The Albanian Nation, free and independent, proud of its past and fully confident of its future, in Constituent Assembly adopts this Constitution.
Chapter 1: The Formation of the State<title>
Part A: General Disposals<title>
Art. 1. Albania is a Parliamentary Republic presided over by a President. The sovereignty comes from the people. 
Art. 2. The Albanian Republic is independent, united, its integrity is inviolable and its territory is inalienable. 
Art.3. The National Flag is a double-headed black eagle on a red field.
Art. 4. Albanian is the official language. 
Art. 5. The Albanian Republic has no official religion. 
All religions and creeds shall be respected. Their freedom of practice and open profession shall be guaranteed. 
Religion shall not in any way give rise to judicial prejudice. 
Religions and creeds shall never be employed for political ends. 
Art. 6. Tirana is the capital of Albania. 
Art. 7. The legislative power shall be vested in a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies in accordance with this Constitution. 
Art. 8. The executive power shall be vested in the President of the Republic, who shall exercise it through his Cabinet Ministers. 
Art. 9. The judicial power shall be vested in the courts and their judgments shall be given in the name of the Albanian Republic. 
Part B 1. The Legislative Power. The Chamber of Deputies<title>
Art. 10. The national representative chamber shall consist of two bodies: Of a Chamber of Deputies, consisting of deputies elected by the people, and of a Senate, consisting of senators elected according to the law concerning this matter. 
Art. 11. The deputies shall serve for a period of four years and there shall be elected one deputy for every 15,000 persons. 
Art. 12. No one shall be elected a deputy unless he is a citizen of Albania, unless he has attained his 30th year of age, unless he enjoys civil and political rights and unless he possesses all the qualifications required by law. 
Art. 13. The status of a deputy shall be incompatible with that of a salaried public official, municipal official or active minister of religion. 
Art. 14. A deputy shall represent the entire nation and not only the district from which he has been elected. 
Art. 15. A deputy shall not be given binding instructions by his constituents. 
Art. 16. Each of the deputies shall have the right to receive an annual compensation of 5000 gold francs. The amount of compensation may be changed from time to time by law.
Art. 17. The working procedure of the Chamber of Deputies shall be fixed by its internal by-laws. 
Art. 18. The presiding officials of the Chamber of Deputies shall be elected by it and within it, at the beginning of each session to continue until the beginning of another. The election of the presiding officials of the Chamber of Deputies and the appointment of its clerks shall be carried out in accordance with its internal by-laws.Art. 19. The Chamber of Deputies shall investigate the eligibility and the legal qualifications of its members and shall make its decision in accordance with the provisions of its internal by-laws. 
Art. 20. Each member of the Chamber of Deputies shall be obligated to take two oaths: one before the investigation of his eligibility and his qualifications, and one before entering his offices as deputy. 
The first oath shall be as follows: 
"I swear in the name of God and upon my honor that I will fulfil the duties of investigation conscientiously and with perfect neutrality." 
The second oath shall be as follows: 
"I swear in the name of God and upon my honor that I will faithfully defend the independence and the integrity of Albania, that I will be faithful to the Country and the Republic, that I will support the Constitution and the laws of the State, and that I will carry out my duties conscientiously towards the general welfare, without hindrance of private or local interests." 
Art. 21. A newly elected deputy who will not have appeared to take his oath before the Chamber of Deputies within two months from date of election and who will not have presented duly certified justifiable reasons for such absence shall be considered deprived of his office. 
The authority to approve or disapprove the reasons presented shall rest with the Chamber of Deputies. 
Art. 22. A deputy who has been absent without leave from the Chamber of Deputies for two consecutive months shall automatically cease to be a member thereof. 
Art. 23. When for any reason there will have occurred a vacancy in the Chamber of Deputies a new deputy shall be elected to fill the place. The election shall be accomplished not earlier than one month and not later than two months from date of occurence. 
Art. 24. The Chamber of Deputies shall convene automatically twice each year in two regular quarterly sessions. 
The first session shall begin on the 15th day of September and shall conclude on the 15th day of December and the second shall begin on the 1st day of March and shall terminate on the 31st day of May of each year. 
Art. 25. The deputies shall not be held responsible for opinions expressed and votes cast in the Chamber of Deputies. 
Art. 26. Deputies shall not be imprisoned for debts during sessions of the Chamber of Deputies. 
Deputies shall not be pursued or arrested for punishable felonies during sessions, unless by permission and decision of the Chamber or unless they should be seized while committing crime. In such events the judicial authorities shall be obligated to notify the Chamber within twenty-four hours and through the Ministry of Justice. 
For political offenses or crimes the deputies may be tried and sentenced at any time, i.e. within and without a session, by the High Court in accordance with the law and by authorization from the Chamber. 
Art. 27. The Chamber of Deputies shall have the right to decree the release of a member of the legislature for the entire duration of a session if such member has been arrested during the period of adjournment excepting those arrested for crimes. 
Art. 28. Only those questions for which an extraordinary session will have been convoked and which will have been arranged in the agenda prepared by the Government shall be discussed therein. 
The President of the Republic shall have the right to terminate such session at any time he deems it reasonable but always before the beginning of a regular session. 
Art. 29. At the opening of each regular session the President of the Republic shall send a message or make an address setting forth the general situation of the country and the measures considered necessary to be taken that year by the Executive Body. The Chamber shall reply shortly thereafter. 
Art. 30. The Chamber of Deputies shall not discuss or decide measures unless there is an attendance of one more than half of the total number of its members who have passed through the formalities prescribed in articles 19 and 20 of this Constitution. 
Deputies absent on leave shall not be counted in the total number. 
Art. 31. All decisions shall be made by a majority vote of the deputies present. 
Election of persons who have not been approved the first time by an absolute majority may be approved the second time by a relative majority of the deputies present.
Art. 32. Voting upon laws shall be first, in principle and second, article by article on three separate days. 
Voting on codes submitted by the Government and prepared by a special committee created by law shall be made in toto in three sessions held on separate days. Laws which the Chamber will consider urgent shall be voted on in accordance with its internal by-laws. 
Art. 33. The sessions of the Chamber of Deputies shall be held publicly. Anyone, except persons under arms, shall be granted admittance therein, in accordance with the regulations. The proceedings of the Chamber shall be published in special volumes. 
Art. 34. The Chamber of Deputies may hold secret sessions if such are requested by the Ministers or five deputies and if approved by the majority. Such sessions may not be opened until all persons not deputies have left the chamber. 
Art. 35. The Chamber of Deputies shall be inviolable. No officer or armed force, except a special police body thereof, shall be allowed within its building or the gate thereof unless by decision and request of the Chamber. 
Art. 36. Any decision effecting legal consequences shall be published in the Official Gazette, copies of which shall be sent to all the Municipalities of Albania. 
The publication of such decisions shall be made not later than two weeks from date of approval and shall become effective one month from date of publication unless otherwise specified. 
Acts effecting legal consequences shall be inserted in the official column under Laws and Decrees. 
Art. 37. The presiding officials of the Chamber of Deputies shall be obligated to send back to the Executive Body during each session any project which may have been submitted by the latter and rejected by the Chamber. Such projects shall be accompanied by the reasons for rejection. 
Art. 38. No proposed law which has been rejected by the Chamber of Deputies shall be submitted for discussion a second time during the same session. 
Art. 39. Each year the Executive Body shall present to the Chamber of Deputies for consideration and approval the proposed general budget of revenues and expenditures of the State. Such projects shall be accompanied by a statement of the ways and means by which the expenditures are to be met. 
All the revenues and the expenditures of the State shall be included in the budget. 
The proposed budget shall always be presented during the Fall session, which shall not adjourn unless the budget has been finally voted upon. 
The draft form of the budget shall be made by law. The budget shall be voted on chapter by chapter, twice, and upon separate days. 
At the and of each fiscal year and during the second session of the following fiscal year the Executive Body shall present to the Chamber of Deputies for consideration and approval an accounting of the revenues and expenditures under the budget of the previous year, which shall be voted upon at one meeting. 
Art. 40. If for whatever cause the new budget has not secured legal approval before the beginning of the fiscal year for which it has been prepared, the Executive Body shall put the previous budget into execution until the new budget will have been voted upon and approved. 
Should the Chamber be in session in this event it shall grant each branch of the administration a monthly credit not to exceed one twelfth of the annual expenditures allotted by the expired budget. 
Art. 41. The Executive Body shall, under its civil responsibility, be obligated to insert in the annual budget of the State any law by which payments and taxes are levied on the citizens. Laws that are not inserted in the budget shall be considered null and void. 
Art. 42. When a credit allotted in the budget will have been insufficient for its purpose the Executive Body shall, within the fiscal year and by a proposed law, request the Chamber to increase such credit to the amount considered sufficient. When incidentals arise the Executive Body shall ask credit from the Chamber, again founded on a special proposed law. 
The method of voting on supplementary or extraordinary credits shall be as for other laws. 
In time of war, revolution or public calamity during the period of recess of the Chamber of Deputies the Government may, on its own responsibility and by decree, create an extraordinary credit. Such decree shall be presented at the next session of the Chamber.
Art. 43. The Chamber of Deputies shall have the right to summon before it any of the Ministers and to question them with regard to any matter concerning their departments. 
The method of summons and of appearance of the Ministers shall be prescribed in the internal by-laws of the Chamber of Deputies. 
Art. 44. The Chamber of Deputies shall control the Government. 
For the purpose of protecting the common interests the Chamber of Deputies shall be obligated to form within itself and for each particular case committees of inquiry to investigate into the matters and facts in connection with such interests. The committees of inquiry shall have the right to demand verbal or written information from public authorities as well as from private individuals. They shall also, have the right to investigate all official documents they may consider necessary. 
Art. 45. The Chamber of Deputies shall have the right to accuse the Ministers and demand their trial before the High Court of the State in conformity with the law. 
Art. 46. The Chamber of Deputies shall not receive deputations and shall not hear others than the Ministers or the Acting Ministers, except in the event mentioned in Article 29. 
Art. 47. At the expiration of the Parliamentary term or in the event of the dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies the Executive Body shall, within two weeks from date of expiration of term, decree new parliamentary elections. These elections shall be completed not later than two and a half months and not earlier than one month from date of decree. 
Should the term of the Chamber of Deputies accidentally end more than one month before the time fixed in the Constitution, the new Chamber shall convene automatically fifteen days after the completion of the elections. Should the Executive Body be compelled to declare war, or should the President of the Republic resign during the period after the expiration of the parliamentary term and before the completion of now elections, the old Chamber shall be convoked by a decree by the President of the Republic or by his successor for the approval of the proposed law declaring war or for the approval of the resignation of the President of the Republic and the election of a new President according to this Constitution. 
Art. 48. The Body of Ministers or the Ministers (individually Translator.) shall ask vote of confidence only from the Chamber of Deputies. 
Part B 2. The Senate<title>
Art. 49. The Senate shall consist of l8 members and shall be elected according to the following method: Two thirds by the people according to a special law, and one third by the President of the Republic.
The President of the Senate shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from among the 18 Senators.
When for whatever reason a vacancy occurs among the (elective-Translator) two thirds senators prior to the application of the law governing the election of senators the vacancy shall be filled by a Senator elected by a majority vote at a joint session of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies. The Senators shall serve for a term of six years. 
For this time only the two thirds of the members of the Senate shall be elected by the Constituent Assembly. 
Art. 50. The Senators shall be obligated to take oath in their Chamber according to the mode prescribed for deputies in Article 20. 
Art. 51. In event of joint session of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies the President of the former shall preside over it and the meeting shall proceed in accordance with the by-laws of the latter Chamber. 
Art. 52. No one shall be eligible to Senatorship unless he has attained his fortieth year of age and unless he one of the following qualifications in addition to pos those prescribed for deputies in Article 12:
<list>A. Diploma from a high institution. 
B. Former Minister or former Deputy. 
C. High civil or military official who has actually displayed patriotism, great ability and abidance with the law. 
D. Important merchant or manufacturer who has displayed great ability and who is prominent in the economic field. 
</list>
Art. 53. Any proposed law approved by the Chamber of Deputies shall be presented to the Senate for consideration and approval before it is sent for approval to the President of the Republic. 
Art. 54. Any proposed law approved by the Chamber of Deputies shall be brought up in the Senate within one month from date of presentation, if the Chamber are in session. If not it shall be considered approved and shall be presented to the President of the Republic. 
When for whatever reason a number or all the Senators do not participate in a joint session within one month from date fixed the Chamber of Deputies shall meet with the Senators present, or if there are none, the Chamber shall meet by itself, and shall proceed in the work which has caused the joint session. 
Art. 55. Any bill rejected by the Senate shall not be brought up again during the same session. 
Art. 56. Should there arise controversies in connection with any decision or law between the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate and the former insists upon its position the President of the Republic shall have the right, with the approval of the Senate, to dissolve the Chamber of Deputies. 
Should the new Chamber of Deputies insist on the position of the previous Chamber the decision of the new Chamber shall be definite. 
Art. 57. In case of high treason, attempt against the security of the State or accusation of Ministers by the Chamber of Deputies, a decree by the President of the Republic shall create the High Court. In this event the High Court shall be composed of five Senators and two Presidents from the Court of Appeals. The duties of the Prosecuting Attorney shall be discharged by a Parliamentary committee of four deputies and the prosecuting Attorney of the Court of Appeals. In this event the five Senators shall be exempted from the political body and shall be made a judicial body. 
Art. 58. The Senators shall enjoy all the rights fixed and prescribed for deputies in this Constitution. 
Art. 59. The Senate shall convene at the same time as the One Chamber of Deputies. 
One Chamber shall not meet while the other is in recess. 
Art. 60. The Senators shall have the right to receive an annual compensation of 6000 gold francs and the President of the Senate shall have the right to receive an annual . compensation of 10,800 told francs. 
This amount may be changed from time to time by law. 
Art. 61. The presiding officers of the Senate, except the President, shall be elected according to the manner fixed in Article 16 of this Constitution for the presiding officers of the Chamber of Deputies. 
Art. 62. The Senate shall regulate its procedure according to its internal by-laws and in conformity with this Constitution. 
Art. 63. The newly elected or appointed Senator who has not within two months from date of election or appointment appeared before the Senate to take his obligatory oath of office and who does not present justifiable reasons for such delay shall be considered deprived of his Senatorship. 
Art. 64. A Senator who has been absent without leave from the Senate for two consecutive months shall automatically cease to be a member thereof. 
Art. 65. The status of a Senator shall be incompatible with that of a salaried public official, municipal official or active minister of religion. 
Art. 66. The sessions of the Senate shall be held according to the manner fixed in this Constitution for the Chamber of Deputies. 
Art. 67. The Senate shall investigate the eligibility and the legal qualifications of its members and shall make its decision in accordance with the provisions of its internal by-laws. 
Art. 68. The Senate shall proceed on the by-laws of the Chamber of Deputies until by-laws for the Senate have been completed. 
Part C: The Executive Power. The President of the Republic<title> 
Art. 69. The President of the Republic shall be elected by an absolute majority vote of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies in joint session. If an absolute majority vote is lacking for two consecutive ballotings the President shall be elected by a third balloting by a relative majority vote. This time he shall be elected by the Constituent Assembly. He shall hold office for seven years. 
Art. 70. No one shall be elected President of the Republic unless he is an Albanian by race and language, unless he is an Albanian citizen, unless he enjoys civil and political rights and unless he has all the qualifications requisite for deputies. 
Art. 71. The seven year term begins from the date of election. New elections shall be held one month before the expiration of said term. 
Art. 72. Before he enter on the execution of his office, the President of the Republic shall take the following oath before the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies: "I swear in the name of God and upon my honor that I will be a faithful supporter of the independence and the integrity of Albania, of the Republic, of the Constitution and of the laws of the State."
This time only the oath shall be taken before the Constituent Assembly.
Art. 73. The President of the Republic shall have the right to receive a monthly compensation of 10,000 gold francs. 
This amount may be from time to time changed by law. 
The expenditures of the official residence of the President of the Republic shall be regulated by special law. 
Art. 74. The President of the Republic shall not be held responsible except for high treason or for acts which do not bear the counter-signatures of the Ministers concerned.
Art. 75. The President of the Republic shall be the chief of the State, he shall be the Commander in Chief of the armed forces, he shall appoint or discharge the Ministers chosen by him and all high officials of the State and all the officers of the armed forces. He shall be the director of the policy of the State and shall have the right by and with the consent of both Chambers to conclude treaties of whatever nature with foreign nations and shall receive and accredit the diplomatic corps. 
The President of the Republic shall not have the right to declare war or conclude peace without the consent of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, except in case of defense. 
Art. 76. The President of the Republic shall order the publication and the execution of bills approved by the two Chambers. He shall have the right of veto. 
Art. 77.If cabinets appointed do not receive a vote of confidence from the Chamber of Deputies for two consecutive times, the President shall have the right to dissolve the Chamber. If the new Chamber does not give a vote of confidence the cabinet shall fall. 
Until the settlement of the situation the last cabinet of those who were not granted a vote of confidence shall remain in power. 
Art. 78. The President of the Republic shall have the right to grant pardons. The presentation of bills concerning amnesty shall be made only by the Chief Executive. 
Art. 79. The President of the Republic may summon the two Chambers in extraordinary sessions. 
Art. 80. The presentation of bills shall be made by the Chief Executive, the Senate end the Chamber of Deputies, but the presentation of bills creating financial obligations shall be made only by the Chief Executive. 
Art. 81. No act of the President of the Republic shall be valid unless countersigned by the competent Ministers. 
Art. 82. In time of revolution, internal or external war, general mobilization or public calamity the President of the Republic shall declare martial law under the responsibility of the cabinet and shall put into execution the martial code throughout the country or only in certain districts. If the Chambers are in session their authorization must be requested, but if they are in recess the Chief Executive may put it in effect, the decree declaring martial law being presented to the Chambers at their next session. 
The decree declaring martial law shall be presented to the Chamber of Deputies at its session for approval or rejection. The Chamber of Deputies shall make known its approval or rejection within thirty days from date of publication of such decree.
A special law shall be enacted for the suspension of the articles of this Constitution relating to personal liberty, freedom of meeting, freedom of association, inviolability of residence, freedom of speech and of press and the secrecy of correspondence. 
Such a law may be applied wholly or in part. 
In the event of their being no Chamber of Deputies the previous Chamber shall be summoned specially for the foregoing purposes. The deputies shall enjoy parliamentary immunity only for the matters in question. 
Art. 83. The President of the Republic presides over the cabinet members appointed by him. The cabinet shall appear before the Chamber of Deputies to read its program and to ask a vote of confidence not later than five days from date of appointment. If it fails to do so it shall be considered as not having received a vote of confidence. 
Art. 84. In case of death, incurable illness which hinders the attendance to his duties or resignation of the President of the Republic a new President of the Republic shall be elected at once if the Chambers are in session. If the Chambers are in recess the President of the Senate shall become Acting President of the Republic and the two legislative bodies shall convene without summons to elect the new President of the Republic. 
Unless in event of the above mentioned, the President of the Senate shall become Acting when the President of the Republic is absent, and in the event of the absence of A President of the Senate, the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall become Acting President. 
The Ministers. 
Art. 85. Any person having the qualifications requisite by law for deputies may be appointed a minister. 
No persons who are relatives within the second degree of the President of the Republic and of the President of the Senate shall be appointed Ministers. Two or more relatives within the third degree shall not be members of the same cabinet. 
Naturalized Albanians of alien race shall not be appointed Ministers. 
Art. 86. The Ministers shall have free access to the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies and shall be heard whenever they desire to speak, but only those who are also Senators or Deputies may vote in their respective Chambers. 
Art. 87. Before they enter on the execution of their office the Ministers shall take oath before the President of the Republic.
Art. 88. The Government shall have the right to issue decrees during recess of the legislative bodies but such decrees shall be presented at the next session of the Chambers for approval or rejection. 
If the decrees will not have been presented or approved they shall be considered rejected. 
Art. 89. Politically the Ministers shall be responsible to the Chamber of Deputies. They shall be responsible as a whole for their policy in general and each Minister shall be held solely responsible for his acts. 
Art. 90. A decree of the President of the Republic shall never release the Ministers of their responsibility. 
Art. 91. The Ministers shall enjoy parliamentary immunity. 
Art. 92. Whenever the cabinet shall appear in body the Minister of Justice shall hold the first seat. 
The Finance Control Council.
Art. 93. The finances of the State shall be controlled by the ?inane Control Council. Art. 94. The organization of this Council, the method of the performance of its duties and the qualifications required of its members shall be fixed by a special law. 
Art. 95. The duties of this Council shall be the supervision and control of finances throughout the entire administration of the State, including items fixed by special law. 
Art. 96. The President and the members of this Council shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, and its clerks shall be appointed according to the law. 
Art. 97. The permanency of office of the members of the Finance Control Council shall be guaranteed in the manner fixed by this Constitution for the members of the Court of Appeals, except that each member shall serve only five years from date of appointment. 
Part D: The Judicial Power<title>
Art. 98. The courts shall be independent. Their judgment shall be based upon no other authority than that of the law. 
Neither the Legislative Power nor the Executive Power shall interfere with the action of the courts. 
Art. 99. No person shall be summoned by or arraigned before any other court than that in which he is legally concerned. There shall never be formed extraordinary courts for the hearing of special cases. 
Art. 100. The sessions of the courts shall be held publicly, except in cases where the judges deem examinations behind closed doors necessary in the interest of morality and public order. 
The judges shall decide and vote secretly, but the judgments given shall be read aloud to the public. 
Each judgment shall contain the reasons for it one by one and the articles of the law upon which such judgment is based shall be set forth. 
Art. 101. Every person accused of crime shall have a solicitor from the date of his indictment. If the accused person does not endeavor to engage a lawyer, the court shall appoint one.
Art. 102. All judges and public prosecutors shall be appointed by decree of the President of the Republic from nominations of the Ministry of Justice founded on selections made by a special committee. This committee shall have the Minister of Justice as its president and as members the Secretary General of the Ministry of Justice, the President and the Public Prosecutor of the Court of Appeals. 
The qualifications requisite for judges and public prosecutors shall be fixed by law. 
Art. 103. Judges and public prosecutors shall be guaranteed permanency of office. 
No judge shall be removed from his position against his will except by a decision of a competent court or of the Court of Appeals. 
A judge shall not be summoned to trial for misdeeds in office unless by a decision of the Court of Appeals. The accusation of a judge by the Court of Appeals shall effect the judge's suspension from office. A judge shall never be transferred against his will unless he shall have previously given written approval of the transfer. 
A judge shall not be pensioned against his will unless he has completed his years of service or has passed the age fixed by law, or unless physical or mental conditions render it impossible for him to continue in the service. 
The method of indictment for breaches of discipline and the trial of members of the Court of Appeals shall be fixed by a special law. 
Art. 104. Judges shall not in any sense be classed "at large". 
Art. 105. A judge shall never accept any other position in the Administration, either with or without salary. 
Art. 106. Judges shall be strictly prohibited from interfering in politics. Otherwise they shall be deprived of their position. 
Art. 107. The privileges of this chapter shall be enjoyed only by those judges who possess the qualifications to be prescribed by a special law to be enacted and who have been three years in the service. 
Chapter 2: Divers Disposals<title>
Art. 108. The Albanian State shall not recognize and shall not grant titles of nobility.
Art. 109. The authentic interpretation of the laws shall be vested in the legislative body. 
Art. 110. No organization under the State shall be created or changed except by law.
No office shall be created except by law. 
Administrative, judicial and military circulars or any others, and the transfer of quarters, shall be regulated according to law. 
Art. 111. Military service shall be compulsory for all Albanian citizens, in accordance with the law, except for those exempted by such law. 
Art. 112. No privilege, whatever it may be and whomever it may concern, shall be created or abolished except by law. 
Art. 113. All persons shall contribute in proportion to their property or wealth for the financial needs of the State. No payment or tax shall be levied or collected except by law. Exception shall be made when custom duties shall be levied or increased, and such duties may be collected beginning the day a law relating to them has been presented to the Chamber of Deputies. This project shall be voted upon within the session during which it has been presented. Art. 114. No privilege concerning payments and taxes shall be granted to anyone. 
Any deduction of facilitation shall be made by law. 
Art. 115. No expenditure shall be made unless by an authorizing law. 
Art. 116. Salary, compensation or pension from the public treasury shall not be paid to anyone except by an authorizing law. 
Art. 117. Immovable state property shall not be alienated or rented for a period longer than twenty years, except by a law. 
Art. 118. No loan on behalf of the State shall be contracted except by an authorizing law. 
Art. 119. Public debt shall be guaranteed. 
Creditor's debts against the State shall be inviolable. 
Art. 120. The State shall recognize corporations created in conformity with the law. 
Art. 121. Foreign armed forces shall not enter Albanian territory except by a special law. 
Art. 122. Officials at large shall be forbidden to any department of the administration except to the army and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Art. 123. The judicial status of officials shall be regulated by law. 
Chapter 3: The Rights of The Citizens<title>
Art. 124. All men, regardless of citizenship, shall be equal before the law, and shall enjoy equal civil rights, but only Albanian citizens and Albanian corporations shall have rights of any kind to own property on rural lands in Albania. Aliens shall have only the right of selling rural lands and the right of ownership only on such rural lands as needed by them for the erection of factories and the regulation of communications. 
Art. 125. All citizens shall enjoy equal political rights and shall be eligible to all civil and military positions, except as fixed by law. 
Art. 126. Personal freedom shall be guaranteed. No person shall be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or arraigned for trial, or in any way be hindered in his freedom, except in cases foreseen by the law and in conformity with the law.
Art. 127. The residence shall be inviolable. Forced entry shall not be made except when and as prescribed by law. 
Art. 128. Free speech and press shall be guaranteed. Preventive censorship shall be forbidden. Confiscation of printed matter shall be regulated by law. 
Only Albanian citizens shall have the right to publish newspapers. 
Art. 129. The right of ownership shall be inviolable without exception unless such violation is demanded by public interest and when legally ascertained, and at the cash payment of a reasonable legal indemnity. 
Art. 130. Land is private ownership but legal disposals at present in effect on lands shall be valid only until changed by special law. 
Mineral resources are of two classes: Mines and quarries; the former are the property of the State and the latter are the property of the owners of the surface. 
Their exploitation shall be effected according to law. 
Art. 131. The right of association and the right of peaceful and unarmed meeting shall be guaranteed in accordance with the law. 
Associations shall never be disbanded for disobedience to the law, unless by decision of the court. 
Police officers may be present at public gatherings only. 
Open air gatherings may be prevented by the authorities only should danger of a breach of the peace arise from such meeting. 
Art. 132. The secrecy of correspondence through the mails shall be inviolable and shall be regulated by law. 
Art. 133. Only Albanian citizens shall be accepted as officials and clerks of the State, except as fixed by law. 
Art. 134. Penal laws shall not be retroactive against the accused. 
Art. 135. Physical torture shall be entirely forbidden. 
Art. 136. No Albanian citizen shall be expelled, interned or deported except by law. 
Art. 137. Confiscation is forbidden… effected except in accordance with the… of the courts. 
Art. 138. Each citizen or several… the right, in defense of the laws of … the competent authorities verbally or latter shall be obligated to act … to those petitioning. 
Art. 139. Because freedom is … shall be bought or sold in Albania… has been bought or who is a slave … free upon stepping on Albanian soil.
Chapter 4: Final Disposals<title>Art. 140. Any law or decree contrary to the provisions and the spirit of this Constitution shall be considered unconstitutional and void. 
Art. 141. At the proposal of the President of the Republic or of the members of the Senate or of the Chamber of Deputies the two legislative bodies shall have the right, each at separate sessions, to decide, by vote of two thirds, changes to this Constitution. The necessity for the changes shall be stated. 
Following such decision the two Chambers shall meet together and proceed on the changes.
The decision for amendments to this Constitution shall be by a two third majority of all the members attending the joint session. 
The authentic interpretation of the Constitution shall be made in like manner. 
The Republican form of the State shall never be changed. 
Art. 142. This Constitution shall take effect on the day of its publication. 
A true copy of the original. 
(Signed) Eshref Frasheri 
President of the Constituent Assembly.