CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

ANGOLA
by ERIC B. BLAUSTEIN

Issued October 1976

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1976 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

Constitution Translated by SARAH J. CAMPBELL

ANGOLA CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA November 11, 1975 The Constitutional law of the People's Republic of Angola, headed by Dr. Agostinho Neto, is based on the following principles: TITLE I FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES Article 1. The People's Republic of Angola is a sovereign, independent and democratic State, whose first objective is the total liberation of the Angolan people from the vestiges of colonialism and the domination and aggression of imperialism, and the construction of a prosperous and democratic country, completely free from any form of man's exploitation by man, realizing the aspirations of the masses. Article 2. All sovereignty rests with the Angolan people, but the M.P.L.A. -- their legitimate representative, composed of a broad front in which all the patriotic forces involved in the anti-imperialist struggle are included -- is in charge of the political, economic and social leadership of the nation. Article 3. The masses are guaranteed broad and effective participation in the exercise of political power through consolidation, extension and evolution of the organizing forces of people's power. Article 4. The People's Republic of Angola is a single and indivisible State whose inviolable and inalienable territory is that defined by the present geographic limits of Angola, and it energetically fights any separatist attempt to dismember its territory.

1

Article 5. Economic, social and cultural solidarity among all regions of the People's Republic of Angola will be promoted by common development of the entire Angolan nation and elimination of the results of regionalism and tribalism. Article 6. The People's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola (FAPLA), the people's fighting arm, under the leadership of the M.P.L.A. and with its President as their Commander-in-Chief, are institutionalized as the National Army of the People's Republic of Angola in charge of defending the territorial integrity of the homeland and participating in production and therefore in national reconstruction, alongside the people. The Commander-in-Chief of the People's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola (FAPLA) shall appoint and remove the top level military leaders. Article 7. The People's Republic of Angola is a lay State in which there is complete separation between the State, the church and religious institutions. All religions will be respected and the State will provide protection for churches, religious places and objects, providing they obey State laws. Article 8. The People's Republic of Angola considers agriculture as a base and industry as a decisive factor in its development. The State shall direct and plan the national economy for the purpose of systematically and harmoniously developing all natural and human resources and utilizing the wealth for the benefit of the people. Article 9. The People's Republic of Angola will promote the establishment of just social relations in all sectors of production, stimulating and developing the public sector and increasing cooperative methods. The People's Republic of Angola will be very particularly concerned with solving the land problem in the interest of the peasant masses. Article 10. The People's Republic of Angola recognizes, protects and guarantees private property, including that of foreigners, provided that this benefits the economy of the country and the interests of the Angolan people. 2

Article 11. All natural resources of the soil and subsoil, territorial waters, continental shelf and air space are the property of the State, which shall determine the conditions under which they are exploited and used. Article 12. The fiscal system shall be guided by the principle of progressive payment of direct taxes with no fiscal privileges of any kind being permitted. Article 13. The People's Republic of Angola shall energetically fight illiteracy and ignorance and shall promote the development of education at the service of the people and of a true national culture enriched by the revolutionary cultural conquests of other peoples. Article 14. The People's Republic of Angola shall respect and apply the principles of the Char•-ter of the United Nations and the Charter of the Organization of African Unity and shall establish relations of friendship and cooperation with all states on the basis of principles of mutual respect for territorial sovereignty and integrity, equality, non-interference in the internal affairs of each country and reciprocity of benefits. Article 15. The People's Republic of Angola supports and expresses solidarity with the people's struggle for their national liberation and will establish relations of friendship and cooperation with all the democratic and progressive forces of the world. Article 16. The People's Republic of Angola will belong to no international military organization, nor permit the installation of foreign military bases on its national territory. TITLE II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES Article 17. The State shall respect and protect the person and human dignity. All citizens have the right to the free development of their personality within the bounds of the respect due 3

to the rights of other citizens or the higher interests of the Angolan People. The law will protect life, liberty, personal integrity, and the good name and reputation of each citizen. Article 18. All citizens are equal under the law, and enjoy the same rights, and are subject to the same duties, without distinction of color, race, ethnic group, sex, place of birth, religion, education, economic and social condition. The law will punish severely all acts aimed at jeopardizing social harmony or creating discrimination and privilege based on these factors. Article 19. Participation in the defense of the territorial integrity of the country, and defending and enlarging the revolutionary conquests, is the highest and most irrefutable right and duty of each citizen of the People's Republic of Angola. Article 20. All citizens, 18 years of age and over, except for those legally deprived of political rights, have the right and the duty to participate actively in political life, voting and being elected or appointed to any organ of the State, discharging their duties with complete devotion to the cause of the country and the Angolan People. Article 21. All citizens elected have the duty to account for the exercise of their mandate to the electors who chose them, the electors having the right at any time to revoke completely the mandate given. Article 22. Within the framework of accomplishing the fundamental objectives of the People's Republic of Angola, the law will assure freedom of expression, assembly and association. Article 23. No citizen may be imprisoned or brought to judgment except within the limits of the law, all accused persons being guaranteed the right of defense. Article 24. The People's Republic of Angola guarantees individual liberties, especially the inviolability of the home and the privacy of corres4

pondence, within the special limits provided for by law. Article 25. Liberty of conscience and belief is inviolable. The People's Republic of Angola recognizes the equality of all religions and guarantees their exercise, in conformity with public order and the national interest. Article 26. Work is a right and a duty for all citizens, each one having to produce according to his ability and to be remunerated according to his work. Article 27. The State will promote the necessary means to assure citizens the right to medical and sanitary assistance, as well as aid to children, to mothers, to the elderly, and to disabled workers. Article 28. Combattants in the war of national liberation who are disabled, and families of combattants who died in the struggle, have, as an honorable duty of the People's Republic of Angola, the right to special protection. Article 29. The People's Republic of Angola shall promote and guarantee access of all citizens to education and culture. Article 30. The People's Republic of Angola has an obligation to create the necessary political, economic and cultural conditions to enable citizens in fact to enjoy their rights and to accomplish their duties. TITLE III ORGANS OF THE STATE CHAPTER I PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC Article 31. The President of the People's Republic of Angola is the President of the M.P.L.A. The President of the Republic, as Chief of State, shall represent the Angolan Nation. 5

Article 32. The President of the Republic shall have the following specific authority: a) To preside in the Council of the Revolution and guide its work; b) To appoint the Governor nominated by the Council of the Revolution; c) To declare war and make peace, with the authorization of the Council of the Revolution; d) To appoint Provincial Commissioners nominated by the Council of the Revolution upon the suggestion of the M.P.L.A.; e) To sign, promulgate and publish laws of the Council of the Revolution and Government decrees and regulatory decrees of the Ministers; f) To direct national defense; g) To pardon and to commute punishments; h) To exercise all other functions conferred on him by the Council of the Revolution. Article 33. In case of the death, resignation or permanent impediment of the President of the Republic, the Council of the Revolution will designate from among its members the person who will exercise temporarily the charge of President of the Republic. CHAPTER II THE PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY Article 34. The People's Assembly is the supreme State organ of the People's Republic of Angola. A special law will determine its composition and system of election, as well as its authority and operation.

6

CHAPTER III REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL Article 35. As long as the total liberation of the national territory has not taken place and as long as conditions for the institution of the People's Assembly are not fulfilled, the supreme organ of power in the State is the Council of the Revolution. Article 36. The Council of the Revolution shall be composed of: a) members of the Political Bureau of the M.P.L.A.; b) members of the General Staff of the F.A.P. L.A.; c) Government members appointed for this purpose by the M.P.L.A.; d) Provincial Commissioners; e) Chiefs of the General Staffs and Political Commissioners of the Military Fronts. Article 37. The Council of the Revolution shall be presided over by the President of the Republic. Article 38. The Council of the Revolution shall have the following duties: a) To exercise the legislative function, which may be delegated to the Government; b) To define and direct the internal and external politics of the country; c) To approve the general budget of the State and the economic plan developed by the Government; d) To appoint and remove the Prime Minister and other members of the Government as directed by the M.P.L.A. 7

e) To appoint and remove the Provincial Commissioners as directed by the M.P.L.A.; f) To authorize the President of the Republic to declare war and to make peace; g) To decree a state of siege or a state of emergency; h) To decree amnesties. CHAPTER IV GOVERNMENT Article 39. The Government shall be composed of the Prime Minister, the Ministers, and Secretaries of State. The Government shall be presided over by the Prime Minister. Article 40. The Government, as the executive organ, shall be responsible for conducting the internal and external politics of the State, under the direction of the Council of the Revolution and the President of the Republic, and for supervising all public administration. Article 41. The following shall be special duties of the Government: a) To guarantee the security of persons and property; b) To develop the general budget of the State and to execute it after approval of the Council of the Revolution; c) To develop the economic plan and to execute it after approval of the Council of the Revolution. Article 42. The Government may exercise by decree the legislative function, which may be delegated to it by the Council of the Revolution. It is the duty of the Ministers to execute the laws of the Council of the Revolution and the decrees of the Government. 8

Article 43. The Government may meet, in whole or in part, with the Council of the Revolution, whenever the latter shall so decide. CHAPTER V COURTS Article 44. Exercise of the judicial function shall be the exclusive province of the Courts, with the aim of accomplishing democratic justice. The organization, composition and authority of the Courts shall be established by Law. Article 45. In the exercise of their duties, judges shall be independent. CHAPTER VI ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES Article 46. The People's Republic of Angola shall be divided administratively into Provinces, Councils, Communes, Circles, Districts, and Villages. Article 47. Local administration shall be guided by the joint principles of decentralization and local initiative. Article 48. In the Province, the Provincial Commissioner shall be the direct representative of the Council of the Revolution and the Government. The Government shall be represented in the Council by the Local Commissioner; in the Commune by the Commissioner of the Commune; and in the Circle by the Delegate, all of whom shall be appointed following nomination by the M.P.L.A. Article 49. In each Province there shall be a Provincial Commission, presided over by the Provincial Commissioner, exercising the legislative function in matters of exclusive interest to the Province.

9

Article 50. The Administrative Bodies of the Council, the Commune, the District and the Village shall be, respectively, the Municipal Chamber, the Communal Commission, and the Ward Commission of the District or Village. Article 51. The local bodies shall be incorporated and shall enjoy administrative and financial autonomy. Article 52. The structure and authority of the administrative bodies of other organs of local administration shall be established by Law. TITLE IV SYMBOL OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA Article 53. The symbols of the People's Republic of Angola shall be the flag, the seal, and the anthem. Article 54. The National flag shall consist of two colors in two horizontal bands. The upper band shall be ruby-red; the lower shall be black. Ruby-red represents the blood shed by Angolans during the colonial oppression, the struggle for national liberation, and the revolution. Black represents the African Continent. In the center there will be a section of serrated wheel, symbol of the working class and industrial production; an Indian cutlass, symbol of the peasant class, agricultural production and the armed struggle; and a star, symbol of internationalism and progress. The serrated wheel, the Indian cutlass, and the star will be yellow, representing the riches of the Country. Article 55. The Seal of the People's Republic of Angola shall consist of a section of serrated wheel, maize, coffee and cotton, representing, respectively, the working class, industrial production, the peasant class, and agricultural production. At the base of the composition there shall be an open book, symbol of education and culture, and 10

the rising sun, symbolizing the new country. In the center shall be placed an Indian cutlass and a mattock, symbolizing work and the beginning of the armed struggle. At the top appears the star, symbol of internationalism and progress. In the lower part of the emblem shall be placed a gold band with the inscription "People's Republic of Angola." The National Anthem shall be . . TITLE V FINAL AND TEMPORARY PROVISIONS Article 57. Until the creation of the Assembly with constituent powers, modification of this Constitutional Law may be made by the Central Committee of the M.P.L.A. Article 58. Laws and regulations currently in effect shall be applied as long as they have not been revoked or altered and provided they do not contradict the spirit of this Law or Angolan revolutionary progress. Article 59. All treaties, agreements and alliances to which Portugal had committed Angola and which may be prejudicial to the interests of the Angolan People will be reviewed. Article 60. This document will take effect at zero hour, November 11, 1975. Approved by acclamation of the Central Committee of the People's Liberation Movement of Angola, November 10, 1975. Let it be so published. Antonio Agostinho Neto. President of the M.P.L.A.

11

