SECTION I. OF THE NATION AND ITS RELIGION<title>
I. 
The Argentine Nation is forever free, and independent of all Foreign Domination.
II. 
It shall never be the patrimony of any Person or Family.
III. 
Its Religion is the Roman Catholic Apostolic, to which it will always afford the most effectual and decided protection, and to which its Inhabitants shall show the greatest respect, whatever be the irreligious opinions.
SECTION II. OF CITIZENSHIP<title>
IV. 
The Citizens of the Argentine Nation, are: first, all freemen born within its territory, and their children, wherever they may be born; secondly, those Foreigners who have fought, or shall fight, in the Army or Navy of the Republic; thirdly, those Foreigners settled in the Country previously to 1816, the Year in which its Independence was solemnly declared, and who are inscribed in the Civic Register; fourthly, other Foreigners established, or who may establish themselves, in the Country, subsequently to that period, and who shall obtain Letters of Citizenship.
V. 
The rights of Citizenship are forfeited: first, by accepting employments, distinctions, or titles from any other Nation, without the authority of the Congress; secondly, by any sentence inflicting infamous punishment, until the Party be again qualified according to Law.
VI. 
The rights of Citizenship are suspended: first, whilst the Party is under 20 years of age, and unmarried; secondly, by not knowing how to read and write (which condition shall not be carried into effect until 15 years after the date of the acceptance of this Constitution); thirdly, by Naturalization in another Country; fourthly, by being declared bankrupt; fifthly, by being a debtor to the Public Treasury, and refusing, when legally called upon, to pay the debt; sixthly, by mental derangement; seventhly, by being servants receiving wages, daily laborers, private soldiers of the line, notorious vagabonds, and individuals under trial for crimes deserving corporeal or infamous punishment.
SECTION III. OF THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT<title>
VII. 
The Argentine Nation adopts for its Government the Representative Republican Form, consolidated in unity of system.
VIII. To this end, it delegates the exercise of its Sovereignty to the three high Powers: the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial, under the restrictions set forth in this Constitution.
SECTION IV. OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER<title>
IX. 
The Legislative Power shall be exercised by a Congress composed of 2 Chambers, one of Representatives, the other of Senators.
CHAPTER I. Of the Chamber of Representatives<title>
X. 
The Chamber of Representatives shall be composed of Deputies, elected by the direct nomination of the People, and by a simple majority of votes, in the proportion of one for every 15,000 Inhabitants, or for a fractional number amounting to 8,000.
XI. 
The Deputies for the first Legislature shall be named in the following proportion:-5 for the Capital, 4 for the Territory dismembered from the Capital, 6 for the Province of Cordova, 3 for Catamarca, 3 for Corrientes, 2 for Entre Rios, 4 for Monte Video, 2 for Mendoza, I for Misiones, 2 for Rioja, 3 for Salta and Jujuy, 4 for Santiago del Estero, 2 for San Juan, 2 for San Luis, 1 for Santa F6, 3for Tucuman, and 2 for Tarija.
XII. 
For the second Legislature, a general Census shall be taken, according to which the number of Deputies shall be regulated. The Census shall be renewed once only in 8 years.
XIII. 
Every Citizen in the exercise of his rights, agreeably to Articles IV, V, and VI, may vote in the Election of Representatives.
XIV. 
For the first time, each Provincial Junta shall regulate the means of carrying into effect the direct Election of its Representatives, in conformity to the above Articles. For future occasions, the Congress shall issue a general Law.
XV. 
No Person can become a Representative, unless qualified: by having been a Citizen 7 Years before his nomination; by being 25Years of age; by having a capital of 4,000 dollars; by being in the exercise of some useful profession, art, or business, or dependent on the Executive Power by holding any paid office. (This condition, for the term of 10 Years, shall only apply to Offices not removable at pleasure.)
XVI. 
The Deputies shall continue in Office during 4 Years; but one half of the Chamber shall be renewed every 2 Years.
XVII. 
The Deputies who may be named for the first Legislature, immediately on their assembling, shall cast lots, for the purpose of deciding who shall go out of Office at the termination of the first 2 Years.
XVIII. 
The Chamber of Representatives shall exclusively originate matters relating to the imposition of Contributions; the Senate possessing the power to admit, refuse, object to, or amend them.
XIX. 
The Chamber of Representatives has the exclusive right to accuse, before the Senate: the President of the Republic and his Ministers, the Members of both Chambers, and those of the Supreme Court of Justice, for crimes of treason, sedition, misapplication of the Public Funds, violation of the Constitution, especially in matters concerning the primary rights of Citizens, or for other crimes, meriting infamous punishment or death.
XX. 
The Representatives, at the time of their incorporation, shall swear to fulfill their duty faithfully, and to act in all things conformably to what is prescribed in this Constitution.
XXI. 
No Member, after his admission, shall receive any Employment from the Executive Power, without the consent of the Chamber, nor without vacating his Seat by the act of appointment, unless it being the regular order of preferment.
XXII. 
The Deputies shall receive a Salary for their Services, the amount of which shall be fixed by a Law.
CHAPTER II. Of the Senate<title>
XXIII. 
The Senate shall be composed of Members, elected for the Capital and Provinces, in the following number and manner:-
Each shall form, by the direct votes of the People, in conformity with Articles XIII, and XIV, a Junta of 11 Individuals, who shall exercise the functions of Electors, and who must each possess the qualities required for a Representative by Article XV. These Electors, or two-thirds at least of them, being assembled in the Capital of the Province, and having elected from their number a President and Secretary, shall vote for the Senators, by signed ballots for 2 Individuals, 1 of whom at least must either be a Native or Resident of the Province. The vote being concluded, and the Act signed by all the Voters, it shall be transmitted, enclosed, and sealed, through the Executive, to the President of the Senate (the first time to the President of the Congress). The President shall open it before the Senate, (the first time before the Congress,) and cause the Acts of the Electoral Juntas to be read, and afterwards passed to a Commission, to report on the validity of the forms, and to ascertain the number of suffrages for each Candidate. Those who shall have obtained an absolute majority of votes of the respective Electoral Juntas, having strictly observed the requisite forms shall be declared Senators, by a resolution of the Senate (or of the Congress the first time) two-thirds of the Members being assembled. If the necessary forms should not have been complied with, the Election shall be repeated by the same Electoral Juntas. If there should not result a majority of suffrages, the Senate (or the Congress, as the case may be) shall choose 3 persons of those who may have obtained the greatest number of votes, and shall elect from amongst them. If, however, there should not result an absolute majority of votes in favor of one Individual, the number of Candidates shall be reduced to the two who may have obtained the greatest number of votes, the vote of the President deciding who shall be excluded, in order to reduce them to that number, in the event of an equality. A new Election shall then take place between the 2 Individuals who remain, and he who shall have obtained an absolute majority shall be proclaimed Senator, the vote of the President again deciding in the event of an equality of numbers. If only one of the Senators shall have obtained an absolute majority in the Electoral Junta, the proceedings of the Senate (or of the Congress) in order to determine the Election of both Senators, shall .be performed by separate Acts, and with the same formality for each.
XXIV. 
No one can be elected a Senator, who is not 36 Years of age, who shall not have been 9 Years a Citizen, and has not a capital of 10,000 dollars, an income equivalent thereto, or is not engaged in a scientific profession of that value.
XXV. 
The Senators, on entering upon their Office, shall take the Oath prescribed in Article XX.
XXVI. 
They shall continue in office for the term of 9 Years, a third part being renewed every 3 Years; and it shall be decided, by lot, immediately after all shall have assembled, which of their Members shall go out of Office at the end of the first and second periods of 3 Years.
XXVII.
It belongs to the Senate to judge publicly the Persons accused by the Chamber of Representatives.
XXVIII. 
The concurrence of two-thirds of the Members is sufficient to establish the criminality of the Accused; but shall have effect only to the extent of removing the Accused from his office.
XXIX. 
The party accused and convicted shall remain, notwithstanding, subject to prosecution, judgment, and punishment, according to Law.
XXX. 
The Senators shall be compensated for their services, by a salary, which the Law shall assign to them.
CHAPTER III. Of the Attributes common to both Chambers<title>
XXXI. 
Both Chambers shall assemble in the Capital, and shall hold their Sitting daily, in the months of May, June, July, August, and September, the Members being bound to reside there during the remaining months of the Year.
XXXII. 
Each Chamber shall be the sole judge in examining and approving the Election of its Members.
XXXIII. 
It shall name its President, Vice-President, and Officers; shall fix the period of their duration in Office; shall prescribe the Regulations for the Debates; and for facilitating the execution of their Resolutions.
XXXIV.
Neither of the Chambers shall commence its functions, until two-thirds of the Members of each shall have assembled at the Hall of Session; but a less number may compel the rest to assemble, in the terms, and under the penalties, which each Chamber may prescribe.
XXXV. 
Senators and Representatives shall never be responsible for their opinions, speeches, or debates.
XXXVI. 
Neither shall Senators or Representatives be arrested by any other authority during their attendance in the Legislature, or while they are going to or returning from its Sittings; except in the event of their being taken in the commission of any crime that may deserve death, or infamous, or corporeal punishment; of which an account shall be given to the corresponding Chamber, with the judicial Report of the Case.
XXXVII. 
When a complaint shall be presented in writing before the ordinary Justices, against any Senator or Representative, for any offense not enumerated in Article XIX, after having examined the Case, the respective Chamber, by a majority of two-thirds of its votes, may suspend the Accused from the exercise of his functions, and place him at the disposal of the competent Tribunal for judgment.
XXXVIII. 
Each Chamber may also punish any of its Members form is conduct in the exercise of their duties, (with a similar Majority of votes,) or remove him, for physical or moral incapacity during his Office; but a majority of 1 above the half of the Members present shall decide upon the resignations, which any of them shall voluntarily propose, of their Office.
XXXIX. 
Each of the Chambers may cause the Ministers of the Executive Power to appear before it, to communicate information which it may consider requisite.
CHAPTER IV. Of the Attributes of the Congress<title>
XL. 
To the Congress it belongs: to declare War, after having heard the grounds thereof explained by the Executive Power.
XLI. 
To recommend to the same, when it may judge it expedient, the Negotiation of Peace.
XLII. 
To fix the regular Land and Sea Forces, in time of Peace and War.
XLIII. 
To order the construction and equipment of National Squadrons.
XLIV. 
To fix, annually, the general Expenditure, with reference to the Estimates presented by the Government.
XLV. 
To receive annually, the account of the application of Public Funds, and to examine and approve the same.
XLVI. 
To establish the duties of importation and exportation; and, for a term not exceeding 2 Years, to impose, according to the exigencies of the State, Contributions proportionally equal throughout the Territory.
XLVII. 
To decide upon the Loans, which it may be necessary to negotiate on the security of the State.
XLVIII. 
To fix the Law, value, weight, and type of the National Coin.
XLIX. 
To establish Tribunals subordinate to the High Court of Justice, and to regulate the form of the judgments.
L. 
To grant Amnesties, when powerful motives of public interest render them expedient.
LI. 
To create or abolish Offices of every description.
LII. 
To regulate internal and external commerce.
LIII. 
To define the Territory of the State, and to fix the boundaries of the Provinces, without prejudice to the permanency of the Provinces enumerated in Article XI.
LIV. 
To establish Ports on the Coasts of the Territory, where it may be judged convenient; and to raise Villages to the rank of Towns, Cities, and Provinces, in such cases, and with such qualifications, as may be conformable to Law.
LV. 
To form general Plans for Public Education.
LVI. 
To award premiums to those who may have performed, or shall hereafter perform, eminent services to the Nation.
LVII. 
To grant to Authors, or the Inventors of useful Establishments, exclusive privileges for a certain period.
LVIII. 
To enact all Laws and Ordinances, of whatever nature, which the good of the State may require; and to modify, explain, and abrogate those already in force.
CHAPTER V. Of the Formation and Sanction of the Laws<title>
LIX. 
The Laws may be originated in either of the Chambers which compose the Legislative Body, by Projects presented by its Members, or by the Executive Power through its Ministers.
LX. 
The Laws which relate to the objects treated of in Article XVIII, are excepted from this rule.
LXI. 
When a Project of Law shall be approved in the Chamber in which it may have originated, it shall be passed to the other Chamber, in order to its being discussed, approved, or rejected.
LXII. 
No Project of Law after rejection by one of the Chambers, can be again brought forward in the Session of the same Year.
LXIII. 
The Projects of Law approved by both Chambers, shall be passed to the Executive Power.
LXIV. 
If the Executive Power approve of them, or, in the term of 10 days, do not return them as objectionable, they shall have the force of Laws.
LXV. 
If the Executive Power should disapprove of the Projects, it shall return them, with the proposed amendments, to the Chamber in which they originated.
LXVI. 
They shall be reconsidered in both Chambers, and a majority of two-thirds of the votes of each Chamber shall finally sanction them.
LXVII. 
The votings of both Chambers shall, in such cases, be either in the affirmative or negative, and the names and decisions of the Members, as also the amendments of the Executive Power, shall be immediately printed and published.
SECTION V. OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title>
CHAPTER I. Nature and qualities of this Power<title>
LXVIII. 
The Executive Power of the Nation is confided and entrusted to one Person alone, under the title of President of the Argentine Republic.
LXIX. 
No one can be elected President, who is not a Citizen of the Republic by birth, and who does not possess the other qualifications required by this Constitution for a Senator.
LXX. 
Before entering on the discharge of his functions, the President elect shall take, before the President of the Senate, and the 2 Chambers assembled, the following Oath:
"I. N.--swear by God our Lord, and by these our Holy Evangelists, that I will duly discharge the Office of President, which is confided to me; that I will protect the Catholic Religion, preserve the integrity and independence of the Republic, and faithfully observe the Constitution."
LXXI. 
The President shall continue in Office 5 Years, and cannot be immediately re-elected.
LXXII. 
In case of the infirmity or absence of the President, or while a new Election is in progress, in consequence of his death, resignation, or removal, the President of the Senate shall supply his place, and shall exercise the functions belonging to the Executive Power; being in the mean while suspended from the Office of Senator.
CHAPTER II. Of the form and time of the Election of the President<title>
LXXIII. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected in the following manner: In the Capital, and in each Province, a Junta of 15 Electors shall be named, with the same qualifications, and under the same forms, as for the Election of Senators.
LXXIV. 
The Electors of each Province being assembled in the Provincial Capital, 4 months before the expiration of the term of the Presidency, on a day which the Legislature shall fix, the Electors shall vote for a Citizen to be President of the Republic, by signed ballots.
LXXV. 
The voting being concluded, and the Act signed by all the Electors, it shall be transmitted by the President of the Electoral Junta, enclosed and sealed, to the President of the Senate.
LXXVI. 
The President of the Senate having collected all the Acts, shall open them, in presence of both Chambers.
LXXVII. 
Four Members of Congress, elected by ballot, being associated with the Secretaries, shall proceed immediately to a scrutiny, and shall announce the number of suffrages in favor of each Candidate.
LXXVIII. 
He who shall have two-thirds of all the votes, shall be immediately proclaimed President of the Republic.
LXXIX. 
If none of the Candidates should possess two-thirds of the suffrages of the Electors, the Congress shall proceed to conclude the Elections in the manner provided by Article XXIII, concerning the Election of Senators.
LXXX. 
The Election of the President of the Republic must be concluded in one Sitting, the Acts of the Electoral Juntas being afterwards printed and published.
CHAPTER III. Of the Attributes of the Executive Power<title>
LXXXI. 
The President is the Chief of the general Administration of the Republic.
LXXXII. 
He publishes, and causes to be executed, the Laws and Decrees of Congress, and provided for their execution by special Regulations.
LXXXIII. 
He convokes the Congress, at the time appointed by the Constitution, or extraordinarily, when important circumstances demand it.
LXXXIV. 
He opens the Sessions, annually, both Chambers being assembled for the purpose in the Hall of the Senate, and informs them on this occasion, of the political state of the Nation, and of the improvements and reforms which he may deem worthy of their attention.
LXXXV. 
He issues the necessary orders, for the Elections of the Senators and Representatives at the proper time, and conformably to Law, and gives an account to Congress of any abuses which he may observe in them.
LXXXVI. 
He is the Supreme Chief of the Land and Sea Forces, and is exclusively charged with the direction of them in Peace or in War, but he cannot command the Army in person without the special permission of Congress, given by a majority of two-thirds of each Chamber.
LXXXVII. 
He provides for the internal and external security of the State.
LXXXVIII. 
He declares War and Peace, and takes upon himself the necessary measures preparatory thereto.
LXXXIX. 
He concludes Treaties of Peace, Friendship, Alliance, Commerce, or any others, but he cannot ratify them without the approbation and consent of the Senate. In the case of any stipulation for the cession of any part of the Territory, or for any pecuniary burdens upon the Nation, it must be with the consent of both Chambers, and with a majority of two-thirds of the votes.
XC. 
He appoints and removes the Ministers, Secretaries of State, and of general Dispatch.
XCI. 
He also appoints Ambassadors, Ministers Plenipotentiary, Envoys, Consuls General, and other Agents, with the approbation of the Senate.
XCII. 
In cases of urgency, if the Senate be not sitting, he may make the necessary appointments of the Officers mentioned in the preceding Article, obtaining its sanction immediately on its assembling again.
XCIII. 
He receives, according to the established forms, the Ministers and Agents of Foreign Nations.
XCIV. 
He issues Letters of Citizenship, in conformity with the forms and qualifications required by Law.
XCV. 
He exercises the general patronage with respect to Churches, and Benefices, and Ecclesiastical Persons, conformably to the Laws.
He nominates the Archbishops and Bishops from 3 Candidates proposed by the Senate.
XCVI. 
All objects and branches of Finance and Police, and scientific, and every other description of Public, and National Establishments, shall be formed and supported by the funds of the State: the Mints, National Banks, Post Offices, Posts, and Roads, are under the supreme inspection of the President of the Republic, subject to the Laws and Ordinances which regulate them, or which may be here after passed by the Legislature.
XCVII. 
He appoints to all Offices which are not reserved by this Constitution.
XCVIII. 
He can require of the heads of every branch and Department of the Administration, and through them of every other Officer, such information as he may want, and which they are bound to provide.
XCIX. 
He may commute capital punishments to Criminals, on the previous report of the Tribunal, or Judge of the Cause, upon grave and powerful considerations; but not in the case of crimes excepted by the Law.
C. 
He decides in conformity with the Statutes, in the Councils held in the Cases provided for, upon the sentences pronounced by Military Tribunals.
CI. 
He shall receive for his services, the salary established byLaw, which shall neither be diminished nor augmented during his continuance in office.
CHAPTER IV. Of the Ministers-Secretaries<titles>
CII. 
Five Ministers-Secretaries, viz.: of the Department of Government, of Foreign Affairs, of War, of Marine, and of Finance, shall have charge of the dispatch of the affairs of the Republic, and shall authorize the Resolutions of the President, without which requisite they shall not have effect.
CIII. 
The President may, in case of emergency, entrust one Minister with the charge of two Departments.
CIV. 
The 5 Ministers-Secretaries form the Council of Government who shall assist the President with their advice, respecting grave and important matters.
CV. 
The President shall hear the opinions of the Council, without being obliged to conform thereto in the Resolutions which he may think fit to take.
CVI. 
In cases of responsibility, the Ministers are not exempt there from, even with the consent or signature of the President of the Republic.
CVII. 
The Ministers cannot in any case take any measures, without the previous order or consent of the President of the Republic, except in matters immediately belonging to their own respective Department.
CVIII. 
They cannot become Deputies or Senators without resigning their Office of Minister.
CIX. 
They shall have a salary assigned them by Law, which shall neither be augmented nor diminished during their continuance in Office.
SECTION VI. OF THE JUDICIAL POWER<title>
CHAPTER I. Of the Supreme Court of Justice<title>
CX. 
The Judicial Power of the Republic shall be exercised by the High Court of Justice, by superior Tribunals, and other Courts established by Law.
CXI. 
A Court of Justice, composed of 9 Judges, and 2 Fiscals, shall exercise the Supreme Judicial Power.
CXII. 
No one can be a Member of this Court, who is not an Advocate of 8 Years' practice, 40 Years of age, and does not possess the qualifications prescribed in this Constitution for a Senator.
CXIII. 
The President, and the other Members of the High Court of Justice, shall be named by the President of the Republic, with the knowledge and consent of the Senate.
CXIV. 
On the first installation of this Court, the Members appointed shall take an Oath before the President of the Republic, to fulfill their duties, and well and legally, to administer justice. Hereafter the Oath shall be taken before the President of the same Court.
CXV. 
The President of the High Court of Justice shall hold his Office for 5 Years, but all its Members shall continue in their employment, during good behavior, and cannot be removed but by judicial proceedings, and a legal sentence.
CXVI. 
The Members of the High Court of Justice cannot be Senators, or Representatives, without resigning their Offices, neither can they be employed in any other capacity by the President of the Republic, without the knowledge and approbation of the Court.
CXVII. 
The High Court of Justice shall name its Officers, in the number and form which the Law may determine.
CXVIII. 
It shall take cognizance, originally and exclusively: of all matters in which a Province may be one Party, or which may arise between two Provinces, or Towns, of the same Province, concerning limits, and other doubtful rights, brought forward in such manner as that a formal decision may be pronounced.
CXIX. 
Of questions which may arise concerning Contracts, or transactions of the Executive Power, or of the Agents under its immediate direction.
CXX. 
Of the Causes of all Public Functionaries, of which Articles XIX, XXVII, XXVIII, and XXIX, treat, and in the Cases therein mentioned.
CXXI. 
Of those which relate to Ambassadors, Ministers Plenipotentiary, Envoys, Consuls, and Diplomatic Agents, from Foreign Courts.
CXXII. 
In order to take cognizance of the matters which, in the4 preceding Articles, belong in the first instance to the High Court of Justice, it shall be divided into 2 Chambers: the first, composed of3 of its Members, shall take cognizance thereof in the first instance; and the other, composed of the 6 remaining Members, in the second and last instance.
CXXIII. 
It shall have the ultimate cognizance of all Appeals referred to it by the Inferior Courts, in the cases and forms which the Law designates, in Admiralty Causes, in all disputed matters of Finance, and in crimes committed against the public Law of Nation.
CXXIV. 
It shall decide upon all differences which may arise between the other Supreme Tribunals of the Nation.
CXXV. 
It shall examine the Pontifical Briefs, and Bulls, and shall present its opinion, with respect to their admission or retention, to the Executive Power.
CXXVI. 
It shall take cognizance of Appeals of violence from the superior Ecclesiastical Tribunals of the Capital.
CXXVII. 
It shall inform the Legislative Body, from time to time, of every thing which it may judge conducive to the improvement of the administration of justice, and shall represent to the same, the doubts which the inferior Tribunals may submit, as to the right understanding of the Laws.
CXXVIII. 
The Judgments of the High Court of Justice, and its definitive Acts, shall be public.
CXXIX. 
Its Members shall receive a salary, which shall not be diminished while they continue in Office.
SECTION VII. OF THE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT<title>
CHAPTER I. Of the Governors<title>
CXXX. 
There shall be a Governor in each Province, who shall act under the immediate direction of the President of the Republic.
CXXXI. 
He must be 30 Years of age, and possess the qualifications required for a Senator.
CXXXII. 
The President shall select the Governors of the Provinces from 3 Persons proposed by the respective Council of Administration.
CXXXIII. 
They are charged with the execution of the general Laws enacted by the National Legislature, of the Decrees of the President of the Republic, and of the particular Regulations of the Councils of Administration.
CXXXIV. 
It is their duty to fill up, in such form as the Councils of Administration establish, all Offices paid by the funds of the respective Provinces.
CXXXV. 
The Governors shall continue in the exercise of their functions for 3 Years, and cannot be immediately re-elected in the same Province.
CXXXVI. 
They shall have a salary, which shall be fixed by Law.
CHAPTER II. Of the Supreme Tribunals of Justice<title>
CXXXVII. 
Superior Tribunals of Justice shall be established in the Capitals of the Provinces,-as the Legislature may judge convenient, according to the advantages of their geographical position, population, and other circumstances.
CXXXVIII. 
They shall take cognizance of Appeals from the Tribunals of First Instance, and of other matters which belong to them by Law, not only of the Territory of the Province where they are established, but of others which the Law may declare within their jurisdiction.
CXXXIX. 
The Superior Tribunals shall be composed of Advocates, named by the President of the Republic, and selected from3 Candidates to be proposed by the High Court of Justice. Their number shall be fixed by Law.
CHAPTER III. Of the Councils of Administration<title>
CXL. 
In each Capital of a Province, there shall be formed a Council of Administration, which, watching over its prosperity, may promote its particular interests.
CXLI. 
The number of Persons who shall compose the said Councils cannot be less than 7, nor more than 15. The Legislature shall fix the number in each Capital, taking into consideration the Population and other political circumstances of the Province.
CXLII. 
The Members of the Councils of Internal Administration shall be popularly elected by direct nomination, in the same manner and under the same forms, as the National Representatives.
CXLIII. 
All that relates to the promotion of the prosperity and improvement of the Provinces, and their interior Police, to Primary Education, Public Works, or any other Establishments, formed and supported by their own resources, shall be regulated by the Councils of Administration.
CXLIV. 
They shall create the Offices which may be necessary for the good government of each Province, and shall regulate the forms to be observed in the maintenance of them.
CXLV. 
The Councils of Administration shall fix, annually, the estimate of the expenses, which the internal service of the Provinces require.
CXLVI. 
The estimate, of which the last Article treats, shall be forwarded to the President of the Republic, in order that it may, with the general estimate of the expenses which the Service of the State demands, be presented for the approbation of the National Legislature.
CXLVII. 
The Councils of Administration shall raise and regulate the collection of the necessary Revenues, to meet the expenses of the internal service of the Provinces.
CXLVIII. 
The Revenues, of which the last Article treats, shall consist solely of direct Taxes; all indirect Contributions belonging to the general Treasury of the Nation.
CXLIX. 
The particular Revenues which may be settled in each Province by the Councils of Administration, shall not be imposed until the approbation of the National Legislature thereto shall have been obtained, and the Regulations for collecting the same be laid before the President of the Republic, for his approbation.
CL. 
Until such time as the Revenues of the Provinces, in their actual state, shall not be sufficient to meet their ordinary expenses, the deficit shall be supplied from the National Treasury, keeping with each Province a particular account of such assistance, which shall be repaid as their Revenues improve.
CLL. 
If, after defraying the expenses of a Province, there should remain any surplus, it shall be expended within the Province, and in such works or establishments as the Council of Administration shall propose, with the previous approbation of the National Legislature.
CLII. 
In the Provinces, no service shall be required from the Citizens, nor fines, nor any other exaction imposed on them, except those established by the general Laws, unless by the special authority of the Councils of Administration.
CLIII.
The accounts of the collection and appropriation of the Revenues of each Province shall be presented to its respective Council of Administrations; which, after having examined the same, shall lay them before the President, with its Report upon them, in order that it may, with the accounts of the general Administration, be submitted to the approbation of the National Legislature.
CLIV. 
The Councils of Administration shall have the right of direct Petition to the National Legislature, and to the President of the Republic; either to require what may be expedient for their own particular prosperity; or to demand the reform of such abuses as maybe found in their government or administration.
CLV. 
The Individuals composing the Councils of Administration shall not, in any case, be responsible for their opinions, or be subject, in consequence of them, to any other judgment than that of the Public voice.
CLVI. 
They shall continue in the exercise of their functions for2 Years, half of their number being renewed every Year.
CLVII. 
They shall receive no compensation whatever for this Service.
CLVIII. 
In order that the Councils of Administration may proceed with uniformity, in the exercise of their important functions, the President of the Republic shall immediately draw up a Regulation, establishing the internal organization of these Bodies, the periods of their meeting, and the order to be observed in their debates and resolutions, This Regulation shall be amended as experience, and the representations of the said Councils themselves, may show to be necessary.
SECTION VIII. GENERAL REGULATIONS<title>
CLIX. 
All the Inhabitants of the State shall be protected in the enjoyment of life, reputation, liberty, security, and property. No one shall be deprived of them except in conformity to the Laws.
CLX. 
The People are equal in the eye of the Law, so that whether it be penal, instructive, or protective, it must be the same for all, and favor equally the rich and the poor in the preservation of their rights.
CLXI. 
The liberty of publishing his ideas through the medium of the Press, which is a right as valuable to Man, as it is essential to the preservation of civil liberty, shall be fully guaranteed by the Laws.
CLXII. 
The private actions of Men, which do not in any manner offend public order, nor injure a third Person, belong alone to God, and are exempt from the authority of the Magistracy.
CLXIII. 
No Inhabitant of the State shall be obliged to do what the Law does not enjoin, nor prevented from doing what the Law does not prohibit.
CLXIV. 
It is the interest and right of all Members of the Community to be judged by the most independent and impartial Judges, which the condition of human affairs permits. The Legislative Body shall take care to prepare and carry into effect the establishment of judgment by juries, so far as circumstances will allow.
CLXV. 
All judgments by commission are absolutely prohibited.
CLXVI. 
Every Citizen shall be secure against arbitrary requisitions, and the unjust seizure of his papers and correspondence. The Law shall determine in what cases, and under what circumstances, possession may be taken of the latter.
CLXVII. 
No Individual shall be arrested, without a previous deposition against him, by a competent witness, or without strong indication of a crime deserving corporeal punishment, the grounds of which shall be shown in a formal process, within three days. In case of any impediment, the Judge shall continue the proceeding, he being responsible for all omission on his part.
CLXVIII. 
Every individual detected in the act of crime, may be arrested by any Person, and taken before a Magistrate agreeably to the preceding Article.
CLXIX. 
To arrest an individual not detected in the acts a Warrant must first be issued, signed by a Magistrate (to whom the Law may grant the power), expressing the cause of the arrest, which must be communicated, at the time of imprisonment, to the arrested Party, and a Copy of it given, if demanded.
CLXX. 
The Prisons shall be for the safe custody only, and not for the punishment of the guilty; every measure which shall be taken under the pretense of precaution, and which may tend to afflict the Prisoner, more than is necessary for the above object, shall be punished by the Laws.
CLXXI. 
No Inhabitant of the State can be punished or confined, without a previous judgment, and a legal Sentence.
CLXXII. 
The house of every Inhabitant of the State is sacred; it cannot be violated without committing a crime, and can only be forcibly entered in case of resistance to a legitimate authority.
CLXXIII. 
This act shall be effected with due moderation, and by the Judge himself, in person. If any urgent motive should prevent it, he shall give to his Delegate a written order, with the necessary instructions; a Copy of which shall be given to the Individual who is to be apprehended, and to the owner of the house, if he should demand it.
CLXXIV. 
The preceding Regulations relative to personal security, cannot be suspended, except in the event of imminent danger to Public tranquility, or to the security of the Country, in the judgment, or by the special decision of the Congress.
CLXXV. 
The possession of property being a sacred and inviolable right, the Inhabitants of the State cannot be deprived of it, nor taxed in consequence of it, excepting in the cases established by Law.
CLXXVI. 
When the interest of the State requires that the property of any private individual should be destined to the public use, according to Law, the Proprietor shall receive a just compensation for the same.
CLXXVII. 
The confiscation of property is prohibited.
CLXXVIII. 
No person shall be obliged to lend aid to the Armies, nor to afford lodging for any Military Body or Individual, without an order from a Civil Magistrate, according to Law. The loss which maybe caused in this case to the Proprietor, shall be fully indemnified by the State.
CLXXIX. 
All the Inhabitants of the State have a right to present their complaints, and to be heard, before the first Authorities of the Country.
CLXKX. 
No advantages, distinctions, or exclusive privileges, shall be conceded to any Individual or Corporation, excepting those which may be granted to virtue or talent; and, as they are not transmissive to descendants, they cannot confer any title of Nobility.
CLXXXI. 
The Law of freedom of the Children of Slaves from the birth, [libertad de vientres] and those by which the trade in Slaves is abolished, and their introduction into the Country under any pretext prohibited, are hereby ratified.
SECTION IX. OF THE REFORM OF THE CONSTITUTION<title>
CLXXXII. 
No Motion for the reform of one or more Articles of the present Constitution shall be admitted, in either of the Chambers of the Legislative Power, unless supported by a fourth part of the Members.
CLXXXIII. 
When a motion shall have obtained such support, after discussion in the ordinary form, two-thirds of the votes in each Chamber shall be requisite to sanction the necessity of the reform of the Article or Articles in question.
CLXXXIV. 
This resolution shall be communicated to the Executive Power, for its opinion, which shall return the resolution to the Chamber, whence it first originated, with its Report.
CLXXXV. 
If the Executive Power do not concur, the subject being reconsidered in both Chambers, the concurrence of three-fourths at least of each of their Members shall sanction the necessity of the Reform, and in this case, as well as in that of the consent of the Executive Power, it shall be immediately verified by the number of suffrages prescribed in Article CLXXXIII.
CLXXXVI. 
The reform being verified, it shall pass to the Executive Power for publication, or for the suggestion of amendments. Should it be returned with amendments, three-fourths of the votes of each Chamber shall ultimately sanction it.
LAST SECTION. OF THE ACCEPTANCE AND OBSERVANCE OF THIS CONSTITUTION<title>
CLXXXVII. 
This Constitution shall be presented for the examination and free acceptance of the Capital and the Provinces, through the medium of the Juntas which exist at present, or which may be formed for that purpose.
CLXXXVIII. 
The acceptance of it by two-thirds of the Provinces, including the Capital, shall be sufficient to carry it into effect, in those Provinces, and relations and good intelligence shall be maintained with those which may delay giving their assent to it.
CLXXXIX. 
If the Provinces should determine to abide by the judgment of the Constituent Congress, it shall proceed to accept their determination by a special declaration.
CXC. 
In the latter case, or in that of the preceding Article, orders shall be immediately issued for the formation of both Chambers, and for the installation of the first Legislature, in order that this Constitution may be solemnly sworn to throughout the Territory of the State.
CXCI. 
Every one conspiring, or lending any aid towards conspiring, against the present constitution, after it shall have been accepted shall be punished, even unto death, according to the magnitude of the crime.