The Constituent Assembly has resolved:
CHAPTER I: GENERAL PROVISIONS<title>
Article 1. Austria is a democratic republic. The will of the people is the foundation of its laws. 
Art. 2. 
(1) Austria is a Federal State (Bundesstaat). 
(2) The Federal State is composed of the autonomous states of Burgenland, Carinthia, Lower Austria (state of Lower Austria and city of Vienna), Upper Austria, Salzburg, Styria, Tyrol, and Vorarlberg. 
Art. 3. 
(1) The territory of the Federal State consists of the territories of the Austrian states. 
(2) Alteration of federal boundaries, affecting also the boundaries of a state, as well as alteration of state boundaries within the federal territory may take place—except as provided by peace treaties—only by concurrent constitutional laws of the Federal State and the state affected thereby. 
(3) Separate provisions for the state of Lower Austria and the City of Vienna are included in the fourth chapter. 
Art. 4. 
(1) The federal territory forms a uniform currency, economic, and customs zone. 
(2) Customs zones or other restrictions on communications may not be established within the federal territory. 
Art. 5. Vienna shall be the federal capital and the seat of the highest federal authorities.
Art. 6. 
(1) There shall be a state citizenship for each state. Domicile (Heimatrecht) in a municipal district (Gemeinde) of the state shall be a condition for state citizenship. The conditions for the acquisition and loss of state citizenship shall be the same in every state. 
(2) Federal citizenship shall be acquired on the basis of state citizenship. 
(3) Every Austrian citizen shall have in every state equal rights and duties with the citizens of that state. 
Art. 7. 
(1) All Austrian citizens are equal before the law. Privileges, based upon birth, sex, rank, class, or religious belief are abolished. 
(2) All public employees, including the members of the federal army, shall be guaranteed the unrestricted exercise of their political rights. 
Art. 8. The official language of the Republic shall be German, without prejudice to the rights conceded by federal law to foreign-language minorities. 
Art. 9. The universally recognized rules of international law are accepted as integral parts of the law of the Austrian Republic. 
Art. 10. The Federal State shall have powers of legislation and execution in respect to the following matters: 
<list>
(a) The federal constitution, especially elections to the Nationalrat, and popular suffrage by virtue of the federal constitution; jurisdiction in regard to the constitution.(b) Foreign relations, including political and commercial representation in relations with foreign countries, in particular the conclusion of all treaties, marking out of boundaries, traffic in goods and live stock with foreign countries, and customs. 
(c) Regulation and supervision of entrance into and departure from the federal territory; immigration and emigration; passports, deportation, removal, expulsion, and extradition from or through the federal territory. 
(d) Federal finance especially taxes to be collected exclusively or in part for the federal treasury; monopolies. 
(e) Currency; credit, produce, and stock exchanges; banking; weights and measures; standards and assaying. 
(f) Civil law, including the law of economic associations; criminal law with the exception of administrative criminal law and administrative criminal procedure in matters which come within the autonomous jurisdiction of the states; administration of justice; administrative jurisdiction; copyright; the press; expropriation not pertaining to specific matters within the autonomous jurisdiction of the states; matters pertaining to public notaries, lawyers, and related professions. 
(g) The right of association and the right of assembly. 
(h) Commerce and industry; suppression of unfair competition; patents and protection of patterns, trademarks, and other commercial designations; matters pertaining to patent lawyers; engineering and consulting engineering; chambers of commerce, trade, and industry. 
(i) Traffic by rail, water, and air; matters concerning roads declared by federal law to be federal highways on account of their importance in intercommunication; police authority over watercourses and navigation; posts, telegraphs, and telephones. 
(j) Mining; regulation and maintenance of all waters used for navigation or rafting or suitable for such use, and of such waters as form a boundary with foreign countries or between states, or which flow through two or more states; construction and maintenance of those waterways which connect the inland with foreign countries or connect several states; general technical measures for adequate utilization of water power, exclusive of agricultural and small industrial plants; standardization and systematization of electrical establishments and plants, safety measures in this field; right of way for electric power transmission in so far as the transmission extends across the boundaries of two or more states; steam boilers and power engines; surveying. 
(k) Labor law and protection of workers and other employees not engaged in agriculture or forestry; social insurance and contract insurance. 
(l) Public health, exclusive of the disposal or burial of the dead, as well as of the municipal sanitation and life-saving service; but only sanitary supervision over hospitals and sanatoria, health resorts, and watering places; veterinary regulations; foodstuffs including food control. 
(m) Scientific and technical archives and libraries; artistic and scientific collections and institutions; protection of monuments; matters pertaining to religion; census and other statistics not solely in the interest of one state; endowments and foundations not intended to serve the interest of only one state and not hitherto autonomously administered by the states. 
(n) Federal police and federal gendarmerie. 
(o) Military affairs; war indemnities and care of discharged soldiers and their dependents; such measures occasioned by or in consequence of a war as are necessary to safeguard the uniform administration of economic affairs, especially the supply of necessities to the population. 
(p) Creation of federal authorities and other federal officers; law of the federal public service.
</list>
Art. 11. 
(1) The Federal State shall have the power of legislation, but the states shall have the power of execution in respect to the following matters: 
<list>
(a) Citizenship and domiciliary rights (Heimatrecht), vital statistics, including registration and change of name; police supervision of aliens. 
(b) Professional associations not included in Article 10, but exclusive of those pertaining to agriculture and forestry. 
(c) Public agencies and private brokerages. 
(d) Taxes not collected exclusively or partially for the federal treasury; provisions for the prevention of double taxation and other excessive levies; for the prevention of obstructions to foreign, interstate, or domestic traffic or economic relations; for the prevention of excessive levies on public communications or institutions, or levies which interfere with communication; and for the prevention of prejudice to federal finance.(e) Ammunition, projectiles, and explosives, not subject to monopoly, as well as the manufacture of arms; motor vehicles. 
(f) Housing. 
(g) Administrative procedure and administrative criminal procedure including execution, and the general provisions of administrative criminal law, even in matters in which the states have the power of legislation.
</list>
(2) Ordinances for the execution of the laws provided for in Paragraph 1 shall be issued by the Federal State, unless otherwise provided by such laws.
Art. 12. 
(1) The Federal State shall have the power of legislation as to fundamental principles, but the states shall have the power of supplementary legislation and the power of execution in respect to the following matters: 
<list>
(a) Organization of administration in the states. 
(b) Poor relief; problems of population; public sanatoria; protection of maternity, infancy, and adolescence; hospitals and sanatoria; health resorts and watering places. 
(c) Institutions such as penitentiaries and workhouses, or institutions of a similar character for the protection of society against criminals, vagrants, and other dangerous persons; deportation and expulsion from one state to another. 
(d) Public institutions for the extra-judicial adjustment of controversies. 
(e) Labor law and protection of workers and other employees in agriculture and forestry. 
(f) Land reform, including especially agrarian reform and recolonization. 
(g) Forestry including pasturage, protection of plants against disease or injury. 
(h) Electricity and water rights not included in Article 10. (i) Building regulations (Bauwesen). 
(j) Law of the public service concerning employees of the states performing official duties. 
</list>
(2) Final decision in matters pertaining to land reform (Paragraph 1, Clause F) shall be vested in a commission appointed by the Federal State and consisting of judges, administrative officials, and experts. 
Art. 13. 
(1) The Federal State shall have powers of legislation and execution to determine what taxes shall belong to the Federal State, the states, or the municipal districts (Gemeinde); to determine the shares of the states or municipalities in the revenues of the Federal State; and to determine the contributions and allowances from the federal treasury for state or municipal expenditures. 
(2) The states shall have power of legislation and execution to determine what state taxes shall be allocated to the municipal districts; to determine the shares of the municipal districts in the revenues of the states; and to determine the contributions and allowances from the treasuries of the states to the expenditures of the municipal districts. 
Art. 14. A special federal constitutional law shall regulate the scope of action of the Federal State and the states in regard to schools, education, and popular instruction. 
Art. 15. 
(1) In so far as a subject matter has not been specifically assigned by the federal constitution to the Federal State as to legislation or execution, it shall remain within the the autonomous sphere of action of the states. 
(2) In so far as the power of legislation has been reserved to the Federal State only as to fundamental principles, the states shall have the power of supplementary legislation within the scope determined by federal law. Federal law may fix a period of time for the enactment of supplementary legislation which, without the consent of the Bundesrat, shall not be less than six months nor more than one year. If a state does not observe this period of time, the power of supplementary legislation for such state shall be transferred to the Federal State. With the enactment by the state of a supplementary law, the federal supplementary law shall cease to be in force. 
(3) If an act of execution on the part of a state in the subjects covered by Articles 11 and 12 shall be effective for several states, such states shall take steps first to reach an agreement thereon. If they fail to agree, the power of performing such an act shall, on application of one of these states, be transferred to the competent federal minister. Detailed regulations may be prescribed by federal laws in accordance with Articles 11 and 12. 
(4) The Federal State shall have the right to supervise the execution of the regulations issued by the Federal State in respect to such subjects as are reserved for legislation by the Federal State in accordance with Articles 11 and 12. 
(5) The states shall be empowered within the scope of their legislative authority to issue all regulations necessary for enforcement, even in the province of criminal and civil law. 
Art. 16. 
(1) The states shall be obliged to take whatever measures are necessary within their autonomous sphere of action for the execution of treaties; if a state does not comply with this obligation in due time the Federal States shall be vested with the power to take such measures, and especially to enact the necessary laws. 
(2) Likewise, the Federal State, when carrying out treaties with foreign states, shall have the right of supervision even in regard to such matters as come within the autonomous sphere of action of the states. In this case the Federal State shall have the same rights over against the states as in matters of indirect federal administration. 
Art. 17. 
(1) The provisions of Articles 10-15 in respect to the powers of legislation and execution shall in no way affect the status of the Federal State in the matter of its private rights. 
(2) In all these legal relations the legislation of a state shall never affect the Federal State more disadvantageously than it affects the state itself. 
Art. 18. 
(1) The entire public administration must be conducted in accordance with the laws. 
(2) Within the limits of the laws every administrative authority may issue ordinances in its own sphere of action. 
Art. 19. 
(1) The supreme executive authority of the Federal State shall be entrusted to commissioners of the people chosen by the assemblies of representatives of the people in the Federal State and in the states. The commissioners of the people shall be the Federal President, the federal ministers, the secretaries of state, and the members of the state governments. 
(2) The transaction of business by the commissioners of the people shall be under the supervision of the assembly by which they are chosen. 
(3) They may be called before the Supreme Constitutional Court (Verfassungsgerichtshof) to account for their actions and omissions, in so far as the federal constitution or the state constitutions provide. 
Art. 20. Under the direction of the commissioners of the people, agencies elected for a certain period or appointed professional agencies shall conduct the federal or state administration in accordance with the laws. They shall be bound by the directions of the commissioners of the people, who are their superiors, and shall be responsible to them for the exercise of their office, unless the federal constitution or the state constitutions otherwise provide. 
Art. 21. 
(1) The law of the public service, including the salary scale and the power of discipline over employees of the Federal State and of the states performing official tasks, shall be regulated by federal law according to uniform principles. (Article 10, Clause P, and Article 12, Clause J.) This law shall also contain provisions determining the extent to which representatives of employees may participate in the regulation of the rights and duties of such employees without prejudice to the supreme control of service on the part of the Federal State and the states. 
(2) The federal commissioners of the people shall have the supreme control of service over employees of the Federal State; the state commissioners of the people shall have the supreme control of service over employees of the states. 
(3) The appointment of employees of local or territorial municipalities who perform official tasks, and the law of the public service concerning such employees, shall be regulated in connection with the organization of the administration. 
(4) Public employees shall always be guaranteed the possibility of an interchange of service between the Federal State, the states, and the municipalities. Change of service shall take place with the consent of the authorities authorized to exercise the supreme control of service. Special arrangements to facilitate interchange of service may be made by federal law. 
(5) Titles of office for the agencies of the Federal State, the states, or the municipalities may be regulated in a uniform manner by federal law. They shall be protected by law. 
Art. 22. All agencies of the Federal State, the states, or the municipalities must render mutual assistance to one another within scope of their lawful authority. 
Art. 23. 
(1) All persons entrusted with functions of federal, state, or municipal administration, or with judicial functions, shall be liable for any injury inflicted on any third party through intentional or grossly negligent violation of the law in the exercise of their office. The Federal State, the states, or the municipalities shall be liable for violations of the law on the part of persons in their service. 
(2) Detailed regulations shall be prescribed by federal law.CHAPTER II- FEDERAL LEGISLATION<title>
A. The Nationalrat<title> 
Art. 24. The power of legislation of the Federal State shall be exercised by the Nationalrat, elected by the entire Austrian people, with the concurrence of the Bundesrat, elected by the Landtags. 
Art. 25. 
(1) The seat of the Nationalrat shall be the federal capital, Vienna. 
(2) For the duration of a period of extraordinary conditions, the Federal President, at the request of the Federal Ministry, may call the Nationalrat together in any other place in the federal territory. 
Art. 26. 
(1) The Nationalrat shall be elected according to the principles of proportional representation by the equal, direct, secret, and personal suffrage of all Austrian men and women who are more than twenty years of age before the first of January of the year of the election. 
(2) The federal territory shall be divided within the state boundaries into contiguous election districts. A number of deputies shall be allowed to the qualified voters of an election district (electoral body) in proportion to the number of citizens in the election districts; that is, the number of Austrian citizens who in accordance with the results of the last census had their domicile in the election districts. A division of the voters into other electoral bodies shall not be permissible. 
(3) Election day must be a Sunday or other public holiday. 
(4) Every qualified voter who is more than twenty-four years of age before the first of January of the year of the election, shall be eligible for election. 
(5) Denial of the right to vote or to be elected may result only from a judicial conviction or decree. 
Art. 27. 
(1) The Nationalrat shall be elected for a four-year term, computed from the day of its first meeting, but continuing to the day on which the new Nationalrat meets. 
(2) The newly elected Nationalrat must be called together by the Federal President no later than the thirtieth day after the election. The election must be arranged by the Federal Ministry in such a manner as to enable the newly elected Nationalrat to meet on the day after the expiration of the four year term of the old Nationalrat. 
Art. 28. The Nationalrat may be adjourned only by its own resolution. It shall reassemble at the call of its President. He must call the Nationalrat together immediately if at least onefourth of its members or if the Federal Ministry demands it. 
Art. 29. Before the expiration of its term the Nationalrat may by simple law decree its own dissolution. In such case also its term shall last until the newly elected Nationalrat meets. 
Art. 30. 
(1) The Nationalrat shall choose from among its own members its President and its Second and Third Presidents. 
(2) The business of the Nationalrat shall be conducted in accordance with a special law and autonomous rules of procedure determined by the Nationalrat within the limits of this law. The law concerning the rules of procedure may be passed only in the presence of one-half of the members and by a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. 
Art. 31. A resolution of the Nationalrat requires the presence of at least one-third of the members and an absolute majority of the votes cast, unless the law regulating the rules of procedure otherwise provides. 
Art. 32. 
(1) The sittings of the Nationalrat shall be public. 
(2) On demand of the presiding officer or of one-fifth of the members present the public shall be excluded if the Nationalrat so resolves in executive session. 
Art. 33. True and accurate reports of the proceedings at the public sittings of the Nationalrat or its committees are privileged matters. 
B. The Bundesrat<title> 
Art. 34. 
(1) The Bundesrat shall represent the states in proportion to the number of citizens in the state in accordance with the following provisions: 
(2) The city of Vienna and the State of Lower Austria (Articles 108-114) shall be regarded as separate states in respect to representation and status in the Bundesrat. 
(3) The state having the greatest number of citizens shall have twelve members; every other state shall be represented by a number of members determined by the ratio of its number of citizens to the aforementioned number of citizens, a fraction of more than one-half of the proportional number being counted as the full proportional number. Every state shall be entitled to at least three representatives. An alternate shall be chosen for each representative. 
(4) The number of representatives from each state in accordance with the aforementioned provision shall be reapportioned by the Federal President after each general census. 
Art. 35. 
(1) The members of the Bundesrat and their alternates shall be elected by the Landtags for the duration of their terms in accordance with the principles of proportional representation; at least one representative, however, must be assigned to the party which has obtained the second largest number of seats in the Landtag, or, in case several parties have obtained the same number of seats, to the party which polled -the second largest number of votes at the last election to the Landtag. Equal claims of several parties shall be decided by lot. 
(2) Members of the Bundesrat need not necessarily be members of the Landtag by which they are elected; they must, however, be eligible for election to that Landtag. 
(3) After the expiration of the term of a Landtag or after its dissolution, the members of the Bundesrat elected by it shall exercise their functions until the election of members of the Bundesrat by the new Landtag has taken place. 
(4) The provisions of this Article may be changed only if in the Bundesrat such change is made by resolution with an affirmative vote of a majority of the representatives of at least four states, provided that the majority necessary for any resolution concurs in this resolution. 
Art. 36. 
(1) The presidency of the Bundesrat shall be held alternately by the states in alphabetical order for a period of six months. 
(2) The ranking representative of the state entitled to the presidency shall act as presiding officer; substitutes shall be chosen in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Bundesrat. 
(3) The Bundesrat shall be called together by its presiding officer at the seat of the Nationalrat. The presiding officer must call the Bundesrat together immediately if at least one-fourth of its members or if the Federal Ministry demands it. 
Art. 37. 
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this law, a resolution of the Bundesrat requires the presence of at least onethird of the members and an absolute majority of the votes cast. 
(2) The Bundesrat shall by resolution determine its own rules of procedure. This resolution requires the presence of at least one-half of the members and a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. 
(3) The sittings of the Bundesrat shall be public. The public may, however, be excluded by resolution in accordance with the provisions of the rules of procedure. The provisions of Article 33 shall apply also to the public sittings of the Bundesrat and its committees. 
C. The Bundesversammlung<title> 
Art. 38. The Nationalrat and the Bundesrat shall assemble as the Bundesversammlung in a joint public sitting at the seat of the Nationalrat for the election of the Federal President and for administering his oath of office as well as for a resolution concerning a declaration of war. 
Art. 39. 
(1) With the exception of the cases provided for by Article 63, Paragraph 2, Article 64, Paragraph 2, and Article 68, Paragraph 2, the Bundesversammlung shall be called together by the Federal President. The presidency shall be exercised alternately by the President of the Nationalrat and the presiding officer of the Bundesrat, for the first time by the latter. 
(2) The rules of procedure of the Nationalrat shall be duly applied in the Bundesversammlung. 
(3) The Nationalrat and the Bundesrat may in advance separately consider any matter subject to a vote of the Bundesversammlung. 
(4) The provisions of Article 33 shall apply also to the sittings of the Bundesversammlung. 
Art. 40. 
(1) The resolutions of the Bundesversammlung shall be authenticated by its presiding officer and countersigned by the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) Official publication shall be the duty of the Federal Chancellor. 
D. Federal Legislative Procedure<title>
Art. 41. 
(1) Bills shall be submitted to the Nationalrat either as proposals of its members or as bills of the Federal Ministry. The Bundesrat may submit bills to the Nationalrat through the Federal Ministry. 
(2) Every proposal signed by 200,000 qualified voters or by one-half of the qualified voters of each of three states (popular initiative) must be submitted by the Federal Ministry to the Nationalrat to be acted on in accordance with its rules of procedure. The initiative proposal must take the form of a bill. 
Art. 42. 
(1) Every law enacted by the Nationalrat must be transmitted at once by its President to the Federal Chancellor, who must communicate it immediately to the Bundesrat. 
(2) Except as otherwise provided by constitutional law, an enacted law may be authenticated and published only if the Bundesrat does not veto it. Such veto must be supported by reasons. 
(3) This veto must be communicated in writing to the Nationalrat through the medium of the Federal Chancellor within eight weeks after the law has reached the Bundesrat. 
(4) If the Nationalrat in the presence of at least one-half of its members reaffirms its original resolution, the law must be authenticated and published. If the Bundesrat resolves not to veto the law, or if no valid veto, supported by reasons, has been interposed within the period of time precribed by Paragraph 3, the law must be authenticated and published. 
(5) The Bundesrat may not veto resolutions of the Nationalrat in respect to a law concerning the rules of procedure of the Nationalrat, the dissolution of the Nationalrat, the grant of the federal budget estimates, the approval of the final budget accounts, the issue or conversion of federal loans, or the disposition of the federal property. Such laws enacted by the Nationalrat must be authenticated and published without further delay. 
Art. 43. If the Nationalrat so resolves, or if a majority of the members of the Nationalrat so demands, every law enacted by the Nationalrat shall, before its authentication, be submitted by the Federal President to a referendum. 
Art. 44. 
(1) Constitutional laws or constitutional provisions contained in ordinary laws may be enacted by the Nationalrat only in the presence of at least one-half of its members and by a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. They must be specifically designated as such ("constitutional laws" or "constitutional provisions"). 
(2) A complete revision of the Federal Constitution must upon conclusion of the procedure prescribed in Article 42, but before authentication by the Federal President, be submitted to a referendum of the entire people of the Federal State; but an amendment need be so submitted only on demand of onethird of the members of the Nationalrat or the Bundesrat.Art. 45. 
(1) An absolute majority of the valid votes cast in the referendum shall decide. 
(2) The result of the referendum must be officially announced. 
Art. 46. 
(1) Detailed regulations in respect to the initiative and referendum shall be prescribed by federal law. 
(2) Every citizen of the Federal State qualified to vote in the elections to the Nationalrat shall be qualified to participate in the initiative and the referendum. 
(3) The Federal President shall make arrangements for the referendum. 
Art. 47. 
(1) The signature of the Federal President shall certify that the federal laws have been constitutionally enacted. 
(2) Presentation for certification shall take place through the Federal Chancellor. 
(3) The certification must be countersigned by the Federal Chancellor and the competent federal ministers. 
Art. 48. Federal laws and the treaties referred to in Article 50 shall be published in the form in which they are approved by the Nationalrat; federal laws based on a referendum shall be published in the form in which they are approved by the referendum. 
Art. 49. 
(1) The federal laws and such treaties of state as are referred to in Article 50 must be published by the Federal Chancellor in the Federal Law Gazette. Unless otherwise explicitly provided, they shall become effective at the expiration of the day on which the number of the Federal Law Gazette containing the publication is issued and distributed; and unless otherwise explicitly provided, they shall apply to the entire federal territory. 
(2) A special federal law shall regulate the publication of the Federal Law Gazette. 
E. Participation of the Nationalrat and the Bundesrat in the Executive Power of the Federal State<title>
Art. 50. 
(1) All political treaties, and all other treaties only in so far as they provide for an alteration of existing laws, shall require for their validity the consent of the Nationalrat. 
(2) The provisions of Article 42, Paragraphs 1-4, and, in case of alteration of a constitutional law by a treaty, the provisions of Article 44, Paragraph 1, shall be duly applied to resolutions of the Nationalrat concerning the approval of treaties.Art. 51. The Federal Ministry must submit to the Nationalrat no later than eight weeks before the expiration of the current fiscal year estimates of the federal revenues and appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Art. 52. The Nationalrat and the Bundesrat shall be authorized to examine the conduct of public business by the Federal Ministry, to question the members of the Federal Ministry on all matters relating to the execution of the laws, and to demand all pertinent information as well as to express by resolution their wishes in respect to the exercise of the executive power. 
Art. 53. 
(1) The Nationalrat may by resolution set up committees of investigation. 
(2) The courts and all other authorities shall be obliged to comply with the requests of these committees for evidence; upon their demand all public authorities shall lay their records before them. 
(3) The procedure of the committees of investigation shall be regulated by the law concerning the rules of procedure of the Nationalrat. 
Art. 54. The Nationalrat shall participate in fixing railroad, postal, telegraph, and telephone rates and prices of articles subject to monopoly, as well as salaries of persons permanently employed in the enterprises of the Federal State. The character of such participation shall be prescribed by federal constitutional law. 
Art. 55. The Nationalrat shall itself share in the executive power of the Federal State in such cases as are specified by this law, as well as through the main committee elected from among its members in accordance with the principles of proportional representation. It shall be a special function of the main committee to participate in the choice of the Federal Ministry (Article 70). Moreover, certain ordinances of the Federal Ministry shall require the consent of the main committee, as may be prescribed by federal law.
F. Status of the Members of the Nationalrat and the Bundesrat<title>
Art. 56. When acting in their official capacity the members of the Nationalrat or the Bundesrat shall not be bound by instructions. 
Art. 57. 
(1) The members of the Nationalrat shall never be held responsible for any votes cast in their official capacity, and they shall be held responsible only by the Nationalrat for any utterances made in this capacity. 
(2) No member of the Nationalrat may, without the consent of this body, be subjected to arrest or any other official prosecution for a penal offense unless he is apprehended in the act of committing a crime. 
(3) In case of apprehension in the very act, the authorities must notify the President of the Nationalrat that the arrest has taken place. 
(4) On demand of the Nationalrat the arrest must be cancelled or the entire prosecution must be deferred during the term of the Nationalrat. 
(5) The immunities attaching to the agencies of the Nationalrat whose functions extend beyond the term of the Nationalrat shall continue for the duration of their functions. 
Art. 58. The members of the Bundesrat shall, during the entire term of their functions enjoy the immunity of members of the Landtag by which they are deputized. 
Art. 59. 
(1) No person may be a member of the Nationalrat and the Bundesrat at the same time. 
(2) Public officials, including members of the federal army, shall not require leave to exercise their functions as members of the Nationalrat or the Bundesrat. Should they seek election to the Nationalrat the time necessary therefor shall be granted to them. Detailed regulations shall be prescribed by the rules for the public service. 
CHAPTER III: THE EXECUTIVE POWER OF THE FEDERAL STATE<title>
A. Administration<title> 
1. The Federal President<title> 
Art. 60. 
(1) The Federal President shall be elected by the Bundesversammlung in accordance with Article 38 and by secret ballot. 
(2) His term of office shall be four years. A reelection for the term of office immediately following shall be permissible only once. 
(3) Only a person who is qualified to vote in the elections to the Nationalrat and who is more than thirty-five years of age before the first of January of the year of the election may be elected Federal President. 
(4) Members of reigning or formerly reigning families are not eligible. 
(5) The person who receives a majority of all votes cast shall be elected. Balloting shall be repeated until an absolute majority is obtained for one person. 
Art. 61. During his term of office the Federal President must not be a member of any general representative body or exercise any other profession. 
Art. 62. On assuming office the Federal President shall before the Bundesversammlung take the following oath: "I swear that I will faithfully observe the constitution and all laws of the Republic and will fulfill my duty to the best of my knowledge and conscience." 
Art. 63. 
(1) An official prosecution of the Federal President is permissible only if the Bundesversammlung assents to it. 
(2) A bill for the prosecution of the Federal President shall be presented by the competent authority to the Nationalrat, which decides whether it shall be submitted to the Bundesversammlung. If the Nationalrat decides in the affirmative, the Federal Chancellor must call the Bundesversammlung together immediately. 
Art. 64. 
(1) In case of disability on the part of the Federal President or in case of a vacancy in his office, the functions of the Federal President shall devolve upon the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) In case of a vacancy in the Federal Presidency the Federal Chancellor must immediately call the Bundesversammlung together for the election of a new Federal President. 
Art. 65. 
(1) The Federal President represents the Republic in international relations; he receives and accredits diplomatic representatives; he accepts the exequaturs of foreign consuls; he appoints the consular representatives of the Republic in foreign countries and concludes treaties. 
(2) Moreover, in addition to the powers conferred upon him by other provisions of this constitution, he shall be empowered: 
<list>
(a) To appoint all federal officials, including military officers and other federal functionaries, and to commission them. 
(b) To create and confer professional titles. 
(c) Specifically, to pardon persons convicted by final judgments of the courts, to mitigate or alter sentences pronounced by the courts, to remit the legal consequences of a conviction and to cancel convictions by pardon, to quash criminal proceedings in case of penal offenses to be officially prosecuted. 
(d) To legitimatize illegitimate children on the petition of the parents. 
</list>
(3) Moreover, special laws shall prescribe to what extent the Federal President shall be empowered to confer honorary rights, to grant extraordinary allowances and increases in salaries and pensions, to confer rights of appointment or confirmation, and to exercise other powers in matters concerning individuals. 
Art. 66. 
(1) The Federal President may transfer to the competent members of the Federal Ministry the right conferred on him to appoint certain classes of federal employees. 
(2) The Federal President may authorize the Federal Ministry or the competent members thereof to conclude certain categories of treaties which are not covered by the provisions of Article 50. 
Art. 67. 
(1) Except as otherwise provided by the constitution, all official acts of the Federal President shall be performed upon the proposal of the Federal Ministry or of a federal minister empowered by it. The law shall prescribe to what extent the Federal Ministry or the competent federal minister shall be bound by proposals emanating from other sources. 
(2) All official acts of the Federal President require for their validity the countersignature of the Federal Chancellor or the competent federal ministers. 
Art 68. 
(1) In accordance with Article 142, the Federal President shall be responsible to the Bundesversammlung for the exercise of his office. 
(2) Upon resolution of the Nationalrat or the Bundesrat the Federal Chancellor must call the Bundesversammlung together to decide upon this issue [of impeachment]. 
(3) A resolution of impeachment within the meaning of Article 142 shall require the presence of more than one-half of the members of each of the two representative bodies and a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. 
2. The Federal Ministry<title> 
Art. 69. 
(1) The highest administrative functions of the Federal State, unless conferred upon the Federal President, shall be entrusted to the Federal Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, and the other federal ministers. Together they form the Federal Ministry under the presidency of the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be empowered to represent the Federal Chancellor in the entire sphere of his authority. 
Art. 70. 
(1) The Nationalrat shall elect the Federal Ministry by a recorded vote upon nomination by a main committee on the election of an entire Federal Ministry. 
(2) Only persons eligible to the Nationalrat may be elected members of the Federal Ministry. The members of the Federal Ministry need not be members of the Nationalrat. 
(3) If the Nationalrat is not in session the Federal Ministry shall be chosen provisionally by the main committee; as soon as the Nationalrat meets, the election must take place. 
(4) The provisions of Paragraphs 1-3 shall be duly applied to the appointment of individual members of the Federal Ministry. 
Art. 71. If the Federal Ministry resigns from office the Federal President must, until a new Federal Government has been formed, entrust the carrying on of the administration to members of the retiring Ministry or to high officials of the federal administration, and must authorize one of them to preside over the provisional Federal Ministry. This provision shall be duly applied if individual members of the Federal Ministry resign. 
Art. 72. 
(1) Before assuming office the members of the Federal Ministry shall take an oath before the Federal President. 
(2) The official commissions of the Federal Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor and the other federal ministers shall be issued by the Federal President on the day on which they take the oath of office, and shall be countersigned by the newly commissioned Federal Chancellor. 
(3) These provisions shall also be duly applied to the cases enumerated in Article 71. 
Art. 73. In case of temporary disability of a federal minister the Federal President shall authorize a federal minister or a high official of the federal administrative to represent this minister. This representative shall be under the same responsibility as a federal minister (Article 76). 
Art. 74. 
(1) If the Nationalrat by express resolution withdraws its confidence from the Federal Ministry, or from individual members of it, the Federal Ministry or the federal minister in question is thereby removed from office.(2) The presence of one-half of the members of the Nationalrat shall be required for a resolution of the Nationalrat by which confidence is withdrawn. On demand, however, of one-fifth of the members present, the vote must be postponed to the second week-day next following. A further postponement of the vote may take place only by resolution of the Nationalrat. 
(3) The Federal Ministry or its individual members shall be relieved of office by the Federal President in cases prescribed by law or upon their request. 
Art. 75. The members of the Federal Ministry as well as their deputies shall be authorized to participate in the deliberations of the Nationalrat, the Bundesrat, or the Bundesversammlung, as well as in the deliberations of the committees of these representative bodies; and, on special invitation, to participate in the deliberations of the main committee of the Nationalrat. At their request they must always be heard. The Nationalrat, the Bundesrat, or the Bundesversammlung as well as their committees may demand the presence of the members of the Federal Ministry. 
Art. 76. 
(1) The members of the Federal Ministry (Articles 69 and 71) shall be responsible to the Nationalrat in accordance with Article 142. 
(2) A resolution of impeachment in accordance with Article 142 shall require the presence of more than one-half of the members. 
Art. 77. 
(1) The federal ministers and the officials subordinate to them shall be authorized to conduct the business of the federal administration. 
(2) The number of the federal ministers, their scope of authority, and the organization of their officers shall be prescribed by federal law. 
(3) The head of the federal chancellery shall be the Federal Chancellor and the head of each of the other federal offices shall be a federal minister. 
(4) The Federal Chancellor or any other federal minister may in exceptional cases be placed in charge of two federal offices. 
Art. 78. 
(1) In special cases federal ministers may be appointed without at the same time being commissioned to take charge of a federal office. 
(2) Secretaries of state, who are chosen and relieved of office in the same manner as the federal ministers, shall be assigned to the federal ministers to assist them in their departmental and parliamentary duties. 
(3) The secretary of state shall be subordinate to the federal minister and shall be bound by his instructions. 
3. Federal Army<title> 
Art. 79. 
(1) The federal army shall be entrusted with the protection of the frontiers of the Republic. 
(2) In so far as the lawful civil authorities require its cooperation, the army shall in general protect the constitutional institutions, as well as maintain order and safety within the realm, and shall give relief in cases of disasters due to natural forces and of accidents of unusual gravity. 
Art. 80. 
(1) The Nationalrat shall have control over the army. In so far as immediate control is not reserved to the Nationalrat by the laws of national defence, the control shall be entrusted to the Federal Ministry, or to the competent federal minister, within the limits of the power conferred upon him by the Federal Ministry. 
(2) The laws of national defence shall prescribe to what extent the authorities of the states or the municipalities may demand directly the cooperation of the federal army for the purposes mentioned in Article 79, Paragraph 2. 
Art. 81. Federal law shall prescribe to what extent the states are to participate in recruiting, provisioning, and quartering the army and in granting subventions of other necessaries.
B. The Administration of Justice<title>
Art. 82. 
(1) All jurisdiction emanates from the Federal State. 
(2) Judgments and decrees shall be pronounced and executed in the name of the Republic. 
Art. 83. 
(1) The constitution and jurisdiction of the courts shall be prescribed by federal law. 
(2) No one may be withdrawn from the jurisdiction of his regularly established court. 
(3) Extraordinary courts shall be permissible only in cases prescribed by the laws concerning the procedure in criminal matters. 
Art. 84. Military jurisdiction shall be abolished except in time of war.Art. 85. Capital punishment in ordinary procedure shall be abolished. 
Art. 86. 
(1) Except as otherwise provided by this law the judges shall be appointed upon nomination of the Federal Ministry by the Federal President, or by the competent federal minister, upon authorization of the Federal President. The Federal Ministry or the federal minister shall request the senates (Senate) provided for by the constitution of the courts to submit proposals for appointment. 
(2) The proposal for appointment, submitted to the competent federal minister and forwarded by him to the Federal Ministry, shall comprise, if there be a sufficient number of applicants, at least three names, and, if more than one position is to be filled, at least twice as many names as there are judges to be appointed. 
Art. 87. 
(1) Judges shall be independent in the exercise of their judicial functions. 
(2) A judge shall be regarded as exercising his judicial functions when he conducts all judicial business entrusted to him by law or by assignment of business, with the exception of such matters of judicial administration as may not be discharged, in accordance with prescriptions of the law, through senates or commissions. 
(3) Business shall be assigned in advance among the judges of a court for a term designated by the constitution of the courts. Any matter thus assigned to a judge may be removed from his jurisdiction by decree of the administration of justice only in case of his disability. 
Art. 88. 
(1) An age limit shall be fixed by the constitution of the courts upon the attainment of which judges shall be permanently retired. 
(2) In all other cases judges may be removed from office, or against their will transferred to another position or retired, only by a formal judicial decision and only in the cases and according to the forms prescribed by law. These provisions, however, shall not apply to transfers or retirements which become necessary through changes in the constitution of the courts. In such cases the law shall prescribe within what period of time judges may be transferred or retired without the formalities otherwise prescribed. 
(3) Temporary removal of judges from office may take place only by decree of the president of the court or of the superior judicial authority with the simultaneous reference of the matter to the competent court. 
Art. 89. 
(1) The courts shall not have power to examine into the validity of laws duly proclaimed. 
(2) If a court, on the ground of its being illegal, questions whether an ordinance governs a case, it shall suspend the proceedings and submit an application to the Supreme Constitutional Court for its annulment. 
Art. 90. 
(1) Hearings or proceedings in civil or criminal cases before the court authorized to pass judgment shall be oral and public. Exceptions may be prescribed by law. 
(2) In criminal procedure the indictment process shall apply. 
Art. 91. 
(1) The people shall participate in the rendering of judgments. 
(2) In case of crimes punishable by severe penalties—which crimes shall be described by law—and in case of all political crimes and misdemeanors, the jury shall render the verdict as to the guilt of the accused person. 
(3) In criminal procedure for other penal offences lay judges (Schoffen) shall participate in the rendering of judgments, if the penalty to be imposed exceeds a limit to be prescribed by law. 
Art. 92. The Supreme Judicial Court in Vienna shall be the highest court of appeal in civil and criminal cases. 
Art. 93. Amnesties on account of legally criminal acts may be granted by federal law. 
Art. 94. 
(1) The administration of justice shall be separated from the administration in every instance. 
(2) If an administrative authority has to decide upon private claims, the party aggrieved by such decision shall be given a remedy against the other party by regular legal process, provided there is no legal provision to the contrary. 
(3) In matters concerning land reform (Article 12, Paragraph 1, Clause F) the commissions consisting of judges, administrative officials, and experts shall have the exclusive right of decision. 
CHAPTER IV: THE LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE POWER OF THE STATES<title>
A. General Provisions<title> 
Art. 95. 
(1) The legislative power of the states shall be exercised by the Landtags. Their members shall be elected in accordance with the principle of proportional representation by the equal, direct, secret, and personal suffrage of all Austrian citizens of both sexes, who are qualified to vote according to the regulations for elections to the Landtags and who have their domicile in the state. 
(2) In the regulations for elections to the Landtags limitations upon the right to vote or to be elected may not be more restricted than in the regulations for election to the Nationalrat. 
(3) The voters shall exercise their suffrages in election districts, which must consist of contiguous territory. The number of deputies must be apportioned among the election districts on the basis of the number of their citizens. A division of the voters in other electoral bodies shall not be permissible. 
Art. 96. 
(1) Members of the Landtags shall enjoy the same immunity as the members of the Nationalrat. The provisions of Article 57 shall be duly applied. 
(2) The provisions of Articles 32 and 33 shall apply also to the sittings of the Landtags and their committees. 
Art. 97. 
(1) A state law shall require for its validity enactment by the Landtag, authentication and countersignature in accordance with the provisions of the state constitution, and publication by the chief executive officer of the state (Landeshauptmann) in the State Law Gazette. 
(2) In so far as a state law provides for the participation of the federal authorities in its execution, the consent of the Federal Ministry must be obtained for this participation. Before this consent is obtained, the law may not be published. 
Art. 98. 
(1) All laws enacted by the Landtags must be communicated to the competent federal minister by the chief executive officer of the state immediately after their enactment by the Landtag and before their publication. 
(2) Within eight weeks after the day on which the law enacted by a Landtag has been filed at the office of the competent federal minister, the Federal Ministry may interpose a veto, supported by reasons, on the ground that the enacted law endangers federal interests. In that event the enacted law may be published only if the Landtag in the presence of at least onehalf of its members reenacts the law. 
(3) Before the expiration of the time allowed for interposing a veto, publication shall be permissible only with the express consent of the Federal Ministry. 
Art. 99. 
(1) A state constitution, enacted by state law, may be amended by state law in so far as the federal constitution is not affected thereby. 
(2) A state constitutional law may be enacted only in the presence of one-half of the members of the Landtag and by a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. 
Art. 100. 
(1) Every Landtag may be dissolved by the Federal President on the demand of the Federal Ministry and with the consent of the Bundesrat. The consenting vote of the Bundesrat requires the presence of one-half of the members and a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. The representatives of the Landtag to be dissolved may not participate in the vote. 
(2) In case of dissolution writs of election must, according to the provisions of the state constitution, be issued within three weeks. The newly elected Landtag must be called together within four weeks after the election. 
Art. 101. 
(1) The executive power of each state shall be exercised by a state ministry to be elected by the Landtag. 
(2) The members of the state ministry need not be members of the Landtag. However, only persons eligible to the Landtag may be elected members of the state ministry. 
(3) A state ministry shall consist of the chief executive officer of the state, the necessary number of deputies, and other members. 
(4) On assuming office the chief executive officer of the state shall take an oath before the Federal President to support the federal constitution, and likewise the other members of the state ministry shall take the same oath before the chief executive officer of the state. 
Art. 102. 
(1) Within the states the executive power of the Federal State shall be exercised—in so far as no federal authorities exist (direct federal administration)—by the chief executive officer of the state and the state authorities subordinate to him (indirect federal administration). 
(2) The following matters may be administered directly by federal authorities within their constitutional sphere of action: 
Marking out of boundaries, traffic in goods and live stock with foreign countries, customs, federal finances, monopolies, measures, weights, standards and assaying, technical experiments, administration of justice, commerce and industry, patents, protection of patterns, trademarks, and other commercial designations, engineering and consulting engineering, traffic, federal highways, police authority over watercourses and navigation, posts, telegraphs and telephones, mining, regulation and maintenance of waters, construction and maintenance of waterways, hydrographic service, surveying, labor law, protection of workers and other employees, social insurance, protection of monuments, federal police, federal gendarmerie, military affairs, care of discharged soldiers and their dependents. 
(3) The Federal State shall have power to commission the chief executive officer of the state with the executive power of the Federal State in the matters enumerated in Paragraph 2. 
(4) The extension of federal administrative authority over matters other than those enumerated in Paragraph 2 may take place only with the consent of the states affected thereby. 
(5) The federal law, mentioned in Article 120, Paragraph 1, shall prescribe to what extent the chief executive officers of the states may have authority over the federal police and the federal gendarmerie. 
Art. 103. The chief executive officer of the state shall be bound by the directions of the Federal Ministry and the individual federal ministers in matters of indirect federal administration. Administrative appeal in such matters shall, unless otherwise expressly provided by federal law, extend to the competent federal ministers. 
Art. 104. The provisions of Article 102 shall not be applied to agencies created to administer the business of the Federal State referred to in Article 17. 
Art. 105. 
(1) The chief executive officer of the state shall represent the state. In matters of indirect federal administration he shall be responsible to the Federal Ministry in accordance with Article 142. This responsibility may be asserted notwithstanding any immunity. 
(2) The members of the state ministry shall be responsible to the Landtag in accordance with Article 142. 
(3) A resolution of impeachment in accordance with Article 142 shall require the presence of one-half of the members. 
Art. 106. An administrative official, legally trained, shall be commissioned as Landesamtsdirektor to direct administrative services of the state government. He shall also be the assistant to the chief executive officer of the state in matters of indirect federal administration. 
Art. 107. The states may reach agreements among themselves only concerning matters within their autonomous sphere of action and must communicate the same immediately to the Federal Ministry. 
B. The Federal Capital Vienna, and the State of Lower Austria<title> 
Art. 108. 
(1) The Landtag of Lower Austria is divided into two curiae (Kurien). The one curia (state curia) shall consist of the deputies elected by the state exclusive of Vienna. The election of the other curia (city curia) shall be regulated by the constitution of the federal capital, Vienna. 
(2) The number of deputies must be divided between the two curiae in proportion to the number of citizens. 
Art. 109. The two curiae shall meet as the Landtag of Lower Austria to exercise the power of legislation in all such matters pertaining to the formerly autonomous provincial administration as may be declared common to both by their common state constitution. Among such matters shall be particularly the common state constitution itself. 
Art. 110. 
(1) In all matters not common to both, each of the two divisions of the state shall have the status of an autonomous state. 
(2) In such matters the municipal council of the city of Vienna shall have for Vienna the status of a Landtag, and the state curia shall have for the state of Lower Austria the status of a Landtag. The provisions of Article 57 shall be applicable to members of the municipal council of Vienna.
Art. 111. 
(1) The constitutions of the two divisions of the state as well as the election of members to the Bundesrat (Article 35) shall not be among the matters common to both. 
(2) Likewise, in so far as it is within the sphere of action of the states, the power of legislation in respect to taxes shall be exercised separately by the municipal council of Vienna and the Landtag (state curia). 
(3) Their common state constitution shall regulate in what manner the expenses for matters common to both shall be met. 
Art. 112. The general provisions of this chapter shall apply to both divisions of the state. In regard to Vienna the Burgermeister elected by the municipal council shall have the same status as the chief executive officer of a state; the city senate (Stadtsenat) elected by the municipal council shall have the status of a state ministry; and the Magistratsdirektor shall have the status of a Landesamtsdirektor.Art. 113. 
(1) Matters common to both shall be administered by an administrative commission elected by the Landtag of Lower Austria from among its members in accordance with the principles of proportional representation. 
(2) The Burgermeister of the city of Vienna and the chief executive officer of the state of Lower Austria shall be members of the administrative commission and shall preside alternately. 
Art. 114. A separate state of Vienna may be formed by concurrent laws of the municipal council of Vienna and the Landtag of the state of Lower Austria. 
C. The Municipalities (Gemeinden)<title>
Art. 115. General public administration in the states shall, in accordance with the following provisions, be organized on the basis of local self-government. 
Art. 116. 
(1) Administrative districts and units of local self-government into which the states are divided shall be the local municipalities (Ortsgemeinden) and the district municipalities (Gebietsgemeinden). 
(2) The local municipalities shall be subordinate to the district municipalities and the latter shall be subordinate to the states. 
Art. 117. 
(1) Local municipalities of more than 20,000 inhabitants shall at their request be declared district municipalities. In such local municipalities district administration shall be consolidated with municipal administration. 
(2) Cities heretofore governed under their own charters shall be district municipalities. 
Art. 118. The local municipalities and district municipalities shall be also autonomous economic units. They shall have the right to own and acquire property of any description and to dispose thereof within the limits of federal and state law, to engage in economic enterprises, to prepare and carry out their independent budgets, and to collect taxes. 
Art. 119. 
(1) The agencies of the local municipality shall be the local municipal council and the local municipal administration (Ortsgemeindeamt); the agencies of the district municipality shall be the district municipal council and the district municipal administration (Gebietsgemeindeamt). 
(2) Elections to all municipal councils shall take place in accordance with the principles of proportional representation and by the equal, direct, secret, and personal suffrage of all Austrian citizens who have their domicile within the territorial jurisdiction of the municipal council to be elected. The legislative bodies of the states shall issue the election regulations. In these election regulations the limitations upon the right to vote or to be elected may not be more restricted than in the regulations for elections to the Landtag. The election regulations may prescribe that the voters shall exercise their suffrages in election districts which must be contiguous. A division of the voters into other electoral bodies shall not be permissible. For elections of the territorial municipal council the judicial district shall be the election district. The number of deputies must be apportioned among the election districts on the basis of the number of citizens. 
(3) Only persons who have their domicile in the district municipality and who are eligible for election to the Landtag may be elected members of the district municipal council. 
(4) The municipal councils may, in accordance with the principles of proportional representation, elect from among their members, for the different branches of administration, special administrative committees, which may, in so far as definite professional interest or groups are concerned, be enlarged by the admission of representatives of such professional interest or groups. 
(5) The director of the district municipal administration must be a legally trained administrative official. 
Art. 120. 
(1) Additional fundamental principles for the organization of general public administration in the states shall be prescribed by federal constitutional law in accordance with Articles 115-119. Supplementary laws shall be enacted by the states. 
(2) Federal and state laws respectively shall, within their scope of authority as defined by the constitution, determine what matters of administration, as to subject matter and administrative organization, shall be administered by representative assemblies, administrative committees, and administrative officials respectively. 
(3) The local municipalities, however, shall be guaranteed scope of authority as to original jurisdiction in respect to the following matters:
<list>
(a) Security of person and property (local security police).(b) First aid and life saving. 
(c) Maintenance of streets, roads, public squares, and bridges of the municipality. 
(d) Local street police. 
(e) Protection and policing of the fields. 
(f) Market and food police. 
(g) Sanitary police. 
(h) Building and fire police.
</list>
CHAPTER V: CONTROL OVER THE EXPENDITURES OF THE FEDERAL STATE<title>
Art. 121. 
(1) An Independent Court of Audit shall be empowered to examine the expenditures of each and every agency of the Federal State as well as the expenditures of the endowments, foundations, and institutions administered by agencies of the Federal State. It may also be entrusted with the examination of expenditures of enterprises in which the Federal State is financially interested. 
(2) The Independent Court of Audit shall draft the balance sheet of the federal budget and present it to the Nationalrat. 
(3) All documents concerning debts of the State (financial and administrative debts) must, in so far as they authenticate a liability of the Federal State, be countersigned by the President of the Independent Court of Audit. Such countersignature certifies only the legality of the expenditure and its correctness as to accounting. 
Art. 122. 
(1) The Independent Court of Audit shall be directly subordinate to the Nationalrat. 
(2) The Independent Court of Audit shall consist of a president and the necessary officials and employees. 
(3) The president of the Independent Court of Audit shall be elected by the Nationalrat on nomination by the main committee. 
(4) The president of the Independent Court of Audit may not be a member of any general representative body and may not have been a member of the Federal Ministry or any state ministry within the last five years. 
Art. 123. 
(1) In respect to responsibility the president of the Independent Court of Audit shall have the same status as members of the Federal Ministry.(2) He may be relieved of office by resolution of the Nationalrat. 
Art. 124. 
(1) The president shall be represented by the official of the Independent Court of Audit who is next highest in rank. 
(2) In case of representation of the president, the provisions of Article 123 shall apply to his representative. 
Art. 125. 
(1) The Federal President shall appoint the officials of the Independent Court of Audit on nomination by, and with the countersignature of, the president of the Independent Court of Audit; the same shall apply to the conferring of titles of office. The Federal President, however, may empower the president of the Independent Court of Audit to appoint officials of certain classes. 
(2) The president of the Independent Court of Audit shall appoint its employees. 
Art. 126. No member of the Independent Court of Audit may take part in the direction or administration of enterprises which must render an account to the Federal State or to the states or which receive a subvention from, or have a contract with the Federal State or a state, except enterprises the exclusive object of which is the advancement of humanitarian endeavors or the betterment of the economic conditions of public employees or their dependents. 
Art. 127. In regard to the expenditures of a state the constitutional laws of a state may assign to the Independent Court of Audit the same functions as are conferred upon it by this law in regard to the expenditures of the Federal State. 
Art. 128. Detailed regulations concerning the activities of the Independent Court of Audit shall be prescribed by federal law. 
CHAPTER VI: CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE GUARANTEES<title>
A. The Supreme Administrative Court<title>
Art. 129. 
(1) Any person who claims to have been aggrieved by an erroneous decision or decree of an administrative authority may, after having exhausted his administrative appeals, take his complaint to the Supreme Administrative Court. 
(2) If, in matters referred to in Articles 11 and 12, the competent federal minister considers the interests of the Federal State injured by an erroneous decision or decree of an authority of a state he also may, in the name of the Federal State, take his complaint against such violation of law before the Supreme Administrative Court. 
(3) A violation of law does not exist, in so far as an administrative authority has been empowered by the provisions of the law to render a discretionary decision or decree and has exercised such discretion within the meaning of the law. 
Art. 130. In matters concerning which complaints may be taken to the Supreme Administrative Court, administrative appeals may be shortened by federal or state law in accordance with the provisions of Articles 10-15 determining spheres of authority. 
Art. 131. From the jurisdiction of the Supreme Administrative Court are excluded any matters: 
<list>
(a) which fall within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Constitutional Court; 
(b) which fall within the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts; 
(c) which are to be decided or decreed by a collegiate authority, which, whether acting in an inferior or superior capacity, shall have among its members at least one judge. 
</list>
Art. 132. Every senate (Senat) of the Supreme Administrative Court which renders judgment upon an appeal from a decision or decree of an administrative authority of a state shall as a rule have among its members a judge who formerly belonged to the judicial or administrative service of that state. 
Art. 133. 
(1) A judgment of reversal by the Supreme Administrative Court operates to set aside an erroneous decision or decree. 
(2) The Administrative authorities when rendering a new decision or decree are bound by the judicial opinion of the Supreme Administrative Court. 
(3) The Supreme Administrative Court may itself determine a matter in so far as the administrative authority is not, in accordance with the provisions of the law, empowered to decide such matter at its own discretion. 
Art. 134. 
(1) The Supreme Administrative Court shall have its seat in the federal capital, Vienna. 
(2) It shall consist of a president, a vice-president, and the necessary number of senate presidents (Senatsprasidenten) and counselors.(3) At least one-half of the members must have the qualifications for the office of judge. 
Art. 135. The president, the vice-president and the members of the Supreme Administrative Court shall be appointed by the Federal President upon nomination by the Federal Ministry. The nomination by the Federal Ministry shall require, for the president and one-half of the members, the assent of the main committee of the Nationalrat; for the vice-president and the other half of the members, the assent of the Bundesrat. 
Art. 136. The administrative jurisdiction and the organization. of the Supreme Administrative Court shall be regulated by federal law. 
B. The Supreme Constitutional Court<title>
Art. 137. The Supreme Constitutional Court shall render judgment upon all claims against the Federal State, the states, or the municipalities, which cannot be brought before the regular courts. 
Art. 138. The Supreme Constitutional Court shall also render judgment upon conflicts of jurisdiction: 
<list>
(a) between courts and administrative authorities; 
(b) between the Supreme Administrative Court and the courts, and in particular between the Supreme Administrative Court and the Supreme Constitutional Court itself; 
(c) between the states themselves, as well as between a state and the Federal State. 
</list>
Art. 139. 
(1) The Supreme Constitutional Court shall render judgment upon the illegality of ordinances of a federal or state authority on the application of a court; but if such an ordinance shall constitute the basis of a judgment of the Supreme Constitutional Court, it may render, judgment on its own responsibility. 
It shall also render judgment upon the illegality of ordinances of a state authority on application of the Federal Ministry. It shall also render judgment upon the illegality of ordinances of a federal authority on application of a state ministry. 
(2) The judgment of the Supreme Constitutional Court, by which an ordinance is annulled as being illegal, shall obligate the competent authority to publish the annulment immediately. The annulment shall become effective on the day of publication. 
Art. 140. 
(1) The Supreme Constitutional Court shall render judgment, on application of the Federal Ministry, upon the unconstitutionality of state laws; on application of a state ministry, upon the unconstitutionality of federal laws; but if such a law constitutes the basis of a judgment of the Supreme Constitutional Court, it may render judgment upon its own responsibility. 
(2) The application mentioned in Paragraph 1 may be made at any time; the ministry that makes the application must communicate it immediately to the competent state ministry or the Federal Ministry, as the case may be. 
(3) The judgment of the Supreme Constitutional Court by which a law is annulled as being unconstitutional, shall obligate the Federal Chancellor or the competent chief executive officer of a state to publish the annulment immediately; the annulment shall become effective on the day of the publication, unless the Supreme Constitutional Court determines a period of time at the expiration of which the annulment shall become effective. This period of time may not exceed six months. 
(4) The provision of Article 89, Paragraph 1, shall not apply to the examination into the constitutionality of laws by the Supreme Constitutional Court. 
Art. 141. The Supreme Constitutional Court shall render judgment concerning contested elections to the Nationalrat, to the Bundesrat, to the Landtags, or to any other general representative body; and on application of one of these representative bodies, it shall render judgment in respect to the declaration that one of its members has lost his seat. 
Art. 142. 
(1) The Supreme Constitutional Court shall render judgment in impeachment proceedings to determine the constitutional responsibility of the highest federal or state authorities for wrongful violations of law in the exercise of their offices. 
(2) Impeachment proceedings may be brought: 
<list>
(a) against the Federal President on account of violation of the federal constitution: by resolution of the Bundesversammlung. 
(b) against members of the Federal Ministry, or those authorities having the same status in regard to responsibility, on account of violation of a law: by resolution of the Nationalrat. 
(c) against members of a state ministry, or those authorities having according to a state constitution the same status in regard to responsibility, on account of violation of a law: by resolution of the competent Landtag; 
(d) against the chief executive officer of a state on account of violation of a law, as well as noncompliance with the ordinances or other decrees of the Federal Ministry in matters of indirect federal administration: by resolution of the Federal Ministry. 
</list>
(3) Judgment by the Supreme Constitutional Court pronouncing a conviction shall decree loss of office, and under specially aggravating circumstances, temporary loss of political rights; in the event of minor violations of law in the cases mentioned in Paragraph 2, Clause D, the Supreme Constitutional Court may limit itself to pronouncing that a violation of law exists. 
Art. 143. Impeachment proceedings 'against the persons enumerated in Article 142 may also be brought on account of penal offences connected with the official 'activities of the accused. In such case only the Supreme Constitutional Court shall be competent; the proceedings pending in the regular criminal courts shall be transferred to it. In such cases the Supreme Constitutional Court may also apply, in addition to Article 142, Paragraph 3, the provisions of the criminal law. 
Art. 144. 
(1) The Supreme Constitutional Court shall decide in respect to complaints of a violation of constitutionally guaranteed rights by reason of a decision or a decree of an administrative authority, after administrative appeals have been exhausted. 
(2) A judgment of reversal by the Supreme Constitutional Court operates to set aside an unconstitutional decision or decree. The authorities when rendering a new decision or decree are bound by the judicial opinion of the Supreme Constitutional Court. 
Art. 145. The Supreme Constitutional Court shall render judgment upon violations of international law in accordance with the provisions of a special federal law. 
Art. 146. The Federal President shall execute the judgments of the Supreme Constitutional Court. 
Art. 147. 
(1) The Supreme Constitutional Court shall have its seat in Vienna. 
(2) It shall consist of a president, a vice-president, and the necessary number of members and substitute members. 
(3) The president, the vice-president, and one-half of the members and substitute members shall be elected for life by the Nationalrat; the other half of the members and substitute mem bers shall be elected for life by the Bundesrat. 
Art. 148. The detailed organization and the procedure of the Supreme Constitutional Court shall be regulated by federal law. 
CHAPTER VII: CONCLUDING PROVISIONS<title>
Art. 149. 
(1) In addition to this law [the federal constitution] the following laws shall, within the meaning of Article 44, Paragraph 1, be regarded as constitutional laws with due consideration for the changes necessitated by this law; 
Fundamental Law of the State, of December 21, 1867, National Law Gazette, No. 142, concerning the general rights of citizens for the kingdoms and territories represented in the Reichsrat.
Law of October 27, 1862, National Law Gazette, No. 87, for the protection of personal liberty. 
Law of October 27, 1862, National Law Gazette, No. 88, for the protection of the inviolability of the home. 
Resolution of the provisional Constituent Assembly of October 30, 1918, State Law Gazette No. 3. 
Law of April 3, 1919, State Law Gazette, No. 209, concerning the expulsion and the taking over of the property of the house of Hapsburg-Lorraine. 
Law of April 3, 1919, State Law Gazette, No. 211, concerning the abolition of the nobility, of the secular orders of knights or of ladies, and certain titles and honors. 
Law of May 8, 1919, State Law Gazette, No. 257, concerning the coat of arms and the Seal of State of the Republic of German Austria with the changes effected by Articles 2, 5, and 6 of the Law of October 21, 1919, State Law Gazette, No. 484. 
Section V of Part III of the Treaty of St. Germain, of September 10, 1919, State Law Gazette, 1920, No. 303. 
(2) Article 20 of the Fundamental Law of the State of December 21, 1867, National Law Gazette, No. 142, as well as the Law of May 5, 1869, National Law Gazette, No. 66, promulgated by reason of the aforementioned Article, shall cease to be in force. 
Art. 150. The transition to this constitution of the Federal State shall be regulated by a special constitutional law, which shall become effective at the same time as this law.Art. 151. 
(1) This law shall become effective on the day of the first sitting of the Nationalrat, except as otherwise provided by the law referred to in Article 150. 
(2) The provisions, however, of Article 50, Paragraph 1, and of Article 66, Paragraph 2 shall become effective on the day of publication; and thereupon, until the other provisions of this law come into force, the power of ratification shall be exercised by the Constituent Assembly instead of the Nationalrat. 
Art. 152. The execution of this law shall be entrusted to the Ministry of the State.
<list>
SEITZ, M. P. 
MAYR, M. P.
HANTJSCH, M. P.
RENNER, M. P.
BREISKY, M. P.
REISCH, M. P.	
HEINL, M. P. 
HAUEIS, M. P.
DEUTSCH, M. P.
ELLENBOGEN, M. P.
ROLLER, M. P.
PESTA, M. P.
GRUNBERGER, M. P.
</list>
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF OCTOBER 1, 1920, CONCERNING THE TRANSITION TO THE CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL STATE 
The Constituent Assembly has resolved:
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS<title> 
Section 1. All laws and executive directions (ordinances) of the State—including such imperial laws of the former State of Austria as have been put in force for the Republic in accordance with Section 16 of the resolution of October 30, 1918, State Law Gazette, No. 1, concerning the fundamental organization of political power—as well as all laws and executive directions (ordinances) of the states shall continue to be in force, in so far as they are not in conflict with the provisions of the law of October 1, 1920, State Law Gazette, No. 450, whereby the Republic of Austria is established as a Federal State (federal constitution).
Sec. 2. In the matters enumerated in Articles 10 and 11 of the federal constitution, the laws of the State, including the former imperial laws, as well as the laws of the states—these latter for the state in which they were enacted—shall become federal laws within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
Sec. 3. 
(1) The laws of the states regulating the matters enumerated in Article 12 of the federal constitution shall continue to be laws of the states within the meaning of the federal constitution. But as soon as fundamental principles have been prescribed by federal law in respect to these matters, such laws of the states must be amended in accordance with Article 15, Paragraph 2, within the terms prescribed by federal law. 
(2) If, however, the matters enumerated in Article 12 have been regulated entirely by laws of the State, including former imperial laws, any such law shall continue to be in force as a federal law for a period of three years computed from the date fixed in Section 42, Paragraph 1, of this law, unless it has been previously abolished by a federal law regulating the same matter within the meaning of Article 12. At the expiration of these three years such laws shall cease to be in force; thereupon state legislation may freely regulate such a matter as long as the Federal State does not exercise the power of legislation conferred upon it by Article 12. 
Sec. 4. 
(1) Laws of the states concerning matters in which the states, according to Article 15, Paragraph 1, of the federal constitution, have the exclusive power of legislation, shall continue to be laws of the states within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
(2) In so far as such matters have been regulated hitherto by laws of the State, including former imperial laws, such laws shall be considered in every state as laws of the state within the meaning of the federal constitution.
Sec. 5. The provisions of Sections 2-4 [of this transitional law] concerning laws shall apply as far as may be, to executive directions (ordinances) enacted pursuant to these laws. 
Sec. 6. 
(1) In so far as the laws and the executive directions (ordinances) referred to in Section 1 [of this transitional law] are in conflict with the provisions of the federal constitution regulating organization—especially those concerning the competence and organization of the authorities as well as their character as federal or state authorities—they shall be considered as amended in accordance with the meaning of the federal constitution. Particularly in matters in which the states shall henceforth exercise the power of execution, appeal shall not lie beyond the state.(2) In so far as doubts arise by reason of this rule of construction, the Federal Ministry or the competent State Ministry, according to the provisions of the federal constitutional regulating competence, shall regulate such matters by ordinance until the enactment of a law within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
Sec. 7. 
(1) The powers hitherto conferred by law on the agencies of the State or the states shall be taken over by the agencies of the Federal State or the states who are authorized to exercise analogous authority, in so far as the competence of these agencies has not been otherwise regulated by the federal constitution. Accordingly the Nationalrat shall take the place of the Constituent Assembly; the Federal President shall take the place of the President of the Constituent Assembly in so far as matters of government were entrusted to the latter; the Federal Ministry shall take the place of the Ministry of the State; the federal ministers shall take the place of the secretaries of state; the secretaries of state shall take the place of the under-secretaries of state; the Independent Court of Audit shall take the place of the Independent Court of Audit of the State. 
(2) The Federal Ministry as well as the individual federal ministers shall take over the powers vested in the Ministry by the law of July 24, 1917, National Law Gazette, No. 307, by which the Ministry was authorized to take in regard to economic problems measures necessitated by the extraordinary conditions due to the state of war. 
Sec. 8. 
(1) The authorities of the State—exclusive of those of general political administration in the states (state ministries, chief authorities of the districts [Bezirkshauptmannschaften]), Including therein the special branches of service attached to these authorities (construction and forestry, public health, veterinary service, archives and libraries, audit) and the agricultural authorities of original and appellate jurisdiction (district agricultural authorities and state agricultural authorities)— shall become federal authorities. 
(2) The status of such authorities of the State as are excepted by Paragraph 1 shall be regulated by the federal constitutional law concerning the organization of administration in the states (Article 12, Paragraph 1, and Article 120, Paragraph 1, of the federal constitution). 
(3) The hitherto autonomous administrative authorities of the states shall become authorities (officials) of the states within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
(4) The institutions of the State shall be taken over by the Federal State; the institutions of the states shall be institutions of the states; the institutions of the districts, the municipalities, or other public corporations shall be institutions of these corporations. 
Sec. 9. 
(1) The employees of the authorities of the State that become federal authorities in accordance with Section 8, Paragraph 1 [of this transitional law], shall become federal employees. 
(2) The status of employees of such authorities of the State as are excepted in Section 8, Paragraph 1 [of this transitional law], shall be regulated in connection with the federal constitutional law concerning the organization of administration in the states. 
Sec. 10. 
(1) The existing police authorities of the State shall become federal authorities and shall administer their previous functions as functions of the Federal State. 
(2) The existing gendarmerie shall be the federal gendarmerie. 
Sec. 11. 
(1) Properties, including funds and institutions, belonging to, or administered by, the states in their capacity as formerly autonomous corporations, shall be properties of the states or shall be taken over by the administration of the states within the meaning of the Federal Constitution. In respect, however, to school funds administered by the states, the prevailing conditions shall continue until the promulgation of the federal constitutional law concerning the spheres of competence of the Federal State and the states in matters pertaining to schools, education, and popular instruction (Article 14 of the federal constitution). 
(2) The entire remaining property of the State shall be federal property; the final settlement in regard to the property of the State shall be regulated by the federal constitutional law concerning the financial settlement between the Federal State and the states.
II. PROVISIONS IN REGARD TO SPECIAL ARTICLES OF THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL LAW<title>
Sec. 12, in regard to Article 2. 
(1) As soon as it has manifested its intention, Burgenland shall be incorporated in the Federal State as an autonomous state having equal rights with the other states. 
(2) Detailed regulations concerning the status of Burgenland in the Federal State as an autonomous state, having equal rights with the other states, shall be prescribed by special federal constitutional law. 
Sec. 13, in regard to Article 4. 
(1) Restrictions on or interference with interstate or intrastate passenger or freight traffic shall be permissible only as long as the extraordinary conditions mentioned in Article 10, Paragraph 15, continue (Section 17 of this transitional law), and may be enacted only by the Federal State. 
(2) Existing restrictions on traffic, not imposed by the State, shall cease to be in force no later than June 30, 1921, unless they have been approved by the State or have been subsequently approved by the Federal State. 
Sec. 14, in regard to Article 6. 
(1) Every citizen of the Republic shall be a citizen of the, state of which his native municipal district is a part and shall be at the same time a citizen of the Federal State. 
(2) Persons being Austrian citizens without having domiciliary rights (Heimatrecht) in any municipality of the Republic shall be citizens of the Federal State. Federal law shall prescribe in what municipality they may acquire domiciliary rights and thereby the prerequisites for citizenship in a state. The Federal State shall have regulatory powers in respect to persons who, without having obtained domiciliary rights, have acquired national citizenship through option by virtue of the Treaty of St. Germain, or by virtue of a simple declaration in accordance with Section 2 of the Law of December 5, 1918, State Law Gazette, No. 91, concerning the right of national citizenship. 
Sec. 15, in regard to Article 10, Paragraph 9. 
Until the promulgation of the federal law provided for in Article 10, Paragraph 9, relative to the designation of highways as federal highways, the administration of highways of the State (former national highways) shall be exercised in accordance with the existing provisions at the expense of the Federal State by the agencies hitherto entrusted with this administration. 
Sec. 16, in regard to Article 10, Paragraph 10. 
The designation of those waters the regulation and maintenance of which is the function of the Federal State according to Article 10, Paragraph 10, shall take place with the consent of the individual states. Until such settlement the regulation and maintenance of these waters shall be continued in accordance with the existing provisions by the agencies hitherto entrusted therewith, with reservations as to a subsequent apportionment of the expenses incurred. 
Sec. 17, in regard to Article 10, Paragraph 15. 
(1) In conformity with Article 10, Paragraph 15, the Federal State shall have powers of legislation and execution concerning such measures as are necessary to assure a uniform conduct of economic affairs for the duration of the extraordinary conditions caused by the events of the War of 1914-1918. 
(2) The date from which the aforementioned extraordinary conditions shall be considered settled shall be determined by federal law. 
Sec. 18, in regard to Article 15, Paragraph 3. 
(1) In the matters enumerated in Articles 11 and 12, such special provisions relative to the competence of the central authorities as are contained in the hitherto existing laws and executive directions (ordinances) shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6 [of this transitional law], remain in force for the cases provided for in Article 15, Paragraph 3, until new federal laws shall have been enacted. 
(2) In matters enumerated in Articles 11 and 12, in which the existing laws and executive directions (ordinances) do not regulate cases of the aforementioned kind, the provision of Article 15, Paragraph 3, shall become effective at once. 
Sec. 19, in regard to Article 23. 
Until the promulgation of the law necessary for the carrying out of the provisions of Article 23, the provisions of the Law of July 12, 1872, National Law Gazette, No. 112 (law concerning syndicates), shall remain in force with the changes effected by Section 12, Paragraph 2, of the Fundamental Law of November 22, 1918, State Law Gazette, No. 38, concerning judicial power. 
Sec. 20, in regard to Article 24. 
(1) The Constituent Assembly, elected by virtue of the Law of July 20, 1920, State Law Gazette, No. 316, concerning regulations for the elections to the Constituent Assembly, shall be the first Nationalrat within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
(2) The laws of July 20, 1920, State Law Gazette, No. 317, concerning the election and convocation of the Constituent Assembly, and of July 20, 1920, State Law Gazette, No. 316, concerning regulations for elections to the Constituent Assembly, shall remain in force for the first Nationalrat. The term of the first Nationalrat shall remain fixed thereby at three years and shall begin with the day of its first meeting. 
(3) Until a new regulation by law, the members of the Nationalrat shall have the rights and duties of members of the Constituent Assembly, except as otherwise provided by the federal constitution. They shall, upon summons by the President of the Constituent Assembly, and by roll call, take an oath, using the formula "I swear," to be unalterably faithful to the Republic, to observe constantly and wholly the constitutional laws as well as all other laws, and to discharge their duties conscientiously. 
(4) The officials and employees of the Constituent Assembly shall be employees of the office of the President of the Nationalrat; they shall have the same status, duties, and rights as the federal employees. 
Sec. 21, in regard to Articles 34 and 36. 
(1) The states shall be represented in the first Bundesrat as follows: 
<list>
Vienna- 12 members
State of Lower Austria- 10 members
Styria- 6 members
Upper Austria- 3 members
Tyrol- 3 members
Carinthia- 3 members
Salzburg- 3 members
Vorarlberg- 3 members
</list>	
(2) As soon as Burgenland has elected a Landtag, the number of members to be deputized to the Bundesrat from Burgenland shall be determined by the Federal President in accordance with Article 34. 
(3) The Bundesrat shall assemble for its first sitting on the 21st day after the first meeting of the Nationalrat, in the hall of the parliament building designated by the Federal Chancellor. The member elected to the first place from Vienna shall act as the first presiding officer. 
Sec. 22, in regard to Article 49. 
(1) Until the promulgation of the law provided for in Article 49, Paragraph 2, the provisions of the Law of November 12, 1918, State Law Gazette, No. 7, concerning the publication of laws and ordinances in the State Law Gazette shall, in so far as they have not been changed by the federal constitution, apply, as far as may be, to the Federal Law Gazette; and thereupon Section 6 of this law is to be applied. 
(2) The Federal Constitution and this law as well as the proclamation mentioned in Section 41 [of this transitional law] shall be republished in the first number of the Federal Law Gazette. The text of the laws thus republished shall be the standard. 
Sec. 23, in regard to Article 54. 
The Law of April 13, 1920, State Law Gazette, No. 180, concerning participation of the Constituent Assembly in the fixing of railroad, postal, telegraph, and telephone rates and of prices of articles subject to monopoly, as well as of salaries of persons employed in enterprises of the State, shall be considered as the federal constitutional law provided for in Article 54; and thereupon Section 6 of this law shall be applied. 
Sec. 24, in regard to Articles 60 and 62. 
(1) For the first election of a Federal President, the Bundesversammlung (Article 38) shall meet, without special convocation, on the 28th day after the first sitting of the Nationalrat at eleven o'clock in the morning in the parliament building. 
(2) In case the oath of office cannot be administered to the newly elected Federal President at the same sitting of the Bundesversammlung, the Federal Chancellor must call the Bundesversammlung together at the next possible date for the administering of the oath of office to the Federal President. 
(3) Until the oath of office has been administered to the Federal President the last President of the Constituent Assembly shall perform all the functions assigned to the Federal President. 
Sec. 25, in regard to Article 65, Paragraph 3. 
(1) The Law of February 26, 1920, State Law Gazette, No. 94, whereby Article 7 of the Law of March 14, 1919, State Law Gazette, No. 180, concerning the Ministry of the State is amended, shall be considered as an ordinary federal law within the meaning of Article 65, Paragraph 3. 
(2) The rights of confirmation conferred upon the President of the Constituent Assembly by the hitherto existing laws shall be transferred to the Federal President, in so far as such provisions may not be considered changed by the transition to the Federal State. 
(3) Without prejudice to the new regulation of the law of the public service of federal employees, the Federal President shall also be empowered to cancel and to mitigate disciplinary penalties pronounced by the disciplinary authorities against federal employees, to remit the legal consequences of such penalties, as well as to direct that disciplinary proceedings shall not be commenced or that disciplinary proceedings commenced should be discontinued. 
Sec. 26, in regard to Article 69. 
(1) Until the promulgation of the federal law provided for in Article 77, Paragraph 2, the Chancellor of the State and the Ministry of the State shall, as Federal Chancellor and Federal Ministry respectively, carry on their business provisionally, with their previous instructions and powers. 
(2) The Ministry of the State shall be the first Federal Ministry within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
Sec. 27, in regard to Article 79. 
The army created by virtue of the Law of National Defence of March 18, 1920, State Law Gazette, No. 122, shall be the federal army within the meaning of the federal constitution.
Sec. 28, in regard to Articles 82-94. 
The provisions actually regulating the jurisdiction and organization of the civil and criminal courts shall remain in force until further provisions have been enacted. 
Sec. 29, in regard to Article 95. 
The existing representative assemblies in the states shall be the first Landtags within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
Sec. 30, in regard to Article 98. 
(1) Article 98 shall also be applied to laws of the states enacted before the federal constitution goes into effect, in so far as the Ministry of the State has not yet taken any steps within the meaning of Articles 14 and 15 of the Law of March 14, 1919, State Law Gazette, No. 179, concerning representative assemblies, and in so far as the term prescribed in the last mentioned Articles has not yet expired. For computing the term prescribed in Article 98, Paragraph 2, the day on which the law has been filed in the competent office of the Ministry of the State shall be regarded as the day of its being filed in the office of the competent federal minister. 
(2) Protests of the Ministry of the State against laws of the states, concerning which protests the Landtag has not yet passed a resolution prior to the date on which the federal constitution becomes effective, shall be considered as protests of the Federal Ministry.Sec. 31, in regard to Article 98. 
In so far as they are not considered as changed by the federal constitution, the state constitutions (state ordinances) at present in force shall be regarded provisionally as the state constitutions provided for in the federal constitution. 
Sec. 32, in regard to Article 101. 
(1) The former state ministries shall be considered as the state ministries within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
(2) Within fourteen days after assuming office the Federal President shall call the chief executive officers of the states together to administer to them the oath of office (Article 101, Paragraph 4). The chief executive officer of a state already in office shall, however, even before he takes the oath of office, exercise the functions of a chief executive officer of a state within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
(3) Salaries of members of the state ministries which fall due after the date fixed in Section 42, Paragraph 1 [of this transitional law], shall be paid by the states. 
Sec. 33, in regard to Articles 108-114. 
(1) The existing Landtag of Lower Austria shall be the Landtag of Lower Austria within the meaning of the federal constitution. The deputies of the Landtag elected in the municipal district of Vienna shall form the city curia; the remaining deputies of the Landtag shall form the state curia. 
(2) The legislative and executive power in matters pertaining to the formerly autonomous provincial administration, as well as the remaining power of legislation hitherto conferred on the Landtag shall continue to be exercised by the agencies hitherto competent, until the agencies provided for in the common state constitution have been chosen. In particular, the present state ministry shall exercise the functions of the administrative commission (Article 113) until the election of the latter. The matters, however, described in Article 111, Paragraphs 1 and 2, shall, in respect to legislation and execution, be subject immediately to the competence of the two divisions of the state. 
(3) In regard to Vienna the municipal council shall assume, within the meaning of the federal constitution, the functions of the Landtag; likewise the city Senate shall assume the functions of the state ministry and the Burgermeister shall assume the functions of the chief executive officer of the state. 
(4) Until the election of a new state ministry in the state of Lower Austria, the members of the present state ministry who have not been elected in an election district in Vienna, and the members of the present state council shall exercise provisionally the functions of the state ministry within the meaning of the federal constitution; and likewise any deputy of the chief executive officer of the state, provided such deputy has not been elected in an election district in Vienna, shall exercise provisionally the functions of the chief executive officer of the state. 
(5) Until the promulgation of the federal constitutional law concerning the organization of administration in the states (Article 12, Paragraph 1), the functions of the indirect federal administration as to original and appellate jurisdiction shall for Vienna be combined in one jurisdiction. In all those matters, however, in which, by virtue of special legal provisions, no appeal lies beyond the state, the competent officer of the Magistrat shall decide in first instance, and the Burgermeister, in his capacity as chief executive officer of the state, shall decide on appeal. These provisions shall apply to decisions in appellate proceedings pending on the date on which this law becomes effective. 
(6) The existing legal provisions concerning salaries of the commissioners of the people in the states shall not apply to Vienna. 
Sec. 34, in regard to Articles 115-119. 
(1) Until the organization of general public administration in the states in accordance with the provisions of Articles 115119, the existing district administration shall continue; but in the jurisdiction of each district administration (Bezirkshauptmannschaft) a district council shall be elected. The sphere of action of this district council shall be determined by federal legislation and by state legislation within their legislative competences as prescribed by constitutional law. 
(2) In cities governed under their own charters the municipal council shall assume at the same time the functions of the district council. These functions may be transferred to a special committee of the municipal council, and in Vienna to the district councils existing there or to committees thereof. 
(3) The election of the district councils shall take place in accordance with the principles of proportional representation and by the equal, direct, secret, and personal suffrage of all Austrian citizens, who have their domicile in the territory of the district administration. The number of the members of the district councils shall be apportioned among the judicial districts on the basis of the number of their citizens. The provisions of Article 119, Paragraph 2, shall be duly applied. 
(4) Only persons who have their domicile in the district and who are eligible for election to the Landtag shall be eligible for the district council. 
(5) Detailed regulations for carrying out these elections shall be prescribed by state law. 
(6) Further fundamental principles for the reorganization of the existing district administration in accordance with the preceding provisions shall be prescribed by federal law. Supplementary laws shall be enacted by the states. The federal law must be promulgated within four months after the federal constitution becomes effective; the state laws must be promulgated within four additional months after the federal law becomes effective. 
Sec. 35, in regard to Article 122. 
(1) The hitherto existing Independent Court of Audit of the State shall become the Independent Court of Audit within the meaning of the federal constitution. 
(2) Until the election of the president of the independent Court of Audit his functions shall be performed by the last president of the Independent Court of Audit of the State. 
Sec. 36, in regard to Article 131. 
(1) The Supreme Administrative Court shall not become competent in administrative criminal matters until the general provisions of administrative criminal law and of administrative criminal procedure have been reenacted. This reenactment must take place before July 1, 1921. 
(2) The provisions contained in any laws concerning administration expressly exempting certain cases from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Administrative Court shall remain in force provisionally. 
Sec. 37, in regard to Articles 134 and 135. 
(1) The hitherto existing Supreme Administrative Court shall become the Supreme Administrative Court within the meaning of the federal constitution. (2) Its president and the members shall remain in office until new appointments have been made in accordance with Article 135. These new appointments must be made before January 1, 1921. 
(3) Within this period of time the president and the members of the Supreme Administrative Court may, within the meaning concurrent laws of the state affected thereby and of the Federal State. 
Sec. 43. 
(1) This law shall become effective at the same time as the federal constitution. 
(2) It shall be executed by the Ministry of the State.