On May 28, 1918 the National Council of Azerbaijan adopted the Declaration of Independence resuming thereby the centuries-old traditions of state system of the people of Azerbaijan. 
The Republic of Azerbaijan disposing the absolute power on its territory, was pursuing independent foreign and home policy. The institutions characteristic of an independent state were created and began functioning, such as the parliament, the government, the army and financial system of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The Republic of Azerbaijan was recognized by many foreign states, and it established diplomatic relations with them. But on April 27-28, 1920 the RSFSR without declaration of war brought its military units into Azerbaijan, thereby grossly violating the International legal rules, then occupied the territory of the sovereign Republic of Azerbaijan; forcibly overthrew the legally elected bodies of state power, and put an end to the independence achieved at the cost of heavy sacrifice of the people of Azerbaijan. 
Following that step, Azerbaijan was again annexed by Russia, just like 1806-1828. 
The treaty on formation of the USSR signed on December 30, 1922 was to seal that annexation. Later on, for a period of 70 years the policy of colonialism had been pursuing in the Republic of Azerbaijan; its natural resources were ruthlessly exploited; and its national property was pilfered; the people of Azerbaijan was subjected to repressions and persecutions; its national dignity was flouted. Despite that, the people of Azerbaijan kept on fighting for the state independence. 
As a result of that fight, on August 30, 1991 the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Azerbaijan adopted the Declaration “On Restoration of the State Independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan.” 
The Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Azerbaijan adopts the present Constitutional Act on the basis of the Declaration of Independence adopted by the National Council of Azerbaijan on May 28, 1918, and of the continuity of democratic principles and traditions of the Republic of Azerbaijan; and being guided by the Declaration “On Restoration of the State Independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan” adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Azerbaijan on August 30, 1991; and establishes the bases of the state, political and economic system of the independent Republic of Azerbaijan. 
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS<title>
Article 1 The invasion of Azerbaijan by the 11th Army of the RSFSR on April 27-28, 1920, the annexation of the republic’s territory, the overthrow of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan, as the subject of International law, is the occupation of an independent Azerbaijan by Russia. 
Article 2 The Republic of Azerbaijan is a successor of the Republic of Azerbaijan existed from May 28, 1918 to April 28, 1920. 
Article 3 The treaty of formation of the USSR signed on December 30, 1922, namely, the part concerning Azerbaijan, is to be considered null and void from the moment of its signing. 
All the consequent problems concerning the mutual relations with the sovereign states, the integral parts of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republic, are to be settled on the basis of treaties and agreements. 
Article 4 The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan of 1978 is currently in force since it doesn’t contradict the provisions of the present Constitutional Act. 
In the Republic of Azerbaijan all the acts of the Republic of Azerbaijan which were currently in force before the declaration on restoring the state independence preserve their legal force, if they do not contradict the sovereignty of the Republic of Azerbaijan and its territorial integrity, and if they are not directed to change its national state system. 
Until the corresponding laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan are adopted, the laws of the USSR, the list of which is fixed by the Azerbaijan Parliament, preserve their legal force. 
Article 5 Any actions directed against the independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan are to be considered the interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign state and they involve the relationary actions in accordance with the standards of international law. 
Article 6 The Republic of Azerbaijan is responsible for only the part of national debt of the USSR formed as a result of economic activity on the territory of the republic and in connection with the property of the USSR transferred to the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
Article 7 All the movable property of the USSR on the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan is the state property of the Republic of Azerbaijan, with the exception of that part of the movable property of the USSR, which can be transferred to other states, the former subjects of the USSR, in accordance with the international law and the treaty signed. 
According to the treaty, the property of the USSR beyond the bounds of the Republic of Azerbaijan formed at the expense of the national income of Azerbaijan, its natural and other resources, while Azerbaijan was an integral part of the USSR, are transferred to the Republic of Azerbaijan, namely, in the part corresponding to the contribution of Azerbaijan to the formation this property. 
II. PEOPLE OF AZERBAIJAN<title>
Article 8 The people of Azerbaijan is constituted by all the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan living within the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan and outside it, which are considered to be subjected to the Azerbaijan State and its laws, which does not exclude the standards of international law. 
Article 9 The people of Azerbaijan possess an inalienable right to choose its own form of governing, to determine its relations with other peoples, and to develop its political, economic and cultural life in accordance with its historical and national traditions, and common human values. 
Article 10 The sovereign power in the Republic of Azerbaijan belongs to the people of Azerbaijan. Not a single part of the people of Azerbaijan, nor a single-person can assume the powers on its execution. 
The people of Azerbaijan executes the sovereign power immediately by means of referendum through their representatives in the Parliament of the Republic of Azerbaijan elected by universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. 
Article 11 The people of Azerbaijan guarantees the democratic system of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the supremacy of law as an expression of the will of the people. 
III. THE STATE OF AZERBAIJAN<title> 
Article 12 The people of Azerbaijan constitutes an independent, temporal, democratic, unitary state, the sovereign power of which in internal problems is restricted by law only, and in foreign ones only by the provisions of treaties and agreements, the people of Azerbaijan has freely consented to. 
The sovereignty of the Republic of Azerbaijan is indivisible and it is to be applied on its whole territory. 
The Republic of Azerbaijan does not alienate in whatever form it might be, the sovereign rights, executed on its territory, to other states and unions of states. 
Article 13 The state power in the Republic of Azerbaijan is based on the principle of division of powers. 
The legislative power is executed by the Parliament of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
The supreme executive power belongs to the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the head of the State of Azerbaijan. 
The judicial power is administered only by independent courts; and the highest instance is the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan, and the Supreme Court of Arbitration of the Republic of Azerbaijan within the limits of their powers correspondingly. 
Article 14 The territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a single entity, indivisible, and inalienable. The Republic of Azerbaijan does not alienate in whatever way any part of its territory; the revision of its bounds may be carried out only with consent of the people of Azerbaijan in the way of the nationwide poll (referendum) of the whole population of the Republic in accordance with the resolution of the parliament of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
No part of the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be sold or transferred to other states or a juridical person of other state. 
Article 15 On the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan only the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan and laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan are in force. 
The legislative power is restricted by the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan; the executive and judicial power — by the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan, its statute and law.The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan is adopted by nationwide referendum conducted among the whole population of the Republic in accordance with the Resolution of the Parliament of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
Article 16 The Republic of Azerbaijan, in accordance with the universally recognized standards of international law establishes its relationship with other states on the basis of principles of sovereign equality of states, non-use of force or threat of force, inviolability of state borders, peaceful settlement of disputes, non-interference in internal affairs of other states, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms; the equal rights of peoples and their right to self-determination, cooperation among states, and fulfillment in good faith of international legal obligations. 
Article 17 The Republic of Azerbaijan is obliged: 
<list>
1. To ensure the unity of the people of Azerbaijan and to maintain the legal order determining and ensuring the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms stipulated by law in the interests of an individual, a family, public associations and other groups. 
2. To stimulate and coordinate all forms of social activity ensuring the harmony of interests of all the citizens based on law, to create equal conditions for the free development of each individual. 
3. To support the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan in getting and permanent[ly] using the promises with modern amenities in the houses of state or social housing resources, in individual housing construction. 
4. To take care of improvement of the position and social protection of the groups of population having the most unfavorable living conditions for the purpose of ensuring their living standard in accordance with the human dignity; to ensure the social protection of those in need of it. 
5. To ensure the protection of the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan from encroachments on life, health, personal freedom and security. 
6. To protect health of the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan, to promote the protection of environment, to support the family, a primary and natural cell of the state, as well as maternity and childhood. 
</list>
Article 18 A uniform citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan is established in the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
The Republic of Azerbaijan acts the duties provided for by law, for its citizens, and the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan act their duties of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
No one can be deprived of the civic rights or right to change the citizenship. Every citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan who is beyond the bounds of the Republic of Azerbaijan is guaranteed legal protection. 
Article 19 All the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan enjoy the equal rights and obligations according to the law. The Republic of Azerbaijan joining the Universal Declaration of Rights, Helsinki Final Act and other generally recognized international and legal documents, ensures the observance and unimpeded realization of all the rights and freedoms provided for by them, irrespective of nationality, sex or race, religion, social origin, political convictions and other circumstances. 
The human rights and freedoms of the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan may not be restricted in any form except for special cases provided for by law. 
IV. ECONOMIC RELATIONS<title>
Article 20 All natural resources belong to the Republic of Azerbaijan without damages to rights of property and interests of any person or organizations. 
Article 21 The whole income of the Republic of Azerbaijan of any source, makes up a single resource intended for being used for the purposes defined by law and in order specified by it with observance of the requirements provided for by law. 
Article 22 The property may be state, private and collective. 
Private and collective property is recognized and guaranteed by law which determines the ways of their acquisition, use and the limits of their functioning. 
Private and collective property may not be forcibly alienated. In cases specified by law private and collective property may be alienated in the interests of the Republic of Azerbaijan providing compensation for losses. 
A complete seizure of movable and immovable property is not allowed. 
Article 23 Any economic activity in the Republic of Azerbaijan is based on market relations and freedom of enterprise. 
Article 24 The Republic of Azerbaijan stimulates the cooperation and creates all necessary conditions for the development of different cooperative associations and other organizations in accordance with law. 
Article 25 In the Republic of Azerbaijan labor is protected in all its forms. Working people have the right to payment for their work in accordance with its quantity and quality, sufficient for ensuring free and worthy life. 
Forced labor is banned except for the cases provided for by law. 
Every citizen has the right to support and help of the state in case of incapability and lack of livelihood. 
Establishment of trade unions of working people is free. 
The right to strike is executed by the working people within the limits of law regulating this right. 
V. POLITICAL RELATIONS<title> 
Article 26 Citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan on coming of age enjoy the electoral right. 
Voting is personal, equal, free and secret.
The vote may not be restricted except for the cases of civic incapacity or court sentence coming into force. 
Article 27 All the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan have the right to unite freely in political parties and other public organizations to facilitate the determination of the policy of the Republic of Azerbaijan in democratic way.Article 28 In accordance with the principles of political pluralism the political parties take part in formation and expression of public opinion and they are considered to be the basis element of the political activity. Their creation and activity are free within the limits of the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
Article 29 To defend the Republic of Azerbaijan is the sacred duty of every citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
The military service is obligatory within the limits and forms provided for by law. 
Article 30 All the citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan are obliged to share the state expenditures in accordance with their income. 
Tax system is based on the principle of progressiveness. 
Article 31 All the citizens are obliged to keep loyally to the Republic of Azerbaijan, and to observe the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
VI. FINAL PROVISIONS<title> 
Article 32 The present Constitutional Act serves the basis for working out a new Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
Ayaz N. Mutalibov 
October 18, 1991, Baku