His Magesty the King has been pleased to command the following Rules to be observed by the Members of the National Assembly (consisting of the Members of the Royal Advisory Council). 
It is the duty of every Countryman to develop this beautiful country of ours in the political and religious fields; when our country is developed then every Dzong and the people living therein will be happy and prosperous. 
Our Constitution may not be as big in comparison to other countries of the world but taking into consideration the welfare and the improvement of the living conditions of the People, all the Members have agreed to take up the measures necessary so His Majesty the Druk Gyalpo graciously established the National Assembly. 
It is always wiser to arrive at a decision (to improve our country) in consultation with many intellectuals than to have one single person make that decision alone. This will prove beneficial not only for contemporary times but for posterity too. The National Assembly has been established with this aim in view. 
The administration will be run according to the decisions taken by the National Assembly. Due to the Grace of God and the able steps taken by our previous rulers, we have maintained the independence, and national integrity of our country. But, while preserving the gem of independence, we are still backward because of lack of education. We have not been able to improve much. 
Other countries of the world have achieved rapid improvement because of rapid progress in education. Under the present circumstances, we too must bring ourselves to a point equal to that of these developed nations. As such, we must place greater emphasis on national development. This must be the foremost duty of all of us.All Members, therefore, should work in unity to improve the country keeping in mind our culture, religious heritage and traditions of the past. We must thrust aside selfish attitudes and dedicate ourselves to the task of nation building. We must learn from our past follies. With these in view, the following 18 Rules and Regulations will be followed by the National Assembly. 
RULE 1. His Majesty will nominate Members of the Royal Advisory Council from Government servants, the Monk Body will elect it's Members from the Central Monk Body and the People's Representatives shall be elected by the People. 
RULE 2. The Identity Cards of the Royal Advisory Council will be issued by His Majesty, Identity Cards from Members from the Monk Body will be issued by the Central Monk Body and People's Representatives' Identity Cards will be issued by the People's Body. 
RULE 3. Members unable to attend the National Assembly sessions due to sickness or otherwise cannot send any other person on their behalf. The Speaker must be informed of any inability to attend in writing. 
RULE 4. In accordance with Bhutan Law Book A (12), Chapter 2, the following persons shall not be eligible for Membership of the National Assembly: 
<list>
1. A person who is not a Bhutanese National.
2. A person who is less than 25 years old.
3. A person who is mentally disabled.
4. A convict.
5. A person who has served a prison sentence.
</list>
RULE 5. A Member shall hold office for three years but should it be necessary for the Member to be changed, an application should be made to the Speaker. 
RULE 6. Should a Member be found unfit to be serve as a Member, the Assembly may decide in favour of his removal. 
RULE 7. The number of Assembly Members shall be decided once every five years by the Assembly itself and the number decided upon shall be fixed- no more, no less. 
RULE 8. Election of the Speaker: The Speaker shall be elected by the National Assembly every three years. Should the Speaker be unable to attend due to sickness or any other reason, then the Assembly reserves it's right to elect another Speaker. 
RULE 9. The Speaker has full powers to maintain proper order in the Assembly hall. No Member may object against him. 
RULE 10. The Speaker shall fix the date of sessions of the National Assembly which shall be twice a year. But in emergencies and under extraordinary circumstances, the Speaker, with the Royal Command of His Majesty, may convene a meeting at any time. 
RULE 11. Every Member shall have the full right and privilege to express his thoughts in the Assembly. No rule or law can interfere with a Member's freedom of expression. 
RULE 12. Every Member shall be equal in the National Assembly and all Members may discuss any subject till a suitable decision is reached. 
RULE 13. No Member shall raise a subject of any nature in the Assembly which is motivated with a desire to fulfill his own or that of his relatives' self-interests. Such Matters will not be permitted to be discussed. 
RULE 14. Members may not contradict or take personal advantage of any decision that has been reached by the Assembly. Should any Member attempt to find fault with the decision, to start a quarrel or take the matter to court, he shall be termed a convict and be removed not only from service but also from society and ultimately from the country. 
RULE 15. If a Member wishes to raise a point which is for the welfare of a particular person but not a Member of the Assembly, then that Member may come to the Assembly and petition the Speaker who can grant his consent.RULE 16. No Member may reveal to an outsider any secret discussion that have taken place in the Assembly. 
RULE 17. All the proceedings of meetings, be they large or minor, shall be passed by a two-thirds majority vote. 
RULE 18. All Assembly decisions may be changed either by the Assembly or by the King. No one else can rectify these decisions.