Section 1. The Nation<title> 
ART. 1. 
Bolivia, free, independent and sovereign, constituted as a unitary Republic, adopts the democratic representative form of government. 
2. 
The Sovereignty rests in the people, it is inalienable and imprescriptible; its exercise is delegated to -the Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers. The independence and co-ordination of these Powers is the basis of the Government. 
3. 
The State recognizes and supports the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman religion, guaranteeing the public practice of all other religions. 
4. 
The people neither deliberate nor govern except through the medium of their representatives and the authorities created by law. 
All armed force or assemblage which attributes to itself the rights of the people, commits the crime of sedition. 
Section 2. Rights and Guarantees<title> 
5. 
Slavery does not exist in Bolivia. No kind of servitude is recognized and no one may be obliged to render personal services without just retribution and full consent. 
Personal services may only be demanded when the laws so establish. 
6. 
Every person has the following fundamental rights, consistent with the laws which regulate their practice:--
<list>
(a) To enter, remain, travel within and leave the national territory. 
(b) To dedicate oneself to work, 'business or industry in conditions that do not prejudice the collective welfare. 
(c) To manifest freely ideas and opinions, through any medium of diffusion whatsoever. 
(d) To meet and associate for the accomplishment of any activities which are not opposed to the security of the State. 
(e) To make individual or collective petitions. 
(f) To receive instruction. 
(g) To teach under the vigilance of the State. 
</list>
7. 
No one shall be arrested, detained or imprisoned except in the cases and according to the manner established by law.
For the execution of an order, it is necessary that it emanate from competent authority and that notification be made in writing. 
8. 
Any person who considers that he has been unjustly arrested, accused or imprisoned, may resort, personally or through someone in his name, with or without notarial power, to the Higher District Court, or to the local judge, as he prefers, and demand that the legal formalities be observed. The judicial authority shall immediately order that the individual be brought before them and that the order be obeyed, without comment or excuse, by those in charge of the prison or place of detention. On being informed of previous proceedings, the judicial authority shall order release, and see that the legal errors are rectified, or shall place the individual at the disposal of a competent judge within 24 hours. The verdict given can be subject to appeal for nullity before the Supreme Court of Justice, a recourse which shall not suspend the execution of the decree. 
Public functionaries or private individuals who resist judicial decisions, in the circumstances foreseen by this article, shall at all times be considered guilty of offense against constitutional guarantees, and their having complied with higher orders will not avail them as an excuse. 
9. 
Any delinquent caught in flagrant can be apprehended even without order by any person, for the purpose only of conducting him before a competent judge who must take his declaration within 24 hours at the most. 
10. 
Those in charge of prisons shall receive no one therein as a prisoner, as a person detained or arrested, without copying in their registry the corresponding order. They may, however, receive within the precincts of the prison those conducted there, so that they may be presented to the competent judge within 24 hours. 
11. 
Acts of transgression against personal security make their immediate perpetrators responsible. These may not plead compliance with superior orders as an excuse. 
12. 
Public functionaries who, without the existence of a state of siege having been declared, take measures to persecute, confine or exile citizens as well as those who close down printing offices or other means of expression of free thought, shall be liable for the payment of an indemnity for civil damages, provided it is legally proved that such measures or acts were taken without justifiable motive and in violation of the constitutional laws which guarantee the rights of citizenship. 
The manner of obtaining satisfaction for the damage caused shall be determined in a special law. 
13. 
No one may be judged by special commissions or tried before judges other than those designated previous to the institution of the lawsuit. 
14. 
No one is obliged to testify against himself in penal matters, nor shall the accused's immediate relatives to the fourth degree and to collateral relatives to the second degree be called upon to testify against him. In no case shall torture or any other punishment of the kind be inflicted. 
15. 
Confiscation of property shall never be applied as a political punishment. 
Written correspondence and private papers are inviolable, and shall not be taken possession of except in those cases determined by law and by virtue of a written order, originating from the competent authority. Private papers and letters which were forcibly removed or violated may not be used in evidence. 
16. 
The privacy of every house is inviolable; it shall not be entered by night without the consent of the occupier, and by day without a written order from the competent authority, except in the case of transgression in flagrante. 
17. 
Private property is guaranteed so long as the use made thereof does not prejudice the collective interest. Subject to prior just indemnification, expropriation may be ordered in the interests of public utility, or when the property fulfills no social function defined by law. 
18. 
Foreign citizens or business enterprises are, as far as property is concerned, treated in the same way as Bolivians. They may in no case claim special privileges nor are they entitled to resort to diplomatic assistance, except in case of a denial of justice. 
19. 
Foreigners cannot acquire or possess property within 50 kilometers of the frontier, under any title, soil or subsoil. directly or indirectly, individually or collectively, under pain of forfeiting to the State the property acquired, except in the case of national necessity declared by an express law. 
20. 
No tax is obligatory except when it has been authorized in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Those who are discriminated against may appeal to the Supreme Court regarding illegal taxation.
Municipal taxes are obligatory when they have been authorized in accordance with Constitutional requirements. 
21. 
Imposts and other public charges are payable equally by all persons. Their enactment, distribution and suppression shall have a general character, and shall be determined on the basis of equality of sacrifice on the part of contributors in a proportional or progressive form, according to the circumstances of the individual case. 
22. 
The property of the Church, of religious congregations or of charitable organizations shall enjoy the same guarantees as private property and shall be subject to the obligations and limitations which the law may establish. 
23.
Every person enjoys civil rights, the exercise thereof being regulated by the civil law. 
24. 
The Legislative Power alone has the right to alter and modify the Codes, and to dictate rules and regulations relative to judicial procedures. 
25. 
Punishment by dishonoring and loss of civil rights does not exist. 
Capital punishment shall be applied only in cases of assassination, parricide, and treason to the country. By treason is meant complicity with the enemy during a state of war against a foreign state. 
26. 
Roads opened by individuals shall be free to the public. A special law shall regulate the exercise of this right, as well as the collaboration of the State and of the individuals in their maintenance. 
27. 
The acts of those who usurp functions which are not theirs, as well as the acts of those who exercise jurisdiction and power illegally, are null and void. 
28. 
The principles, guarantees and rights recognized by this Constitution cannot be altered by the laws which regulate their exercise and do not require regulation prior to their fulfillment. 
29. 
No person shall be obliged to do what the Constitution and the laws do not permit, nor deny himself what they do not prohibit. 
30. 
Those who attack Constitutional rights and guarantees shall be subject to ordinary jurisdiction. 
31. 
The law only relates to the future and has no retroactive effect.
32.
Every public, civil, military or ecclesiastical functionary, before entering upon his duties, is obliged to declare expressly and specifically his property or income, which declaration shall be verified in a form determined by law. 
33. 
The declarations, rights and guarantees which the Constitution enumerates shah not be understood as the negation of other rights and guarantees not mentioned and which spring from the sovereignty of the people and from the republican form of government. 
Section 3. Maintenance of Public Order<title> 
34. 
In case of grave danger because of internal disorder or a foreign war, the Chief of the Executive Power, with the approval of the Council of Ministers may declare a state of siege within the territory in which the disorders occur. 
If Congress meets ordinarily or extraordinarily, while the Republic or a part of it is in a state of siege, the continuation of the state of siege shah be regulated by a legislative decree. In the same manner, if a state of siege is declared by the Executive Power while the Chambers are in session, the continuation thereof shall also be subject to legislative decree. 
Should the Executive not suspend the state of siege within 90 days, it will automatically lapse at the end of the said period, except in the case of declared international war, or of active civil warfare. Those who have suffered constraint shall be released, unless they have been handed over to the jurisdiction of competent tribunals. 
The Executive cannot prolong the state of siege by new decree beyond 90 days, or declare another state of siege within the same year without the consent of Congress. For this purpose, Congress shall be convened for extraordinary sessions, should the case occur during a recess of the Chambers. 
35. 
The declaration of a state of siege necessitates the following action: 
<list>
(1) The Executive may increase the standing army and call to the colors the reserves deemed necessary; 
(2) It may impose payment in advance of the national taxes and revenue as may be indispensable, and negotiate and demand by means of a loan sufficient resources provided expenses cannot be met out of the ordinary revenue. In the case of a forced loan, the President will assign the quotas and will apportion them among the contributors according to their economic capacity.
(3) The guarantees and rights which this Constitution uphold will not de facto be generally suspended by the declaration of a state of siege, but they may be suspended in the case of specified persons accused with good reason of conspiring against the peace of the Republic, in accordance with the provisions of the following paragraphs. 
(4) The legitimate authority shall be able to issue orders of summons or arrest against the accused, but within 48 hours they shall be brought before a competent judge, to whom shall be passed the documents which were the motive for the arrest. 
If the maintenance of public order should necessitate the removal of the accused, their confinement in the capital of a department or province away from the disturbed area can be ordered. 
Exile for political motives is prohibited; but if those confined, persecuted, or arrested for these motives request passports for abroad, they cannot be refused for any cause; and the authorities must furnish the necessary guarantees. Persons in charge who violate these guarantees, can be tried, after the state of siege is over, as transgressors against the Constitutional guarantees, without their being entitled to plead compliance with superior orders as an excuse. 
(5) Censorship may likewise be imposed on correspondence in general and transit passports may be required of persons entering and leaving the territory in which the state of siege prevails. 
In case of international war, censorship shall be imposed on correspondence and all methods of publicity. 
</list>
36. 
The Government shall render an account at the first meeting of Congress of the reasons for the declaration of a state of siege, and of the use which was made of the powers granted by this section, reporting also the results of the prosecutions ordered and indicating the measures indispensable in order to meet the debts contracted by direct loans and by anticipated taxes. 
37. 
Congress shall dedicate its first sessions to an examination of the account referred to in the preceding article, and shall either give its approval or declare the responsibility of the Executive Power. 
The Houses, in this respect, may make the investigations considered necessary, and ask the Executive to explain and justify all its acts in connection with the state of siege, although such acts may not have 'been mentioned in the account rendered. 
38. 
Neither Congress nor any association or popular meeting may delegate to the Executive Power any extraordinary powers, the whole of the public power, or grant it any control by which the lives, honor and properties of Bolivians are placed at the mercy of the Government, or of any person whatsoever. 
The personal inviolability and immunities established by this Constitution for the National representatives are not suspended during a state of siege. 
Section 4. Nationality and Citizenship<title> 
39. 
The following are Bolivians by birth:
<list>
(1) Those born in the territory of the Republic whatever the nationality of the parents. 
(2) Those born abroad of a Bolivian father or mother, on becoming domiciled in national territory, or by registration at the Consulates. 
</list>
40. 
The following are Bolivians by naturalization:
<list>
(1) Foreigners who render military service or who have fought in the Republic's service in an international war. 
(2) Foreigners who after 3 years residence in Bolivia, take out naturalization papers according to the law. 
</list>
41. 
A Bolivian woman married to a foreigner does not lose her nationality; a foreign woman married to a Bolivian acquires the nationality of her husband provided she resides in the country; and does not lose it even in the case of widowhood or divorce. 
42. 
Bolivian nationality is lost:
<list>
(1) By fighting or rendering service in the enemy's army in time of war; 
(2) By rendering similar services in a foreign army at time of civil or international war, without the permission of the Government. 
</list>
43. 
Citizenship consists:
<list>
(1) In acting as elector or elected in the formation or exercise of the public powers. 
(2) In the admissibility to public office without any other requisite except suitability, subject to the exceptions established by law.
</list>
44. 
To be a citizen, it is necessary: -- 
<list>
(1) To be a Bolivian; 
(2) To be 21 years of age; 
(3) To know how to read and write; and 
(4) To be registered in the Civil Register. 
</list>
45. 
The rights of citizenship are suspended:
<list>
(1) By naturalization in another country; but residence in Bolivia and inscription in the Civil Register suffice to recover them. 
(2) By being declared guilty of fraudulent bankruptcy or by being sentenced to corporal punishment. 
(3) By accepting employment or activities on behalf of a foreign government which involve the exercise of authority or jurisdiction, without the special permission required by law. 
</list>
46. 
For the formation of Municipalities the right of the Bolivian woman to vote and her eligibility to take office is recognized on the same conditions as those of the Bolivian man, in addition to the rights of citizenship referred to in the second part of Art. 43 of this Constitution. 
Section 5. Legislative Power<title> 
47. 
The Legislative power is vested in a National Congress composed of two Houses, one of Representatives and another of Senators. 
It shall meet ordinarily every year in the Capital of the Republic, on August 6, even should it not have been convened; its sessions shall last 90 working days, but may be prolonged to 120 days by the decision of the Congress itself or by petition of the Executive Power. If, in the judgment of the latter, it is convenient that the Congress meet elsewhere than in the Capital of the Republic, it may convene the meeting, naming another place. 
48. 
Congress may hold an extraordinary meeting, by the vote of an absolute majority of its members or by a summons from the Executive Power. In either of these cases, only the business mentioned in the summons shall be dealt with. 
49. 
The Chambers must act with the absolute majority of their members, at the same time and in the same place, and neither may commence or terminate its functions on a different day from the other. 
50. 
Senators and Deputies may be appointed President or Vice-President of the Republic, Ministers of State or Diplomatic Agents, their legislative functions being suspended during the time they fulfill those duties. Otherwise, they may not exercise other offices dependent on the Executive or Judicial powers. 
51. 
Civil employees, soldiers in service, as well as ecclesiastics in authority may not be elected as national representatives, with the exception of University professors. 
52. 
Senators and deputies are inviolable at all times with regard to the opinions which they express during the exercise of their duties. 
53. 
No Senator or Deputy, from the day of his election until the completion of -his uninterrupted tenure of office, may be accused, prosecuted or arrested for any matter, except with the permission of the Chamber to which he belongs. In civil matters he may not be sued within 60 days before the meeting of Congress until the end of the time necessary for him to reach his home. 
The Vice-President of the Republic, in his capacity of President of the National Congress and of the Senate, enjoys the same immunities and prerogatives as are accorded to Senators and Deputies. 
54. 
Senators and Deputies may not acquire public property or take such on lease, in their own name or in the name of a third person; nor may they enter into construction contracts or contracts for supplying provisions, nor obtain concessions or any other kind of personal advantage. 
Neither may they, while Senators or Deputies, be employees of autarchic entities or be lawyers of limited companies or enterprises which do business with the State. 
The violation of these precepts shall involve the loss of their representative mandate through a resolution of the corresponding Chamber, according to Art. 60, section 4, of this Constitution. 
55. 
During the constitutional period of their mandate they may direct petitions to executive officers for the proper fulfillment of legal provisions, and they may also call attention to the needs of their respective electoral districts, and how best to meet them. 
56.
When the same citizen is elected both Senator and Deputy he shall select the mandate which he prefers. If he is elected Senator or Deputy by two districts or Departments he shall represent the district which he chooses.
57. 
Senators and Deputies may be re-elected and they are entitled to resign their mandates. 
58. 
The Sessions of Congress and of both Chambers shall be public and they may only be secret when two-thirds of their members so determine. 
59. 
The following are the duties of the Legislative Power: --
<list>
(1) To dictate laws, repeal them, modify and interpret them. 
(2) On the initiative of the Executive Power, to impose taxes of any kind or nature, to abolish existing ones, to determine their national or departmental character and to decree fiscal expenditure. 
Nevertheless the Legislative Power, by the simple request of one of its members, may press the Executive to present certain projects of a financial character. If the Executive does not within 20 days present or take notice of the project presented, Parliament may consider the project, for the approval of which an absolute majority of the members of the Chamber from which it originated shall be necessary. 
Taxes shall be decreed for an indefinite period, except where the respective laws indicate a fixed period therefore. 
(3) To assign for every financial period the expenses of the public administration, after the presentation of Budget proposals by the Executive. 
(4) To assign, likewise in each legislature, the military force which is to be maintained in time of peace. 
(5) To authorize the Executive to contract loans, designating the funds to serve them. To recognize the debts contracted and establish the manner of cancellation. 
(6) To create new departments or provinces, and to fix their boundaries; to install main ports and establish Customs Houses. 
(7) To fix the weight, standard, value, type and denomination of the currency; authorize the issue and circulation of banknotes and arrange the system of weights and measures. 
(8) To grant subventions and interest guarantees for the construction of railways, canals, highways and other means of communication. 
(9) To permit the passage of foreign troops across the territory of the Republic, and arrange the length of their stay. 
(10) To authorize the departure of national troops outside the territory of the Republic and determine when they shall return.
(11) On the initiative of the Executive, to create and suppress public posts, determine or modify their duties and establish salaries. The Legislative Power may approve, reject or reduce the services, posts or emoluments proposed, but it may not increase them except in the case of those which correspond to the National Congress. 
(12) To decree amnesty for political crimes; grant pardons, subject to the Supreme Court's report. 
(13) To approve or reject international treaties and agreements of all kinds. 
(14) To authorize the alienation of national, departmental, municipal and university properties and of all those which are public domain. 
(15) To authorize the Executive to acquire immovable properties and approve the purchases effected. 
(16) To exercise the right of diplomatic action with regard to acts not consummated or international commitments on the part of the Executive. 
(17) To approve or disapprove annually the account of the investment of the funds destined for the expenses of the public administration, which account the Government must present in the first session of each legislature. 
(18) To appoint the Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
(19) To authorize the Universities to contract loans. 
</list>
Section 6. Congress<title> 
60. 
Each Chamber has the following duties: 
<list>
(1) To examine and pass judgment on the credentials of its respective members. To examine credentials each Chamber shall appoint a Commission composed of 5 members chosen in accordance with the incomplete list system-3 for the majority and 2 for the minority. Decisions of this Commission which are unfavorable to the credentials must be supported by the votes of two-thirds of the members. 
(2) To organize its Board of Directors. 
(3) To dictate its regulations and correct its infractions.
(4) To suspend temporarily or definitively any of its members for serious offenses committed in the exercise of their duties, with the consent of two-thirds of the votes. 
(5) To order the payment of items in its budget and attend to everything related to its economy and interior policy.
</list>
61. 
The Chambers shall meet in Congress for the following purposes: --
<list>
(1) To inaugurate and close their sessions. 
(2) To hold the scrutiny of the proceedings in the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, or to appoint them themselves should they not have secured the absolute majority of votes required by the Constitution. 
(3) To receive the oath of the functionaries mentioned in the preceding paragraph. 
(4) To accept or refuse the resignation of the said persons. 
(5) To perform the duties referred to in clauses 13 and 17 of Article 59. 
(6) To consider the laws vetoed by the Executive. 
(7) To decide upon a declaration of war on the petition of the Executive. 
(8) To determine the number of the armed forces. 
(9) To consider the Bills which, approved by the Chamber in which they originated, had not received the approval of the revising Chamber within 20 days. 
(10) To decide by a two-thirds vote of the total number of its members, controversies which arise between the two Chambers, with the Executive or with the Supreme Court; and, by a majority vote, those which arise between the said powers or between the District Courts and that of Cassation. 
(11) To exercise the authority as regards to Articles 34, 36 and 37 of this Charter. 
(12) To consider according to the law, petitions accusing the President and Vice-President of the Republic, Ministers of State, Diplomatic Agents and the Comptroller-General of the Republic, of offenses committed in the exercise of their duties. 
</list>
62. 
In no case shall Congress delegate to one or more of its members, or to another power, the duties which it has under this Constitution. 
63. 
The Chambers, separately or jointly as the case may be, may decree a vote of censure as regards the acts of the Executive. this to be directed against the Ministers of State, with a view to securing the modification of the political procedure which had given rise to the vote of censure. 
For the exercise of this right, the decision of the Chamber in which the censure originated is sufficient-by a vote of the absolute majority of the members present.
64. 
Either Chamber, on the written petition of any of its Commissions or members, has the right to request the presence, in the precincts, of the Ministers of State, in order to be furnished with the information deemed convenient, if for legislative ends, for examination, or for censure. 
Section 7. Chamber of Deputies<title> 
65. 
Deputies shall be elected directly by the people by a simple plurality of votes. They shall hold their posts for 4 years, renewing one-half their membership every 2 years. In the first two-year period, the outgoing ones shall be selected by lot. The law shall regulate these elections and fix the number of deputies. 
66. 
To be a representative it is necessary: --
<list>
1st. To be a Bolivian by birth, 
2nd. To have done military service, 
3rd. To be registered in the Civil Register, 
4th. To have attained 25 years of age, 
5th. Not to have been condemned to corporal punishment by the tribunals, and not to be under indictment or executed sentence. 
</list>
67. 
It is the privilege of the Chamber of Representatives alone to take the initiative in the cases of clauses (4) and (5) of Article 59. 
68. 
To the Chamber of Deputies belongs the right of electing, by an absolute majority of votes, the magistrates of the Supreme Court, from names proposed by the Senate, and of putting forward accusations against these same functionaries before the Upper Chamber, for any transgressions committed during the exercise of their functions. 
Section 8. Chamber of Senators<title> 
69. 
The Senate of the Republic is composed of for each Department. 
70. 
To be a Senator it is necessary: to have 35 years of age, and to have all the other requisites in the case of a Deputy. 
71. 
Senators shall exercise their duties for Renewal of the members of the Chamber shall be In each of the first 2 years the resigning third shall by lot.
72. 
The duties of this Chamber are the following: --
<list>
(1) To take cognizance of the accusations made by the Chamber of Deputies against the Ministers of the Supreme Court, in accordance with the Law of Responsibilities. 
The Senate only shall pass judgment on the Ministers of the Supreme Court and shall impose the corresponding penalty and responsibility, as the result of the accusation of the Chamber of Deputies, arising out of a complaint of the injured parties or as the result of denouncement by some citizen. 
In the cases covered by the preceding clauses the vote of two-thirds of the members present shall be necessary. 
A special law shall regulate the procedure and formalities of these lawsuits. 
(2) To rehabilitate as Bolivians, or as citizens, those who have lost these qualities. 
(3) To permit Bolivians to accept employment, titles or emoluments from a foreign Government. 
(4) To consider municipal ordinances. 
(5) To decree public honors to those who merit them for eminent services to the Nation. 
(6) To propose names to the Chamber of Deputies for the election of magistrates of the Supreme Court.
(7) To submit names to the President of the Republic for the posts of Comptroller-General and Attorney General of the Republic. 
(8) To propose names for Archbishops and Bishops, that they may be presented by the Executive Power for the canonical institution. 
(9) To grant, by a two-third vote, pecuniary awards. 
</list>
Section 9. Laws and Resolutions of the Legislative Power<title> 
73. 
The laws, with the exception of the cases mentioned in the second, third and eleventh clauses of Article 59 and in Article 67 may originate in either the Senate or in the Chamber of Deputies, on the proposal of one of the members, or by a message from the President, on condition, in the latter case, that the project be supported in the debates by the Minister of the respective department, who shall not be allowed to be present at the voting. 
The Supreme Court may, by means of a special message, initiate plans relative to codes of laws, procedures, and constitutional reforms.
74. 
A Bill which has been approved in the Chamber of origin shall pass immediately to the other for discussion within a period of 20 days. If the reviewing Chamber approves it, the law shall be passed on to the Executive Power for its promulgation. 
75. 
A Bill rejected in the Chamber in which it originated, cannot be proposed again in either of the Chambers until the following legislative period.
76. 
If the reviewing Chamber limits itself to amending or modifying the Bill, the latter shall be considered approved if the Chamber in which it originated accepts by an absolute majority the amendments or modifications. But, if the Chamber does not accept them, or if it corrects or alters them, the two Chambers, on being summoned by the President of either, shall meet within 20 days to deliberate on the Bill. In case of approval the Bill shall 'be remitted to the President for promulgation as a law of the Republic; if, however, it is rejected, it may not be proposed again except in one of the following legislative periods. 
77. 
Should the revising Chamber allow 20 days to elapse without giving a decision regarding the Bill, the latter shall be considered approved and shall be sent by the Chamber of origin to the Executive for its promulgation. This period shall only be interrupted during the recess of Congress. The same procedure shall be followed in the case of bills sent by the Executive. 
78.
All laws sanctioned by the Legislature may be queried by the President of the Republic within a term of 10 days from the day on which he receives them, provided the Minister of the Department from which it originates was not present at the discussions. A law not queried within 10 days, shall be promulgated. If a recess of Congress takes place during this period, the President of the Republic shall publish his observations on the law for consideration during the next legislative period. 
79. 
The comments of the Executive shall be addressed to the Chamber of origin. If this Chamber and the reviewing Chamber, united in Congress, find them well founded and modify the law accordingly, they shall return it to the Executive for its promulgation. 
If Congress declares the comments unfounded, by a vote of two-thirds of the members present, the President of the Republic shall promulgate the law within another 10 days. If he does not do so, the law shall be promulgated by the President of Congress. 
80. 
The resolutions of the 2 Chambers and of the Legislature need not be promulgated by the President. 
81. 
The promulgation of the laws shall be made by the President of the Republic in the following form: "Inasmuch as the National Congress has sanctioned the following law: ............ Therefore I promulgate it in order that it may be regarded and complied 'with as a law of the Republic." The Parliamentary decisions shall be promulgated in this form: "The National Congress of the Republic resolves ......... Therefore, let it be complied with, in accordance with the Constitution." 
82. 
A law is obligatory from the day of its publication, except when the same law provides otherwise. 
Section 10. Executive Power<title> 
83. 
The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic jointly with the Ministers of State. 
84. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected by direct vote. At the same time and in the same manner, the Vice-President shall be elected. 
85. 
The Constitutional period of office of the President and Vice-President of the Republic is for 6 years, and may not be prolonged. They cannot be re-elected, nor can the Vice-President be elected President of the Republic except after the lapse of 6 years from the termination of his mandate. 
86. 
To be elected President or Vice-President of the Republic, the qualifications required for a Senator are necessary. 
87. 
The following cannot be elected either President or Vice-President of the Republic: 
<list>
(1) Ministers of State who do not give up office 6 months before the day of the election; 
(2) Members of the armed forces in active service, and members of the regular clergy; 
(3) Blood relations or collateral relations to the second degree of persons who occupied the Presidency or the Vice-Presidency in the year immediately preceding the Presidential election;
(4) Contractors of public works and services; administrators and directors, agents and representatives of enterprises subsidized by the State, or of societies and establishments in which the National Treasury has a financial interest; administrators and tax collectors of public funds while their accounts are still pending. 
</list>
88. 
If none of the candidates for the Presidency or Vice-Presidency should obtain an absolute plurality of votes, Congress shall select the three who have obtained the greatest number of votes for either office, and shall choose from among these. 
If, after the first scrutiny, none of the competing candidates secures an absolute majority of votes, the subsequent voting shall be limited to the two who have received the greater number of votes. In case of a tie the voting shall be repeated until one of the candidates obtains an absolute majority. The election, scrutiny and proclamation shall be held in a public and continuous session. 
89. 
The proclamation of President and Vice-President of the Republic, shall be announced to the Nation by means of a law. 
90. 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic, on taking office, shall, before Congress, solemnly swear loyalty to the Republic and to the Constitution. 
91. 
In case of a temporary inability or absence of the President of the Republic, before or after his proclamation, the Vice-President shall replace him in the interim, and in the absence of the latter, the President of the Senate, and failing him, the President of the Chamber of Deputies. 
The Vice-President shall assume the Presidency of the Republic if, before or after the proclamation of the President elect, this seat should become vacant, and shall exercise the duties of the post until the termination of the constitutional period. Failing the Vice-President, the President-elect of the Senate shall take his place, and failing him, the President-elect of the Chamber of Deputies. In this last case, if 3 years of the Presidential term have not elapsed, there shall be a new election of President and Vice-President, for the sole purpose of completing the said Presidential term. 
92. 
So long as the Vice-President does not exercise the Executive Power, he shall fill the position of President of the Senate, without prejudice to the right of this Chamber to elect its own President to take the place of the former in his absence. 
93. 
The President of the Republic may not leave the national territory without permission of Congress. 
94. 
The attributions of the President of the Republic are the following: --
<list>
(1) To execute and enforce the laws and to issue the necessary decrees and orders, without restrictively defining rights, or changing those defined by the law or violating their provisions; and to observe the limitations established by this Constitution;
(2) To negotiate and conclude treaties with foreign nations and to exchange them, after ratification by Congress. 
(3) To appoint diplomatic officials, consuls and consular agents; to recognize foreign officials of this class; and to conduct foreign relations in general. 
(4) To participate in the formation of the laws through special messages or parliamentary intervention of the Minister concerned. 
(5) To call special sessions of Congress. 
(6) To administer the national revenues and decree their expenditure through the Minister of the respective department, in accordance with the laws and in strict observance of the budget. 
(7) To present to Congress at the close of each financial year the proposed budget for the coming year, and to propose while it is in force the changes and modifications which necessity and experience indicate in the case of revenue and expenditure of a fixed or variable character. The account of public expenditure shall be presented annually. 
(8) To exercise vigilance over municipal resolutions, especially those relating to revenue and taxes; to denounce -before the Senate those which are contrary to the Constitution and to the laws, whenever the transgressing Municipality does not yield to the indications of the Executive; 
(9) To present annually to Congress, in the first regular session, a written message regarding the state of the affairs of the administration during the year, accompanied by the ministerial Reports. 
(10) To furnish to the Chambers, through the Ministers, the -information which they may ask for, with a right to reserve information relative to diplomatic business which in his judgment should not be published. 
(11) To commute the death penalty in accordance with the laws. 
(12) To enforce the sentences of the tribunals. 
(13) To decree an amnesty for political crimes, without prejudice to amnesties which the Legislature may grant. 
(14) To grant pensions, superannuations, and gratuities in accordance with the laws. 
(15) To exercise the rights of National Patronage of churches, ecclesiastical institutions, properties and persons. 
(16) To present Archbishops and Bishops, choosing them from names proposed by the Senate, and to appoint dignitaries, canons and prebendaries from among those proposed by the Ecclesiastical Chapters. 
(17) To grant or refuse exequaturs for decrees of Church Councils, and for Papal briefs, bulls and orders, with the consent of the Senate. A law is necessary when general and permanent dispositions are contemplated. 
(18) To appoint the Attorney General and the Comptroller General of the Republic from names proposed by the Senate. 
(19) To appoint those employees of the administration whose designation is not reserved by law to another power and to issue their titles. 
(20) To appoint temporarily, in case of resignation or death, employees ordinarily chosen by another authority, the latter being in recess at the time. 
(21) To be present at the inauguration and closing of Congress. 
(22) To maintain and defend internal order and the foreign security of the Republic, in accordance with the Constitution. 
(23) To appoint the Commander-in-Chief of the Army. 
(24) To confer, in the name of the Nation, on the field of battle during an international war, the ranks of Colonel and General. 
(25) To grant, according to law, temporary exclusive privilege to those who invent, perfect or import procedures or methods useful to the sciences or arts, and grant compensation in case of publication of the secret of the invention, perfection or importation. 
(26) Create and establish minor posts.
</list>
95. 
The grade of Captain-General of the Army is inherent to the functions of the President of the Republic. 
96. 
The President of the Republic shall visit the main centers of the country, at least once during the period of his mandate, to study their needs, and shall give an account of his observations to the Legislature. 
Section 11. Ministers of State<title> 
97. 
The affairs of Public Administration shall be carried out by the Ministers of State, whose number the law fixes. A decree by the President of the Republic is sufficient for their appointment or removal. 
98. 
To be a Minister of State the same conditions are required as in the case of a Deputy. 
99. 
The Ministers of State are responsible for the acts of the Administration in their respective branches, jointly with the President of the Republic. 
As regards acts agreed to in the Cabinet meeting, theirs shall be a joint responsibility. 
100. 
All the decrees and dispositions of the President of the Republic must be signed by the Minister of the respective Department. They shall not be obeyed without this requisite. 
101. 
The Ministers of State may attend the discussions of either Chamber, but must leave before the voting. 
102. 
As soon as Congress opens its sessions, the Ministers shall present their respective reports relative to the state of the Administration in the form expressed in Article 94, clause No. 9. 
103. 
The account of public expenditure of the revenue, which the Minister of Finance must present to Congress, shall carry the approval of the other Ministers as to their respective departments. 
All the Ministers in respect of their corresponding departments shall participate in the formation of the general budget. 
104. 
The verbal or written order of the President of the Republic shall not exempt the Ministers from their responsibility. 
105. 
For the transgressions which they may commit in the exercise of their functions, they may be accused in accordance with the law of responsibilities.
Section 12. Interior Regime<title> 
106. 
The departmental government, in political and administrative affairs, shall be in charge of Prefects, Sub-Prefects and Mayors whose attributions and conditions of eligibility shall be determined by law. 
Section 13. Economic and Financial Regime<title> 
107. 
The economic regime must essentially be in accordance with the principles of social justice, the trend of which is to assure all the inhabitants an existence worthy of a human being. 
108. 
To the original domain of the State belong, in addition to property so assigned by law, all the substances of the mineral kingdom, uncultivated lands with all their natural resources, waters of lakes, rivers, and medicinal springs, as well as all physical forces capable of economic use. The conditions of the public domain as well as those for its assignment to individuals shall be defined by law. 
109. 
The State may regulate, by means of legislation, the exercise of commerce and industry, when it is absolutely necessary for reasons of public security or necessity. In these cases it may also assume the supreme administration of national economy. This intervention shall be exercised in the form either of control, of encouragement, or by direct steps. 
110. 
The State may, with the legislative approval of Congress, establish the fiscal monopoly of certain exports, provided that the country's needs so require. It shall likewise -control available funds in foreign currency. 
The exportation of oil and its derivatives, of public and private property, shall only be effected by means of the State, or by an entity which represents the State. 
Likewise the importation of raw material for the national industry may be effected by the State, or by an entity representing the State. 
111. 
All enterprises established in the country for exploitation, profit or business, shall be considered national and shall be subject to the sovereignty, laws and authorities of the Republic. 
112. 
The revenues of the State are divided into national, departmental and municipal and shall be administered independently by their treasuries. No money shall be taken from these treasuries except in conformity with the respective budgets.
An organized law shall classify the national, departmental and municipal revenues. 
The departmental, municipal or university resources collected by offices dependent on the national treasury, shall in no manner be centralized in this treasury. 
113. 
The Legislative Power shall fix the respective budget for each financial period, on the initiative of the Executive Power. During the financial period the fixed receipts and expenditure can only be modified by a special law emanating from the Executive Power. The Executive may, during recess of Congress, decree the supplementary credits and the transfers of credit from one entry or item and from one chapter to another of the same section, on condition that a statement of such credits and transfers, with reasons therefore, is presented to the National Congress for its approval. 
114. 
The law shall indicate the duration of each financial period, in accordance with the economic plan proposed by the Executive Power. Bills dealing with national and departmental budgets shall be presented to Congress in session by the Executive before the close of the financial period. On production of the report of the respective Commission or after the close of the prescribed period, they shall be discussed forthwith, by chapters, in sessions of Congress within a period not greater than 60 days. Congress may only accept, reject or reduce global items of each chapter. If the said period of 60 days lapses with the bill still not approved, it shall have the force of law. 
115. 
Every Bill which involves expenditure for the State, must indicate at the same time, the manner of covering it and the nature thereof. 
116. 
The public debt is guaranteed. Every obligation of the State, contracted in conformity with the laws, is inviolable. 
117. 
The floating debt which the Executive contracts during a fiscal year, must be cancelled without fail in the following financial term. 
118. 
The general account of receipts and expenditure of each financial period shall be presented to Congress by the Minister of Finance in the first regular session. 
119.
State entities, autonomous or semi-autonomous, must also present annually to Congress an account of their income and expenses, accompanied by a report from the Comptroller General of the Republic.
120. 
Departments and municipalities may not create protective or prohibitive systems which affect the interests of other districts of the Republic, nor decree ordinances in favor of the inhabitants of departments to the exclusion of other Bolivians. 
121. 
There shall be an accounting office and fiscal comptroller who shall be named Comptroller-General of the Republic. The law shall determine the attributions and responsibilities of the Comptroller-General and of the officers under him. The Comptroller-General shall depend directly on the President of the Republic and shall be appointed by the latter from names proposed by the Senate; he shall receive the salary of a Minister of State and shall be entitled to the same immovability as the Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
Section 14. Social Regime<title>
122. 
Labor and capital, as factors of production, are entitled to the protection of the State. 
123. 
The law shall regulate compulsory insurance against illness, accident, unemployment, disability, old age, maternity, and death; the dismissal and indemnification of employees and workers, the work of women and children, the maximum length of the working day, the minimum wage, deductions for Sundays and feast days, annual and maternity leave with pay, medical assistance, hygiene, and other social benefits for the protection of workers. 
124. 
The State shall encourage, through adequate legislation, the organization of all classes of co-operatives. 
125. 
The State shall decree protective measures for the life and health of the workers, employees and agricultural workers; it shall see to it that these have sanitary living quarters and shall promote the building of cheap houses; it shall also watch over the technical education of manual laborers. 
The authorities shall control, likewise, the conditions of public health and safety in which should be carried on the various professions and tasks, including labor on the land and in the mines. 
126. 
Free professional and syndical association is guaranteed, and the collective work contract is recognized. Likewise, syndical laws and the right to strike, as a means of defense for workmen, in conformity with the law, are recognized. The latter may not be dismissed, persecuted or imprisoned on account of their syndical activities. 
127. 
The law shall determine the system of participation by the employees and workers in the profits of the enterprises. 
128. 
The State, by means of tribunals and special organizations, shall decide conflicts between employers and workers or employees. 
129. 
The rights and benefits recognized by law in favor of the workers and employees are irrevocable. Contrary agreements are void, including those the tendency of which is to evade this provision. 
130. 
Social assistance is a function of the State. The law shall set forth the conditions of this assistance, which as regards sanitation is obligatory and compulsory. 
Section 15. The Family<title> 
131. 
Matrimony, the family and maternity are under the protection of the State. The juridical equality of husband and wife is established. 
De facto matrimony is recognized in the case of concubinary unions after only 2 years of co-habitation, proof of which must be given, or if a child has been born, provided the parties have legal capacity to marry. The Civil Registry law shall complete these de facto unions. 
132. 
The law does not recognize inequalities between sons; all have the same rights and duties. The investigation of paternity according to law is allowed. 
133. 
The laws shall fix the family patrimony which is not to be subject to embargo and alienation, as likewise the family subsidy in relation to the number of children. 
134. 
The defense of the physical, mental and moral health of infants is a primary duty of the State. The State supports the rights of the child to a home, to education and to ample assistance when in a condition of neglect, sickness or misfortune. The State shall entrust the fulfillment of what is ordered in this article to suitable technical organizations. 
Section 16. The Judicial Power<title> 
135. 
The Judicial Power is exercised by the Supreme Court, the District Courts and also by the other tribunals and courts of justice which the law establishes.
The administration of justice in the tribunals and courts of justice is gratuitous. 
136. 
The judges are independent and are not subject to anyone but the law. 
137. 
Courts of Appeal may not be established. 
138. 
Publicity in trials is a condition essential to the administration of justice, except when it is offensive to good customs. 
The secret character of trial in criminal indictments is suppressed. 
139. 
It shall be the responsibility of the tribunals not to grant possession to magistrates or judges who are not appointed in conformity with this Constitution and secondary laws. 
140. 
The following functions are the concern of ordinary justice: 
<list>
(1) The examination and decision of all litigation between private citizens and between these and the State when the latter acts in the capacity of a private person. 
(2) To decide upon direct appeals for nullity, based on Art. 27 of the Constitution, with reference to all acts or resolutions of a public authority which is not judicial. These appeals shall be tried and resolved by the tribunals and judges who by law are entitled in first instance to judge the functionary who may have exceeded his powers. 
</list>
141. 
The Supreme Court is composed of 10 Ministers and is divided into 2 Chambers. 
142. 
To be a member of the Supreme Court or Attorney General it is necessary to have been an accredited lawyer for 10 years and to fulfill the conditions required in the case of a Senator. 
143. 
The Supreme Court has the following duties besides those indicated by law: 
<list>
(1) To represent and direct the Judicial Power; 
(2) To appoint the members of the District Courts and the other judges, according to law. The President of the Supreme Court shall issue the necessary commission. 
(3) To decree the budget of the judicial branch and to order payment from the National Treasury. 
(4) To take cognizance of appeals for nullity according to the laws, and, at the same time, to give a decision as to the principal issue involved.
(5) To have exclusive jurisdiction in all cases of pure right, decision in which depends on the constitutionality or unconstitutionality of laws, decrees, or resolutions of any kind. 
(6) To try the cases of charges made against Diplomatic and Consular Agents, of Surveying Inspectors, National Delegates, the Comptroller-General, Rectors of Universities, members of the Superior Courts, District Attorneys, Prefects and other functionaries indicated by the law, for transgressions committed in the exercise of their duties. 
(7) To try cases of litigation which arise from contracts, negotiations and concessions of the Executive Power, and to decide administrative cases (contencioso-administratives) arising from decisions of that Power. 
(8) To take cognizance of all contentious matters relative to national patronage exercised by the Government. 
(9) To settle controversies which may arise between Municipalities, and between these and the political authorities, as well as controversies between the foregoing and the Municipalities of the provinces. 
(10) To exercise sole jurisdiction in suits against the decisions of the Legislature or of one of the Chambers, whenever such decisions might affect one or more concrete rights, whether civil or political and whoever the interested parties may be, provided that the claims do not refer to the qualification of credentials of national representatives. 
(11) To take cognizance and decide controversies which may arise between departments, whether with regard to boundaries or to other disputed rights. 
</list>
144. 
In addition to the duties and powers established by law, the district courts shall have jurisdiction to try Mayors and members of the Deliberative Councils for crimes committed in the exercise of their duties, be it individually or collectively, and to try the nullity of their elections. 
The Sub-Prefects are subject to the same jurisdiction. 
145. 
Ministers of the Supreme Court shall continue in office for 10 years, those of the District Courts, for 6 years, and the special and advisory judges for 4 years, re-election being permissible. During these periods, which are personal, no magistrate or judge may be removed from office except by an executive sentence, nor suspended except in cases not determined by law. Neither may they be transferred without their express consent.
146. 
The Public Ministry acts in the name of the Nation, through Commissions designated by the Legislative Chambers, through the Attorney General and other functionaries to whom the law attributes the said Ministry. 
147. 
The Attorney General shall be appointed by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the Senate. He shall remain in office 10 years, and may be re-elected. He shall not be removed from office except by virtue of a condemnatory sentence pronounced by the Supreme Court. 
Section 17. Communal Regime<title> 
148. 
The Communal government is autonomous. In the capitals of departments, of provinces and of sections of these, there shall be paid Mayors assisted by a Deliberative Council, the organization and attributions of which shall be determined by law. In the districts there shall be communal agents. 
The members of the Deliberative Councils shall be elected by popular vote; the Mayors by the President of the Republic from names submitted by the respective Councils--two names for the majority and one name for the minority. They shall hold office for 2 years. 
149. 
The Deliberative Council has the power to control and legislate in Municipal matters, within the following attributions:--
<list>
(1) To dictate annually the budget of income and expenditure. 
(2) To present before the Senate an annual review of grants and taxes for approval. 
(3) To put forward names from among the employees for appointments to be assigned by the Mayor. 
(4) To determine appeals from decisions of the Mayor. 
(5) To denounce the Mayor before the Superior Court of the District, for penal or correctional judgment, for infractions committed in the exercise of his duties. 
(6) To receive the annual report of the Mayor on the day on which the new Municipal term begins. 
(7) To accept legacies and donations. 
</list>
150. 
The Mayors of the capitals of departments shall exercise vigilance over the provincial Mayors, and the latter over the district agents.
151. 
To be a Mayor or a member of the Deliberative Council it is necessary to have full rights as a citizen and to be a resident of the place. 
152. 
Mayors have the following attributions: --
<list>
(1) To attend to and supervise services connected with cleanliness, comfort, decoration, urban administration and recreation. 
(2) To supervise public morals. 
(3) To control the sale prices of articles of prime necessity as well as those of public spectacles. 
(4) To supervise services of social assistance and beneficence. 
(5) To encourage popular culture. 
(6) To collect, administer and invest municipal taxes. 
(7) To attend to the supply of articles of subsistence to the townships in agreement with the Deliberative Council. 
(8) To negotiate loans for public works recognized as necessary, after authorization by the Deliberative Council and approval of the Senate. 
(9) To summon public force in order that its resolutions may be carried out. 
(10) To suppress speculation in, and the raising of, house rents. 
</list>
153. 
The ordinances of municipal grants and taxes shall not be valid without previous approval of the Senate. 
Section 18. Cultural Regime<title>
154. 
Education is the highest function of the State. Public instruction shall be organized according to the system of the simple school. The obligation to attend school is general from the age of 7 years to 14 years. Primary and Secondary instruction of the State is free. 
155. 
The State shall give economic assistance to those apt students who, through lack of resources, have not had access to the higher circles of education; so that the development of vocation and capacity may not be dependent on the social or economic position of individuals. 
156. 
Private schools shall also be subject to the official authorities, plans, programs and rules. 
Freedom of religious instruction is recognized. 
157. 
Schools maintained by philanthropic institutions shall have the co-operation of the State.
158. 
Education in the primary, secondary and normal and special grades shall be governed by the State, through the Ministry of Education and in accordance with the Educational Statute. Teaching posts are immovable in the conditions established by law. 
159. 
The public Universities are autonomous and equal in rank. Their self-Government consists in the free administration of their resources, the appointment of their Rectors, personnel, both teaching and administrative, the framing of their statutes and their plans of study, the approval of their annual revenue, the acceptance of legacies and donations, the right to make contracts and incur obligations for institutional purposes, and to support and perfect their institutes and faculties. 
They may negotiate loans on the guarantee of their properties and resources subject to previous legislative approval. 
160. 
The public Universities alone are authorized to grant academic diplomas. Titles of national character shall be granted by the Government in the name of the State. 
161. 
The public Universities shall obligatory be assisted by the National Treasury out of national funds, independent of their departmental, municipal and their own resources, already created or to be created. 
162. 
Education, in all grades, shall be subject to the protection of the State exercised through the Ministry of Education. 
163. 
Artistic, archaeological and historical wealth, and that arising from religious worship, is the cultural treasure of the nation, is under the protection of the State and may not be exported. The State shall protect the buildings and places which have been declared of historic and artistic value. 
164. 
The State shall encourage the culture of the people. 
Section 19. Regarding the Peasants<title> 
165. 
The State recognizes and guarantees the legal existence of the indigenous communities. 
166. 
Indigenous and agrarian legislation shall be authorized, account being taken of the characteristics of the different regions of the country. 
167. 
The State shall encourage the education of the peasant by the formation of native scholastic groups of an integral nature covering economic, social and pedagogic aspects.
Section 20. The Armed Forces<title> 
168. 
The permanent armed force is composed of the standing army, the size of which shall be fixed in each legislative period. It is essentially obedient, does not deliberate and is, in everything, subject to the military laws and regulations. 
Every Bolivian is obliged to render military service in accordance with the law. 
169. 
The Army is charged fundamentally with the conservation of internal order and external security of the country. It shall co-operate in works of road making, communications and colonization. 
170. 
The Army depends upon the President of the Republic and, in so far as administration is concerned, receives its orders from him, through the Ministry of Defense, and, regarding technical matters, through the Commander-in-Chief. 
In case of war the Commander-in-Chief of the Army shall direct operations. 
The President of the Republic is empowered to appoint and to change the Commander-in-Chief. 
171. 
No foreigner shall be admitted to the army without previous authorization by Congress. 
To fulfill the duties of Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Chief of the General Staff it is absolutely necessary to be Bolivian by birth. 
172. 
All promotions shall 'be made in accordance with the respective laws. 
173. 
The Supreme Council of National Defense, the organization and attributions of which shall be determined by law, shall be composed of the President of the Republic, Ministers of State, the Commander-in-Chief and the Chief of the General Staff. 
Section 21. Amendments to the Constitution<title> 
174. 
This Constitution may be amended in part, by previously showing the necessity for doing so and indicating this with precision by an ordinary law, approved by two-thirds of the members present of each of the Houses. 
This law may be proposed in either of the Houses in Constitutional form. 
The law in question shall be sent to the President for its promulgation.
175. 
In the first sessions of the legislature in which there has been a change in the Chamber of Deputies, the matter shall be brought up by the House which originally planned the amendment, and if this is approved as being necessary by two-thirds of the votes present, it shall pass to the other House for revision, which also requires a two-thirds vote. 
The rest of the procedure shall be the same as the Constitution indicates as regards relations between the Chambers. 
176. 
The Houses shall deliberate and vote on the amendment, adjusting it to the Constitutional requirements set forth in the amending law. 
The approved amendment shall pass to the President for promulgation, without the President being able to pronounce thereon. 
177. 
When the amendment is in regard to the Constitutional period of the President of the Republic, it may only be carried out in the following period. 
178. 
The Chambers may decide all doubts which may arise regarding the meaning of any of the articles of the Constitution, if such doubts are declared to be well founded by a two-thirds vote. 
The subsequent formalities to be observed are those prescribed for an ordinary law. 
Interpretative laws cannot -be reviewed by the President of the Republic. 
179. 
The authorities and tribunals shall apply this Constitution in preference to the laws, -and the latter in preference to any other resolutions. 
180. 
Laws and decrees in conflict with this Constitution are declared null and void. 
To be communicated to the Executive Power for constitutional ends. 