Title: Date Adopted: Date In Force: Date Promulgated: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

The Constitution of the Pluri-National State of Bolivia: January 25, 2009 01/25/2009 02/07/2009 02/07/2009 Bolivia © 2011 Oxford University Press, Inc. Proprietary Max Planck Institute

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE PLURI-NATIONAL STATE OF BOLIVIA, 2009 Explanatory Note: Adopted: January 25, 2009 Effective: February 7, 2009 Table of Contents Preamble Part I Fundamental Bases of the State. Rights, Duties and Guarantees Title I Fundamental Bases of the State First Chapter State Model Second Chapter Principles, Values and Purposes of the State Third Chapter System of Government Title II Fundamental Rights and Guarantees First Chapter General Provisions Second Chapter Fundamental Rights Third Chapter Civil and Political Rights Section I Civil and Political Rights Section II Political Rights Fourth Chapter Rights of the Indigenous Originary Peasant Nations and Peoples Fifth Chapter Social and Economic Rights Section I Right to the Environment Section II Right to Health and Social Security Section III Right to Work and Employment Section IV Right to Property Section V Rights Related to Childhood, Youth and Adolescence Section VI Rights of Families Section VII Rights of Senior Citizens Section VIII Rights of Persons with Disabilities Section IX Rights of Persons Deprived of Liberty Section X Rights of Users and Customers Sixth Chapter Education, Interculturality and Cultural Rights Section I Education Section II Superior Education Section III Cultures Section IV Science, Technology and Investigation

Section V Sports and Recreation Seventh Chapter Communication Title III Duties Title IV Judicial Guarantees and Legal Remedies First Chapter Judicial Guarantees Second Chapter Legal Remedies Section I Action in Defense of Liberty Section II Action of Constitutional Protection Section III Action of Protection of Privacy Section IV Action of Unconstitutionality Section V Action of Compliance Section VI Popular Action Third Chapter State of Emergency Title V Nationality and Citizenship Chapter I Nationality Chapter II Citizenship Second Part Functional Structure and Organization of the State Title I The Legislative Organ First Chapter Composition and Powers of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly Second Chapter Legislative Procedure Title II The Executive Organ First Chapter Composition and Powers of the Executive Organ Section I General Provision Section II Presidency and Vice-Presidency of the State Section III Ministries of State Title III The Judicial Organ and the Plurinational Constitutional Tribunal First Chapter General Provisions Second Chapter Ordinary Jurisdiction Section I The Supreme Court of Justice Third Chapter Agro-Environmental Jurisdiction Fourth Chapter Indigenous Originary Peasant Jurisdiction Fifth Chapter The Council of the Judiciary Sixth Chapter The Plurinational Constitutional Court Title IV The Electoral Organ First Chapter The Plurinational Electoral Organ Second Chapter Political Representation Title V Functions of Control, Defense of Society and Defense of the State First Chapter Control Function Section I The Office of Comptroller General of the State Second Chapter Defense of Society Function Section I The Ombudsman Office Section II The Public Ministry Third Chapter Defense of the State Function Section I The Attorney General’s Office Fourth Chapter The Public Servants Title VI Participation and Social Control

Title VII The Armed Forces and the Bolivian Police First Chapter The Armed Forces Second Chapter The Bolivian Police Title VIII International Relations, Borders, Integration and Maritime Claims First Chapter International Relations Second Chapter National Borders Third Chapter Integration Fourth Chapter Maritime Claims Third Part Territorial Structure and Organization of the State Title I Territorial Organization of the State First Chapter General Provisions Second Chapter Departmental Autonomy Third Chapter Regional Autonomy Fourth Chapter Municipal Autonomy Fifth Chapter Executive Organs of the Autonomous Governments Sixth Chapter Legislative, Deliberative and Control Organs of the Autonomous Governments Seventh Chapter Indigenous Originary Peasant Autonomy Eighth Chapter Distribution of Powers Fourth Part Economic Structure and Organization of the State Title I Economic Organization of the State First Chapter General Provisions Second Chapter Role of the State in the Economy Third Chapter Economic Policies Section I Fiscal Policy Section II Monetary Policy Section III Financial Policy Section IV Sector Policies Fourth Chapter Assets and Revenue of the State and their Distribution Title II Environment, Natural Resources, Land and Territory First Chapter Environment Second Chapter Natural Resources Third Chapter Hydrocarbons Fourth Chapter Mining and Metallurgy Fifth Chapter Water Resources Sixth Chapter Energy Seventh Chapter Biodiversity, Coca, Protected Areas and Forestry Resources Section I Biodiversity Section I Coca Section III Protected Areas Section IV Forestry Resources Eighth Chapter Amazonia Ninth Chapter Land and Territory Title III Comprehensive Sustainable Rural Development Fifth Part Normative Hierarchy and Reform of the Constitution Sole Title Supremacy and Reform of the Constitution

Transitional Provisions Abrogating Provision Final Provision

PREAMBLE In times immemorial mountains arose, rivers were displaced, lakes were formed. Our Amazonia, our Chaco, our highlands and our plains and valleys were covered by green trees and flowers. We populated this sacred Mother Earth with different faces, and since then we understood the plurality inherent in all things and our diversity as beings and cultures. This is how we formed our peoples, and we never understood racism until we suffered it in the dark times of colonialism. We the Bolivian people, of plural composition, from the depths of history, inspired by the battles of the past, the indigenous uprising against colonial rule, the independence movements, the fights for popular liberation, the marches of indigenous, social and workers’ groups, the water and October wars, the battles for land and territory, and with the memory of our martyrs, build a new State. A State based on respect and on the equality of all, on principles of sovereignty, dignity, complementariness, solidarity, harmony and equity in the distribution and redistribution of the social product, where the search for the good life prevails; with respect for the economic, social, legal, political and cultural plurality of the inhabitants of this land; in collective coexistence with access to water, work, education, health and housing for everybody. We leave behind us the colonial, republican and neoliberal State. We assume the historical challenge to build together a unitary, social, plurinational communitarian state based on the rule of law (Estado Unitario Social de Derecho Plurinacional Comunitario) which integrates and articulates the proposals for advancing towards a Bolivia that is democratic, productive, peaceful and peace-inspiring, committed to the integral development and the free determination of peoples. We, men and women, through the Constituent Assembly and sustained by the original power of the people, affirm our commitment to the unity and integrity of the country. Fulfilling the mandate of our peoples, with the strength of our Pachamama and by the grace of God, we found Bolivia anew. Honor and glory to the martyrs of the constitutional and liberation struggles who have made this new beginning possible. FIRST PART FUNDAMENTAL BASES OF THE STATE: RIGHTS, DUTIES AND GUARANTEES

TITLE I FUNDAMENTAL BASES OF THE STATE FIRST CHAPTER STATE MODEL Article 1 Bolivia is established as a unitary, social, plurinational communitarian state based on the rule of law (Estado Unitario Social de Derecho Plurinacional Comunitario), free, independent, sovereign, democratic, intercultural, decentralized and with autonomies. Bolivia is founded on the basis of plurality and political, economic, legal, cultural and linguistic pluralism, within the integrating process of the country. Article 2 In view of the pre-colonial existence of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples and their ancestral possession of their territories, their free determination is guaranteed within the framework of the unity of the State, which consists in their right to autonomy, to selfgovernment, to their culture, to the recognition of their institutions and to the consolidation of their territorial entities, in accordance with this Constitution and the statute. Article 3 The Bolivian nation consists of all Bolivian women and men, the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, and the intercultural and Afro-Bolivian communities which together form the Bolivian people. Article 4 The State respects and guarantees freedom of religion and spiritual belief, in accordance with the respective vision of the cosmos. The State is independent of religion. Article 5 I. The official languages of the State are the Spanish language and all of the languages of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, which include the languages aymara, araona, naure, bésiro, canichana, cavineño, cayubaba, chácobo, chimán, ese ejia, guaraní, guarasu’we, guarayu, itonama, leco, machajuyai-kallawaya, machineri, maropa, mojeño-trinitario, mojeñoignaciano, moré, mosetén, movima, pacawara, puquina, quechua, sirionó, tacana, tapiete, toromona, uru-chipaya, weenhayek, yaminawa, yuki, yuracaré and zamuco. II. The plurinational Government and the departmental governments must use at least two official languages. One of them must be Castilian, and the other shall be determined by taking into account the use, convenience, circumstances, needs and preferences of the whole population

or the territory in question. The other autonomous governments must use the languages of their territories, and one of them must be Castilian. Article 6 I. Sucre is the Capital of Bolivia. II. The symbols of the State are the tricolor flag with the colors red, yellow and green; the Bolivian anthem; the coat of arms; the wiphala[*]; the cockade (escarapela); the kantuta flower and the patujú flower. SECOND CHAPTER PRINCIPLES, VALUES AND PURPOSES OF THE STATE Article 7 Sovereignty vests in the Bolivian people which exercises it either directly or through its representatives. It is the source, by way of delegation, of the functions and competences of the public authorities; it is inalienable and imprescriptible. Article 8 I. The State assumes and promotes as ethic-moral principles of the plural society: ama qhilla, ama llulla, ama suwa (don’t be lazy, don’t be a liar nor a thief); suma qamaña (to live well), ñandereko (harmonious life), teko kavi (good life), ivi maraei (land without evil), and qhapaj ñan (noble path or life). II. The State is sustained by the values of unity, equality, inclusion, dignity, liberty, solidarity, reciprocity, respect, complementariness, harmony, transparency, balance, equality of opportunities, social and gender equity in participation, common well-being, responsibility, social justice, distribution and redistribution of the social products and assets, to live well. Article 9 The following are essential purposes and functions of the State, in addition to those established by the Constitution and by statute: 1. To establish a just and harmonious society, founded upon the principle of decolonization, without discrimination or exploitation, with full social justice, to consolidate the plurinational identities. 2. To guarantee the well-being, the development, the security, the protection and the equal dignity of the individuals, the nations, the peoples and the communities, and to encourage mutual respect and intracultural, intercultural and plurilingual dialog.

3. To reaffirm and consolidate the unity of the country, and preserve its plurinational diversity as historical and human heritage. 4. To guarantee the fulfillment of the principles, values, rights and duties recognized and established in this Constitution. 5. To guarantee the access of the people to education, health and work. 6. To promote and guarantee the responsible and planned exploitation of the natural resources, and encourage their industrial use, through the development and strengthening of the productive base in its different dimensions and levels, as well as the conservation of the environment, for the well-being of current and future generations. Article 10 I. Bolivia is a pacifist State, which promotes the culture of peace and the right to peace, as well as the cooperation among peoples of the region and the world, in order to contribute to mutual understanding, to equitable development and to the promotion of interculturality, with full respect of the sovereignty of states. II. Bolivia rejects any war of aggression as an instrument of solving differences and conflicts between states and it reserves the right to legitimate defense in case of aggression that puts in danger the independence and integrity of the State. III. The establishment of foreign military bases within the Bolivian territory is prohibited. THIRD CHAPTER SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT Article 11 I. The Republic of Bolivia adopts as its form of government the participatory, representative and communitarian democracy, with equivalent conditions among men and women. II. Democracy is exercised in the following forms, which shall be further developed by statute: 1. Direct and participatory, by way of referendum, citizens’ legislative initiative, recall, assembly, municipal council and prior consultation. The assemblies and municipal councils shall have a deliberative character in accordance with the statute. 2. Representative, by way of election of representatives by universal, direct and secret vote in accordance with the statute. 3. Communitarian, by way of election, designation or appointment of authorities and representatives on the basis of the special norms and procedures of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, among others, in accordance with the statute.

Article 12 I. The State organizes itself and structures its public power through Legislative, Executive, Judicial and Electoral organs. The organization of the State is founded on the independence, separation, coordination and cooperation of these organs. II. The functions of control, of defense of the society and of defense of the State are state functions. III. The functions of the public organs may not be fused in one single organ nor shall they be mutually interchangeable. TITLE II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES FIRST CHAPTER GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 13 I. The rights recognized by this Constitution are inviolable, universal, interdependent, indivisible, and dynamic. The State has the duty to promote, protect and respect them. II. The rights proclaimed by this Constitution shall not be understood as excluding other nonenumerated rights. III. The classification of rights laid down in this Constitution does not establish any hierarchy among rights or precedence of some rights over others. IV. The international treaties and agreements ratified by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly which recognize human rights and prohibit their limitation during states of emergency prevail in the domestic order. The rights and duties established in this Constitution shall be interpreted in accordance with the international human rights treaties ratified by Bolivia. Article 14 I. Every human being has legal personality and legal capacity in accordance with the laws and enjoys the rights recognized by this Constitution without any distinction. II. The State prohibits and sanctions any form of discrimination on grounds of sex, color, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, origin, culture, nationality, citizenship, language, religious belief, ideology, political or philosophical affiliation, marital status, economic or social condition, type of occupation, education level, disability, pregnancy, or others which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of the rights of every individual.

III. The State guarantees to all individuals and collectivities, without any discrimination, the free and effective exercise of the rights established in this Constitution, the statutes and the international treaties of human rights. IV. In the exercise of those rights nobody shall be required to do anything which is not stipulated by the Constitution or by statute, or to refrain from doing anything not prohibited by them. V. The Bolivian laws apply to every person, natural or legal, Bolivian or foreign, within the Bolivian territory. VI. Foreign women and men within the Bolivian territory have the rights and must comply with the duties established by this Constitution, unless this Constitution provides otherwise. SECOND CHAPTER FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS Article 15 I. All persons have the right to life and to physical, psychological and sexual integrity. No one shall be tortured, or shall suffer cruel, inhumane, degrading and humiliating treatment. The death penalty is abolished. II. All persons, women in particular, have the right to not suffer physical, sexual or psychological violence, within the family and the society. III. The State shall adopt the necessary measures to prevent, eliminate and sanction gender and generational violence, as well as any action or omission which aims to degrade the human condition, to cause death, pain, physical, sexual or psychological suffering within the public or private realm. IV. No person may be subjected to forced disappearance for any cause or in any circumstance. V. No person may be subjected to servitude or slavery. Slave trade and human trafficking are prohibited. Article 16 I. All persons have the right to water and food. II. The State has the obligation to guarantee food security through a healthy, adequate and sufficient diet for the entire population. Article 17. All persons have the right to receive education at every level based on the principles of universal, productive, free, integral and intercultural education, without discrimination.

Article 18. I. All persons have the right to health care. II. The State guarantees that all persons are covered by and have access to health care services, without any exclusion or discrimination. III. The single health care system shall be universal, free, equitable, intracultural, intercultural, participatory, and be based on quality, social warmth and control. The system is based in the principles of solidarity, efficiency and joint responsibility and is implemented through public policies at every level of government. Article 19 I. Every person has the right to an adequate environment and housing which allow for a family and community life in dignity. II. The State shall promote plans for public housing at every level of government through adequate financing systems, based on the principles of solidarity and equity. These plans shall be directed primarily towards low income families, less favored groups and the rural area. Article 20 I. Every person has a right of general and equitable access to basic services of drinking water, sewage, electricity, gas for home consumption, mail and telecommunications. II. It is the responsibility of the State at every level of government to ensure the provision of the basic services through public, mixed, cooperative or communitarian entities. In the cases of electricity, gas for home consumption and telecommunications the services may be provided by way of contracts with private companies. The provision of services must respond to the criteria of responsibility, accessibility, continuity, quality, efficiency, effectiveness, equitable tariffs and necessary coverage, with social participation and control. III. The access to water and sewage is a human right which shall not be subject to concessions or privatization; it shall be governed by a special licensing and registration regime established by statute. THIRD CHAPTER CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS SECTION I CIVIL RIGHTS Article 21 Bolivian males and females have the following rights:

1. To cultural self-identification. 2. To privacy, intimacy, respect, honor, own image and dignity. 3. To freedom of thought, spirituality, religion and cult, expressed individually or collectively, in public or in private, for legal ends. 4. To freedom of gathering and association, in public or in private, for legal ends. 5. To freely express and spread thoughts or opinions by any means of communication, in an oral, written or visual, individual or collective form. 6. To have access to information, to interpret, analyze and communicate it freely, in an individual or collective manner. 7. To freedom of residence and movement in all of the Bolivian territory which includes the entry into and exit from the country. Article 22 The dignity and freedom of the person are inviolable. Respecting and protecting them is the fundamental duty of the State. Article 23 I. Every person has the right to freedom and personal security. Personal liberty may only be restricted within the limits determined by statute, in order to ensure the discovery of the historic truth by the endeavor of the judicial bodies. II. Measures depriving adolescents of their liberty shall be avoided. Every adolescent who is deprived of liberty shall be given priority attention by the judicial, administrative and law enforcing authorities. They shall at any moment respect her/his dignity and identity. The detention shall take place in facilities separate from those assigned to adults, taking into account the special needs of her/his age. III. No one may be detained, apprehended, or deprived of her/his liberty except in the cases and in accordance with the procedures established by statute. The execution of the arrest warrant requires that it is issued in written form by a competent authority. IV. Any person caught in the act of committing a crime may be arrested by any person, even without a warrant. The only objective of the arrest shall be to bring the individual before a competent judicial authority which shall decide on her/his legal situation within a maximum delay of twenty-four hours. V. At the time a person is deprived of her/his liberty he shall be informed of the grounds for her/his detention, as well as of the indictment or charges brought against him.

VI. The authorities responsible for the detention centers shall keep a registry of the persons deprived of their liberty. They shall not receive any person without taking a copy of the corresponding arrest warrant to their registry. Non-compliance with these requirements shall trigger the prosecution and the sanctions established by statute. Article 24 Every person has the right to submit oral or written petitions individually or collectively, and to receive a formal and prompt response. In order to exercise this right nothing else than the petitioner’s identification shall be required. Article 25 I. Every person has the right to inviolability of domicile and to the secrecy of her/his private communications in all of its forms, unless a judicial warrant provides to the contrary II. Correspondence, private papers and private statements contained in any kind of document are inviolable; they may be seized only in the cases determined by statute for the purpose of a criminal investigation, by virtue of a written order and duly motivated by a competent judicial authority. III. No public authority, person or entity may intercept private conversations or communications through a device designed for their control or central scrutiny. IV. The information and evidence which are obtained by means of violation of private correspondence and communications in any of its forms shall not produce legal effects. SECTION II POLITICAL RIGHTS Article 26 I. All citizens have the right to freely participate, either directly or by means of their representatives, in the formation, exercise and control of the political power, individually or collectively. The participation shall take place in an equitable manner and in equal conditions for men and women. II. The right of participation includes: 1. Organization for purposes of political participation, in accordance with the Constitution and the statutes. 2. Voting, through equal, universal, direct, individual, secret, free and obligatory suffrage which is publicly counted. Suffrage shall be exercised starting at the age of eighteen.

3. Where communitarian democracy is practiced, the electoral processes shall be conducted according to their own norms and procedures, supervised by the Electoral Body, unless the electoral act is subject to equal, universal, direct, individual, secret, free and obligatory suffrage. 4. The election, appointment and direct nomination of the representatives of the indigenous originary peasant nations and people, in accordance with their own norms and procedures. 5. The auditing of the acts of the civil service. Article 27 I. Bolivians residing abroad have the right to participate in the elections for President and Vicepresident of the State, and in the other elections specified by statute. The right shall be exercised on the basis of the voter registration conducted by the Electoral Body. II. Foreigners residing in Bolivian have the right to vote in municipal elections, in accordance with the statute and subject to the principles of international reciprocity. Article 28 The exercise of political rights is suspended in the following cases, following an enforceable sentence and while the prison sentence has not yet been served: 1. For taking arms and serving in enemy forces in times of war. 2. For embezzlement of public funds. 3. For treason to the country. Article 29 I. The right to request and receive asylum and refugee status due to political and ideological prosecution for foreigners is recognized, in accordance with the statutes and international treaties. II. Any person to whom asylum or refuge is granted in Bolivia shall not be expelled or extradited where her/his/her life, integrity, security or freedom may be in danger. The State shall deal in a positive, humanitarian and speedy manner with the requests of family reunification presented by parents or children with an asylum or refugee status. FOURTH CHAPTER RIGHTS OF THE INDIGENOUS ORIGINARY PEASANT NATIONS AND PEOPLE Article 30

I. The original indigenous farmer nation and people consists of the whole group of human beings which share a cultural identity, language, historical tradition, institutions, relation to territory, and cosmovisions, and whose existence predates the Spanish colonial invasion. II. Within the framework of the State’s unity and in accordance with this Constitution the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples enjoy the following rights: 1. To exist freely. 2. To their cultural identity, religious creed, spiritual ideas, practices and customs, and to their own cosmovision. 3. To have the cultural identity of each of its members registered, if she/he so wishes, alongside the Bolivian citizenship in her/his identity document, passport or other legally valid identification document. 4. To free determination and possession of their territory. 5. To their own institutions within the general structure of the State. 6. To the collective titling of lands and territories. 7. To the protection of their sacred places. 8. To create and establish their own systems, media and networks of communication. 9. To have their traditional knowledge, traditional medicine, their languages, rituals, symbols and clothing valued, respected and promoted. 10. To live in a healthy environment, with an adequate management and use of the ecosystems. 11. To the collective intellectual property of their knowledge and sciences, as well as their valuation, use, promotion and development. 12. To an intracultural, intercultural and plurilingual education in the entire education system. 13. To a universal and gratuitous health system that respects their cosmovision and traditional practices. 14. To the operation of their political, legal and economic systems according to their cosmovision. 15. To be consulted through appropriate procedures, and in particular through their institutions, every time legislative or administrative measures which are likely to affect them are being envisaged. In this context the right to compulsory prior consultation conducted by

the State in good faith and in an agreed manner with regard to the exploitation of nonrenewable natural resources within the territory where they are living shall be respected and guaranteed. 16. To a sharing of the benefits resulting from the exploitation of natural resources in their territories. 17. To the autonomous indigenous territorial administration, and to the exclusive use and management of the renewable natural resources existing in their territories, without prejudice to the rights legitimately acquired by third parties. 18. To participation in the organs and institutions of the State. III. The State guarantees, respects and protects the rights of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples established by this Constitution and by statute. Article 31 I. The indigenous originary nations and peoples in danger of extinction, in situation of voluntary isolation and without contact to the outside world, shall be protected and respected in their individual and collective ways of life. II. The indigenous originary nations and peoples living in isolation and without contact to the outside world enjoy the right to maintain that condition, as well as to the delimitation and legal consolidation of the territory they occupy and live in. Article 32 The Afro-Bolivian people enjoy in all matters affecting them the economic, social, political and cultural rights recognized in the Constitution in respect of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples. FIFTH CHAPTER SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC RIGHTS SECTION I RIGHT TO THE ENVIRONMENT Article 33 All persons have the right to a healthy, protected and balanced environment. The exercise of this right must allow individuals and collectivities of present and future generations, as well as other living beings, to develop in a normal and permanent manner. Article 34

Any person, acting individually or on behalf of a collectivity, is authorized to bring the legal actions in defense of the right to the environment, without prejudice to the obligation of the public institutions to respond ex officio to the attacks against the environment. SECTION II RIGHT TO HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY Article 35 I. The State shall protect the right to health at all levels, promoting public policies designed to improve the quality of life, the collective wellbeing and the free access of the population to health services. II. There is only one health system and it includes the traditional medicine of the indigenous originary peasant nations and people. Article 36 I. The State shall guarantee the access to universal health insurance. II. The State shall control the functioning of the public and private health services, and shall regulate it through law. Article 37 The State has the obligation of guaranteeing and sustaining the right to health, an obligation which it may not relinquish and which is a supreme function and a primary financial responsibility. Both health promotion and the prevention of deceases shall be prioritized. Article 38 I. Public goods and services related to health are property of the State and may not be privatized or become the object of a concession. II. Health services shall be performed with interruption. Article 39 I. The State shall guarantee the public health service and recognizes the private health service; it shall regulate and supervise the delivery of quality services through sustainable medical audits that evaluate the work of their staff, the infrastructure and the equipment, in accordance with the statute. II. A statute shall sanction negligent actions or omissions in medical practice. Article 40

The State shall guarantee the participation of the organized population in the decision-making process and in the management of the entire public health system. Article 41 I. The State guarantees the access of the population to medicines. II. The State shall give priority to generic drugs through the encouragement of their domestic production and, if necessary, shall determine their importation. III. The right of access to medicines may not be restricted by intellectual property and trade rights, and shall take into account standards of quality and first generation manufacturing. Article 42 I. It is the responsibility of the State to promote and guarantee the respect, use, investigation and practice of traditional medicine, recovering the ancestral knowledge and practices from the thinking and values of all the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples. II. The promotion of traditional medicine shall include the registration of natural medicines and their working principles, as well the protection of its knowledge as intellectual, historic, and cultural property, and as the patrimony of the indigenous originary farmer nations and people. III. A statute shall regulate the practice of traditional medicine and shall guarantee the quality of its service. Article 43 A statute shall regulate cell, tissue or organ donations or transplants in accordance with the principles of humanity, solidarity, opportunity, gratuity and efficiency. Article 44 I. No person shall be subjected to a surgical intervention, medical or laboratory examination without her/his consent or the consent of a legally authorized third party, save in cases of imminent danger to her/his life. II. No person shall be subjected to scientific experiments without her/his consent. Article 45 I. All Bolivians have the right of access to social security. II. Social security is provided in accordance with the principles of universality, integrality, equity, solidarity, unified management, economy, opportunity, interculturality, and efficacy. Its direction and administration is incumbent upon the State, with social control and participation.

III. The social security regime covers care provided in cases of sickness, epidemic and catastrophic diseases; maternity and paternity; professional and labor risks and risks related to work in the fields; disability and special needs; unemployment and loss of job; orphanhood, incapacity, widowhood, old age, and death; housing, family assistance and other social previsions. IV. The State guarantees the right to retirement, with a universal, solidarity-based and equitable character. V. Women have the right to a safe maternity, based on an intercultural concept and practice; they shall enjoy the special assistance and the protection of the State during pregnancy and delivery, and during the pre-natal and post-natal periods. VI. The public social security services may not be privatized or transferred by way of concession. SECTION III RIGHT TO WORK AND EMPLOYMENT Article 46 I. Every person has the right to: 1. To a dignified job with job security, occupational hygiene and safety, without discrimination and with a fair, equitable and sufficient wage or salary that guarantees a dignified existence for him/her and her/his family. 2. To a stable employment in equitable and adequate conditions. II. The state shall protect work in all its forms. III. All kinds of forced labor or similar forms of exploitation that oblige a person to work without her/his consent and adequate remuneration are prohibited. Article 47 I. Every person has the right to engage in commerce, industry or in any licit economic activity, in conditions that are not detrimental to the collective good. II. The workers of small urban and rural production centers, the self-employed workers, and trade union members in general shall enjoy special protection by the State, through a policy of fair trade and fair prices for their products, as well as the preferential assignation of economic financial resources to incentives to their production. III. The State shall protect, encourage and strengthen the communitarian forms of production.

Article 48 I. Social and labor laws are of mandatory compliance. II. Labor laws shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with the principles of protection of workers as the main productive force of society, of the primacy of labor relations, of employment continuity and stability; of non-discrimination and of reversal of the burden of proof in favor of the worker. III. The rights and benefits granted to the workers may not be waived, and all conventions to the contrary or which try to circumvent their effects are null. IV. Unpaid salaries or wages and outstanding labor fees, social benefits and contributions to social security have priority over any other debt and are neither subject to seizure nor to the statute of limitations. V. The State shall promote the incorporation of women into the labor force and shall secure for them equal pay for equal work in the public as well as in the private sector. VI. Women may not be discriminated or dismissed on grounds of marital status, pregnancy, age, physical characteristics or number of children. Job security is guaranteed for pregnant women and for fathers until the son or daughter is one year of age. VII. The State shall guarantee the incorporation of young people in the productive system in accordance with their training and formation. Article 49 I. The right to collective bargaining is recognized. II. A statute shall regulate the labor relations resulting from contracts and collective agreements; general and specific minimum wages and wage increases; reincorporation; paid rest periods and holidays; calculation of employment age, of the work day, of extra hours, of the payment for night and Sunday shifts; year-end bonus, bonuses, and other forms of participation in the profits of the company; indemnities and severance payments; maternity leave; training and professional formation, and other social rights. III. The State shall protect job security. Dismissals without justification and any type of mobbing at the workplace are prohibited. A statute shall establish the necessary sanctions. Article 50 The State shall resolve labor disputes between employers and workers, including those concerning job security and social security, through specialized administrative courts and bodies. Article 51

I. All workers have the right to organize themselves in trade unions in accordance with the statute. II. The State shall respect the trade union principles of unity, trade union democracy, political pluralism, self-sustainability, solidarity and internationalism. III. The establishment of trade unions is recognized and guaranteed as a means of defense, representation, assistance, education and culture of the workers of the countryside and of the city. IV. The State shall respect the ideological and organizational independence of the trade unions. The unions shall enjoy legal personality merely by being organized and recognized by their parent entities. V. The tangible and intangible assets of union organizations are inviolable and not subject to seizure or alienation. VI. Trade union leaders enjoy the right to employment security of union representatives; they may not be dismissed before one year has passed since the end of their term in office, their social entitlements may not be reduced nor shall they be subjected to prosecution or incarceration for acts performed in the discharge of their union responsibilities. Article 52 I. The freedom to establish employers’ associations is recognized and guaranteed. II. The State guarantees the recognition of the legal personality of employers’ associations as well as of the democratic forms of organization of employers in accordance with their own bylaws. III. The State recognizes the training institutions of business organizations. IV. The tangible and intangible assets of employers’ organizations are inviolable and not subject to seizure. Article 53 The right to strike is guaranteed as the exercise of the legal prerogative of workers to suspend labor for the defense of their rights in accordance with the statute. Article 54 I. It is the obligation of the State to establish employment policies to avoid unemployment and underemployment, with the goal of creating, maintaining and generating conditions which offer the workers decent employment opportunities at fair wages.

II. The protection and defense of the industrial sector and of state services is a duty of the State and of society. III. Workers may, in defense of their work places and in protection of the social interest, reactivate and reorganize companies which are in the process of bankruptcy, insolvency or liquidation or have been closed or abandoned without justification, and establish communitarian or social companies. The State may contribute to the action taken by the workers. Article 55. The cooperative system is based on the principles of solidarity, equality, reciprocity, equitable distribution, social purpose, and no profit for its associates. The State shall encourage and regulate the organization of cooperatives through law. SECTION IV RIGHT TO PROPERTY Article 56 I. Every person has the right to individual or collective private property, as long as it performs a social function. II. Private property is guaranteed as long as its use is not detrimental to the collective interest. III. The right to succession by inheritance is guaranteed. Article 57 Expropriation shall be imposed on the ground of public necessity or utility, stated in accordance with the statute and subject to prior and fair compensation. Urban real estate property is not subject to reversion. SECTION V RIGHT RELATED TO CHILDHOOD, YOUTH AND ADOLESCENCE Article 58 Every person of minor age shall be considered a boy, a girl or an adolescent. Children and adolescents are entitled to the enjoyment of the rights recognized in the Constitution, within the limits established by the latter, and of the specific rights inherent in their development process; to their ethnic, sociocultural, gender and generational identity; and to the satisfaction of their needs, interests and aspirations. Article 59 I. Every girl, boy or adolescent has the right to an integral development.

II. Every girl, boy or adolescent has the right to live and grow up among her/his original or adoptive family. When this is not possible or contrary to the child’s or adolescent’s best interest, the child or adolescent shall have the right to a substitute family in accordance with the statute. III. All girls, boys and adolescents, without distinction of origin, have equal rights and duties in relation to their parents. Discrimination by parents towards their children shall be sanctioned by statute. IV. Every girl, boy and adolescent has the right to her/his identity and to know her/his parents. When the parents are not known, the last name used shall be chosen by the person responsible for the child’s or adolescent’s care. V. The State and society shall guarantee the protection, promotion and active participation of the youth in the productive, political, social, economic and cultural development, without any discrimination and in accordance with the statute. Article 60 It is the duty of the State, of society and of the family to make sure that the child’s or adolescent’s best interest prevails; this comprises the primacy of her/his rights, privileged access to protection and aid in all circumstances, the right to be given priority attention by the public and private services, and the access to an administration of justice that is swift, speedy and makes use of specialized assistance personal. Article 61 I. Any kind of violence towards girls, boys or adolescents within the family or society is prohibited and shall be sanctioned. II. Forced labor and exploitation of children are prohibited. The activities of girls, boys or adolescents in the family and in society shall be oriented towards their integral formation as citizens and have an educational function. Their rights, guarantees and institutional mechanisms of protection shall be established by special regulation. SECTION VI RIGHTS OF FAMILIES Article 62 The State recognizes and protects the families as the fundamental core of society and guarantees the necessary social and economic conditions for their full development. All of its members have equal rights, duties and opportunities. Article 63

I. The marriage between woman and man constitutes a legal relationship and is based on the equality of rights and duties of the spouses. II. Free unions or unions of fact which satisfy conditions of stability and single-partnerrelationship and are maintained by a woman and a man without legal impediment shall produce the same effects as the civil marriage, in respect of the personal and matrimonial relations of the partners as well as in relation to children adopted or born in these unions. Article 64 I. Spouses or partners have the duty, in equality of conditions and through joint effort, to contribute to the maintenance of the household and to the education and integral formation of the minor children and children with disabilities. II. The State shall protect and assist those who are responsible of the families in the discharge of their obligations. Article 65 In the best interest of the girls, boys and adolescents and of their right to an identity, the presumption of origin shall operate in the basis of the indication of the mother or the father. This presumption shall be valid unless proof to the contrary is provided by the person who contests the affiliation. In case evidence is presented which contradicts the presumption, the incurred costs shall be paid by the person who invoked the affiliation. Article 66 Women and men are guaranteed the exercise of their sexual rights and their reproductive rights. SECTION VII RIGHTS OF SENIOR CITIZENS Article 67 I. Apart from the rights recognized in this Constitution, all senior citizens have the right to spend their old age in dignity and in a humane environment. II. The State shall promote a life pension for senior citizens within the framework of the integral social security system in accordance with the statute. Article 68 I. The State shall adopt public policies for the protection, care, recreation, rest and social occupation of senior citizens, in accordance with their capabilities and possibilities.

II. Any form of mistreatment, abandonment, violence and discrimination against senior citizens is prohibited and shall be sanctioned. Article 69 The Veterans of the Country deserve gratitude and respect from public and private institutions and from the general population, they shall be considered heroes and defenders of Bolivia and shall receive from the State a life pension, in accordance with the statute. SECTION VIII RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES Article 70 Any person with a disability enjoys the following rights: 1. To be protected by the family and by the State. 2. To free integral education and health care. 3. To communication in alternative language. 4. To work in adequate conditions, in accordance with their possibilities and capabilities, with a fair remuneration which assures a dignified life. 5. To the development of her/his individual potential. Article 71 I. Any type of discrimination, mistreatment, violence and exploitation in respect of a person with a disability is prohibited and shall be sanctioned. II. The State shall adopt affirmative action measures to promote the effective integration of persons with disabilities in the productive, economic, political, social and cultural sectors, without any discrimination. III. The State shall create the conditions that allow the development of the individual potential of the persons with disabilities. Article 72 The State shall guarantee integral services of prevention and rehabilitation for the persons with disabilities, as well as other benefits established by statute. SECTION IX RIGHTS OF PERSONS DEPRIVED OF LIBERTY

Article 73 I. Any person subjected to any form of deprivation of liberty deprivation shall be treated with due respect for her/his human dignity. II. All persons deprived of liberty have the right to communicate freely with their defenders, interpreters, family members and related individuals. The refusal of communication is prohibited. Any restriction of communication may only take place within the framework of criminal investigations and shall only last for a maximum of 24 hours. Article 74 I. The State is responsible for the social reinsertion of the persons deprived of liberty, for the respect of their rights, and for their detention and custody in adequate surroundings, in accordance to the classification, nature and gravity of the crime, as well as the age and sex of the detained individuals. II. The persons deprived of liberty shall have the opportunity to work and study in the correction centers. SECTION X RIGHTS OF USERS AND CONSUMERS Article 75 The male and female users and consumers enjoy the following rights: 1. To the provision of food, medicines and products in general, in conditions of safety, quality, and adequate and sufficient quantity, with an efficient and timely delivery of supplies. 2. To trustworthy information about the characteristics and contents of the products they consume and services they use. Article 76 I. The State guarantees access to an integral transportation system in its diverse modalities. A statute shall establish that the transportation system must be efficient and effective, and that it must provide benefits to its users and providers. II. There shall be no customs controls, stations or control posts of any kind within the Bolivian territory, with the exception of those created by statute. SIXTH CHAPTER EDUCATION, INTERCULTURALITY AND CULTURAL RIGHTS

SECTION I EDUCATION Article 77 I. Education is a fundamental function and a priority financial responsibility of the State which cannot renounce its obligation to sustain, guarantee and administer it. II. State and society have full oversight over the educational system which comprises regular, alternative and special education and the superior professional formation. The educational system develops its processes on the basis of criteria of harmony and coordination. III. The educational system consists of state educational institutions and of private and conventional educational institutions. Article 78 I. Education is unitary, public, universal, democratic, participatory, communitarian, decolonizing and of quality. II. Education is intracultural, intercultural and plurilingual within the entire educational system. III. The educational system is based on an open, humanist, scientific, technical and technological, productive, territorial, theoretical and practical, liberating and revolutionary, critical and supportive education. IV. The State guarantees vocational training and humanist technical teaching, for men and women, related to life, work and productive development. Article 79 Education shall foster patriotism, intercultural dialogue and moral values. The values shall incorporate gender equity, non-differentiation of roles, non-violence and the full effectiveness of human rights. Article 80 I. Education shall have as its objective the integral formation of the people and the strengthening of critical social conscience in life and for life. Education shall be oriented towards individual and collective formation; to the development of physical and intellectual capabilities, skills and abilities that link theory with productive practice; to the conservation and protection of the environment, biodiversity and territory in order to live well. Its regulation and performance shall be established by statute. II. Education shall contribute to strengthening of the unity and identity of all persons as part of the Plurinational State, as well as the identity and cultural development of the members of each

indigenous originary peasant nation or people, and the intercultural understanding and enrichment within the State. Article 81 I. Education is mandatory until graduation from high school. II. State-funded education is free at all levels up to the superior level. III. Upon completion of the studies at the secondary level the bachelor degree shall be awarded immediately and free of charge. Article 82 I. The State guarantees the access to education of all citizens in conditions of full equality. II. The State shall give priority support to the students with limited economic means in order to make sure that they get access to the different levels of the educational system, through the provision of economic resources, food programs, clothing, transportation, school material; and in outlying areas through the establishment of student residences, in accordance with the statute. III. Scholarships shall be awarded to students who achieve excellent results at all levels of the educational system. All girls, boys and adolescents with outstanding natural talent have the right to get educational care based on formation and learning methods that allow them to fully develop their skills and gifts. Article 83 Social participation, communitarian participation and that of the parents within the educational system are recognized and guaranteed, through representative organisms in all levels of the State and in the indigenous originary peasant nations and people. Its compositions and attributions shall be established by statute. Article 84 State and society have the duty of eradicating illiteracy through programs that are tailored to the cultural and linguistic reality of the population. Article 85 The State shall promote and guarantee constant education for girls, boys and adolescents with disabilities or with extraordinary learning gifts in accordance with the general structure, principles and values of the educational system, and shall establish special institutions and curricular development plans [for this purpose]. Article 86

In educational centers the freedom of conscience, faith and religious instruction, as well as the spirituality of the indigenous originary peasant nations and people, shall be recognized and guaranteed, and the respect and mutual tolerance among people of diverse religious opinions shall be promoted, without dogmatic harassment. In these centers there shall be no discrimination with regard to the acceptance and retention of students based on their religious views. Article 87 The operation of educational units established by convention with social service objectives, free access and non-profit character is recognized and respected; they shall function under the supervision of public authorities which respect the management rights of religious entities over such academic units, without prejudice to the provisions in the national legislation, and shall be subject to the general norms, policies, plans and programs of the educational system. Article 88 I. The operation of private educational units at all levels and in all modalities is recognized and respected; they shall be subject to the policies, plans, programs and authorities of the educational system. The State guarantees their operation after verification of the operating conditions and their compliance with the requirements established by statute. II. The right of the parents to choose the education which is best suited to the needs of their children is respected. Article 89 The monitoring, measurement, evaluation and accreditation of the educational quality in the entire educational system shall be assigned to a specialized public institution which is independent from the Ministry in charge of the area. Its composition and functioning shall be determined by statute. Article 90 I. The State recognizes the activities of institutes of humanistic, technical and technological formation at the medium and superior levels following their compliance with the terms and requirements established by statute. II. The State shall promote technical, technological, productive, artistic and linguistic formation through technical institutes. III. The State, through the educational system, shall promote the creation and organization of remote learning and of popular but not scholarized educational programs, with the objective of raising the cultural standard and developing the plurinational awareness of the people.

SECTION II SUPERIOR EDUCATION Article 91 I. The superior education develops processes of professional formation, of generation and revelation of knowledge oriented towards the integral development of society, and shall take into account the universal knowledge and collective wisdom of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples. II. The superior education is intracultural, intercultural and plurilingual, and has as its mission the integral formation of the human resources with high qualification and professional competency; the development of scientific investigation processes to resolve the problems of the productive base and its social surroundings; the promotion of social inclusion and interaction policies to strengthen the scientific, cultural and linguistic diversity; the participation alongside the people in the processes of social liberation, to construct a society with more equity and social justice. III. Superior education comprises universities, superior schools for the training of teachers, and technical, technological and artistic institutes, public or private. Article 92 I. Public universities are autonomous and equal in hierarchy. The autonomy consists in the free management of their resources; the appointment of their authorities, its teaching and administrative personnel; the drafting and approval of their by-laws, study plans and yearly budgets; and the acceptance of bequests and donations, as well as the signing of contracts, to achieve their objectives and sustain and perfect their institutes and faculties. Public universities can negotiate loans using their properties and resources as security, following legislative approval. II. The public universities, in exercise of their autonomy, shall constitute the Bolivian University, which shall coordinate and plan its objectives and functions through a central body, in accordance with the university development plan. III. The public universities shall be authorized to award academic diplomas and professional degrees that are valid throughout the entire State. Article 93 I. The public universities shall be compulsorily and sufficiently subsidized by the State, independently from departmental, municipal and their own resources, created or to be created. II. The public universities, within the framework of their by-laws, shall establish social participation mechanisms of advisory, coordinating and consultative character.

III. The public universities shall establish mechanisms of accountability and transparency in the use of their resources, through the presentation of financial statements to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, the Comptroller General and the Executive Organ. IV. The public universities, within the framework of their by-laws, shall establish programs of academic outreach and of interculturality, in accordance with the needs of the State and of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples. V. The State, in coordination with public universities, shall promote in the rural areas the creation and operation of universities and pluricultural communitarian institutes, assuring social participation. The opening and operation of such universities shall respond to needs for the strengthening of the productive capacities of the region, in the light of its potential. Article 94 I. Private universities shall be subject to the policies, plans, programs and authorities of the educational system. Their operation shall be authorized by means of a supreme decree, following verification of their compliance with the conditions and prerequisites established by statute. II. Private universities shall be authorized to issue academic diplomas. Professional degrees that are valid throughout the country shall be issued by the State. III. In private universities examination panels, consisting of professors appointed by the public universities, shall be established in accordance with the terms provided for by statute in order to decide on the awarding of academic diplomas in all graduation modalities. The State shall not subsidize private universities. Article 95 I. The universities shall create and maintain intercultural centers of formation and technical and cultural training, freely accessible by the people, in conformity with the principles and objectives of the educational system. II. The universities shall implement programs for the recovery, preservation, development, learning and dissemination of the different languages of the indigenous originary peasant nations and people. III. The universities shall promote centers for the creation of productive units, in coordination with communitarian, public and private productive initiatives. Article 96 I. It is the responsibility of the State to form and train instructors for public teaching, through superior formation schools. The formation of teachers shall be uniform, public, free, gratuitous, intracultural, intercultural, plurilingual, scientific and productive, and shall be developed on the basis of social commitment and vocation to public service.

II. The teachers of the public sector shall participate in continuous updating and pedagogic training courses. III. The teaching career and job security of the teachers of the public sector are guaranteed in accordance with the statute. The teachers shall receive an adequate salary. Article 97 Postgraduate formation at all of its levels shall have as its fundamental mission the qualification of professionals in different areas, through scientific investigation processes and the generation of knowledge linked to reality, in order to contribute to the integral development of society. Postgraduate formation shall be coordinated by an instance established by the universities of the educational system in accordance with the statute. SECTION III CULTURES Article 98 I. Cultural diversity forms part of the essential foundation of the Plurinational Communitarian State. Interculturality is the instrument of cohesion and harmonious and balanced conviviality among all peoples and nations. Interculturality shall proceed on the basis of respect for differences and subject to equality of conditions. II. The State acknowledges as a source of strength the existence of indigenous originary peasant cultures, reservoirs of values, knowledge, spirituality and cosmovisions. III. It shall be the fundamental responsibility of the State to preserve, develop, protect and promote the cultures existing in the country. Article 99 I. The cultural heritage of the Bolivian people is inalienable, unseizable and imprescriptible. The economic resources generated by it shall be regulated by statute and be spent with priority on its conservation, preservation and promotion. II. The State shall guarantee the registration, protection, restoration, recuperation, revitalization, enrichment, promotion and spreading of its cultural heritage in accordance with the statute. III . The natural, arqueological, paleontological, historic and documentary wealth and the wealth resulting from religious cult and folklore forms part of the cultural heritage of the Bolivian people in accordance with the statute. Article 100

I. The cosmovisions, the myths, the oral history, the dances, the cultural practices, the knowledge and traditional technologies are the heritage of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples. This heritage forms part of the expression and identity of the State. II. The State shall protect the [traditional] wisdom and knowledge by means of the intellectual property registration which safeguards the intangible rights of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples and of the intercultural and afro-Bolivian communities. Article 101 The manifestations of art and popular crafts, in their intangible component, shall enjoy special protection by the State. This protection shall equally apply to places and activities declared as cultural heritage of mankind, in their tangible and intangible components. Article 102 The State shall register and protect the intellectual, individual and collective property of the works and discoveries of authors, artists, composers, inventors and scientists in the conditions determined by statute. SECTION IV SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INVESTIGATION Article 103 I. The State shall guarantee the development of science and scientific, technical and technological investigation for the benefit of the general interest. The necessary resources shall be provided and a state science and technology system shall be created. II. The State shall adopt a policy of implementing strategies to incorporate the knowledge and application of new information and communication technologies. III. The State, the universities, the productive service companies of the public as well as of the private sector, and the indigenous originary peasant nations and people, shall develop and coordinate investigation, innovation, promotion, dissemination, application and transfer of science and technology processes to strengthen the productive base and stimulate the full development of society, in accordance with the statute. SECTION V SPORTS AND RECREATION Article 104 Everybody has the right to sports, to physical exercise and to recreation. The State guarantees the access to sports without distinction of gender, language, religion, political orientation, residence, and social, cultural or any other kind of affiliation.

Article 105 The State shall promote, through education, recreation and public health policies, the development of a culture of physical exercise and of practice of sports in its preventive, recreational, formative and competitive aspects, with special attention to people with disabilities. The State shall guarantee the means and economic resources necessary for its effectiveness. SEVENTH CHAPTER COMMUNICATION Article 106 I. The State guarantees the right to communication and the right to information. II. The State guarantees to all Bolivians the right of freedom of expression, opinion and information, to rectification and reply, and the right to freely express ideas through any means of dissemination, without prior censorship. III. The State guarantees to the workers of the press the freedom of expression and the right to communication and information. IV. The conscience clause of the workers of the information section is recognized. Article 107 I. The communication media must contribute to the promotion of the ethic, moral and civic values of the different cultures of the country by producing and broadcasting plurilingual educational programs and programs in alternative language for the disabled. II. The information and views disseminated by the communication media must respect the principles of truthfulness and responsibility. These principles shall be implemented through the ethics and self-regulation norms of the journalists’ organizations and communication media and their statute. III. Communication media may not form, directly or indirectly, monopolies or oligopolies. IV. The State shall support the establishment of communitarian communication media in equality of conditions and opportunities. TITLE III DUTIES Article 108 Bolivians have the following duties:

1. To know and to uphold the Constitution. 2. To know, to respect and to promote the rights recognized in the Constitution. 3. To promote and to disseminate the practice of the values and principles proclaimed by the Constitution. 4. To defend, to promote and to contribute to the right to peace and to encourage the culture of peace. 5. To work, in accordance with their physical and intellectual abilities, in licit and socially beneficial activities. 6. To undergo training in the educational system until graduation from high school. 7. To pay taxes in proportion to their economic means, in conformity with the statute. 8. To report and to combat all acts of corruption. 9. To assist, to feed and to educate their sons and daughters. 10. To assist, to protect and to help their ancestors. 11. To help with all necessary assistance in cases of natural disasters and other emergencies. 12. To render military service, which is mandatory for men. 13. To defend the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bolivia, and to respect its symbols and values. 14. To guard, to defend and protect the natural, economic and cultural heritage of Bolivia. 15. To protect and to defend the natural resources and to contribute to their sustainable use in order to preserve the rights of future generations. 16. To protect and to defend an adequate environment for the development of living beings. TITLE IV JUDICIAL GUARANTEES AND LEGAL REMEDIES FIRST CHAPTER JURISDICTIONAL GUARANTEES Article 109

I. All of the rights recognized in the Constitution are directly applicable and protected by equal guarantees. II. The rights and their guarantees can only be regulated by statute. Article 110 I. The people who violate constitutional rights shall be subject to the jurisdiction and competence of Bolivian authorities. II. The violation of constitutional rights entails the liability of the persons who are intellectually or materially responsible for the violation. III. Attacks on personal security entail the liability of their direct authors, without the possibility to excuse themselves by reference to orders of a superior. Article 111 Crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, treason to the country and war crimes are not subject to the statute of limitations. Article 112 The crimes committed by public servants affecting the assets of the State and cause grave economic damage are not subject to the statute of limitations or immunity. Article 113 I. The violation of rights confers upon the victims the right to receive indemnity, reparation and compensation of damages and losses in a timely manner. II. In case the State is sentenced to pay compensation for damages and losses it shall file a recovery action against the authority or public servant responsible for the action or omission that caused the damage. Article 114 I. Any form of torture, disappearance, confinement, coercion, imposition or any kind of physical or moral violence is prohibited. The public servants or public authorities that apply or instigate or consent to such violence shall be dismissed, without prejudice of the sanctions determined by statute. II. The statements, actions or omissions obtained or undertaken through the use of torture, coercion, imposition, or by any other form of violence, are null by full force of the law. Article 115

I. All persons shall be adequately and effectively protected by the judges and courts in the exercise of their rights and legitimate interests. II. The State guarantees the right to due process, to defense and to a justice that is plural, prompt, adequate, gratuitous, transparent and without delays. Article 116 I. The presumption of innocence is guaranteed. In case of doubt regarding the application of a provision during the process, the provision which is more favorable to the person accused or on trial shall apply. II. Any sanction must be based on a law which was in force already prior to the commission of the punishable act. Article 117 I. No person may be convicted without having been previously heard and judged in due process. Nobody shall be subjected to criminal sanction that has not been imposed by a competent judicial authority by way of enforceable judgment. II. No one shall be tried or convicted more than once for the same act. The full restoration of her/his restricted rights shall take place immediately after serving her/his sentence. III. No sanction consisting in the deprivation of liberty may be imposed for debts or financial obligations, except in the cases established by statute. Article 118 I. The stripping of a person of his honor, civil death and confinement are prohibited. II. The maximum criminal sentence shall be thirty years of deprivation of liberty, without the right to pardon. III. The execution of sanctions of deprivation of liberty and of security measures is aimed towards the education, rehabilitation and social reinsertion of the convicted individuals, with respect for their rights. Article 119 I. The parties to a dispute shall have the same opportunities during the legal proceedings to exercise the prerogatives and rights favoring them, whether in an ordinary trial or in an indigenous originary peasant trial.

II. Every person has the inviolable right to defense. The State shall provide to the accused or charged persons a defense attorney at no cost in the cases where they do not have the necessary economic resources. Article 120 I. Every person has the right to be heard by a competent, independent and impartial judicial authority, and may not be judged by special commissions or subjected to judicial authorities other than those established prior to the case. II. Every person which is subjected to a trial must be judged in her/his language; exceptionally, in a mandatory manner, she/he must be assisted by a translator or interpreter. Article 121 I. In penal matters nobody may be forced to testify against himself/herself, against her/his blood relatives up to the fourth degree or against the persons to which she/he is related by marriage up to the second degree. The right to remain silent shall not be considered an indication of guilt. II. The victim in a criminal trial may intervene in accordance with the statute and shall have the right to be heard before each judicial decision. In case of not having the necessary economic resources, assistance shall be provided by an attorney free of charge. Article 122 The acts of persons who usurp functions to which they are not entitled as well as the acts of those who exercise jurisdiction or power which is not derived from the law are null and void. Article 123 The law only makes provision for the future and shall not have retroactive effect, except in labor matters when it expressly so stipulates in favor of the workers; in penal matters, when it benefits the person charged with a crime; in corruption matters, in order to investigate, try and sanction the crimes committed by public servants against the interests of the State; and in the other cases specified by the Constitution. Article 124 I. Any Bolivian who commits one of the following acts is guilty of the crime of treason to the country: 1. Taking up arms against her/his country, placing himself/herself at the service of one of the participating foreign countries or entering into complicity with the enemy in case of an international war against Bolivia. 2. Violating the constitutional rules on natural resources.

3. Undermining the unity of the country. II. This crime shall carry the maximum criminal penalty. SECOND CHAPTER LEGAL REMEDIES SECTION I ACTION IN DEFENSE OF LIBERTY Article 125 Anybody who considers that her/his life is under threat, that she/he is unlawfully prosecuted, or that she/he is tried or deprived of personal liberty in violation of due process, may file an Action in Defense of Liberty and sustain it, in oral or written form, by himself/herself or through somebody else acting on her/his behalf, and without any procedural formality, before any judge or competent court in penal matters, and may request the protection of her/his life, the halting of the unjustified persecution, the reestablishment of the legal formalities or the restoration of his/ her right to liberty. Article 126 I. The judicial authority shall immediately set a day and hour for a public hearing, which shall take place within 24 hours from the filing of the action claim, and shall order that the applicant is brought before it or shall appear at the place of her/his detention. With such order the summons shall be addressed, either personally or by letter, to the denounced authority or person, an order that shall be followed without comment or excuse, by the denounced authority or person as well as by the persons responsible for the jails or detention centers, without any possibility for the latter, once they have been summoned, to disregard the order. II. In no case may the hearing be suspended. In case the defendant is not present, due to nonattendance or withdrawal, the hearing shall be conducted in her/his absence. III. After elucidating the background of the case and hearing the allegations [of the parties], the judicial authority, mandatorily and under its responsibility, shall issue the sentence in the same hearing. The sentence may order measures for the protection of life, the restoration of the right to liberty, the reparation of legal defects, the halting of the unlawful prosecution, or the remission of the case to a competent judge. In all cases, the parties are considered notified upon the reading of the sentence. IV. The judicial ruling shall be executed immediately. However, the decision shall be subject to an ex officio revision by the Plurinational Constitutional Court within twenty-four hours following its issuance. Article 127

I. Public servants or individuals who do not comply with the judicial rulings in the cases covered by this action shall be sent to the Public Ministry by order of the authority which ruled on the application in order to be tried for their interference with constitutional guarantees. II. The judicial authority that does not proceed in accordance with this article shall be subject to a sanction, in accordance with the Constitution and the statute. SECTION II ACTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL PROTECTION Article 128 The Action of Constitutional Protection shall lie against unlawful or unjustified acts or omissions by public servants, individuals or collective entities which restrict, suppress, or threaten to restrict or suppress the rights recognized by the Constitution and statute. Article 129 I. The Action of Constitutional Protection shall be filed by the person allegedly affected, by another person acting on her/his behalf with sufficient power of representation, or by the respective authority in accordance with the Constitution, before any competent judge or court, provided that there is no other means or legal remedy for the immediate protection of the restricted, suppressed or threatened rights and guarantees. II. The Action of Constitutional Protection may be filed within a maximum period of six months, starting with the commission of the alleged violation or the notification of the last administrative or judicial decision. III. The defendant authority or person shall be summoned in the manner set forth for the Action in Defense of Liberty, with the objective of providing information and presenting, as the case may be, the facts regarding the alleged violation, within a maximum period of forty-eight hours since the filing of the Action. IV. The final ruling shall be pronounced in a public hearing immediately following the reception of the information from the defendant authority or person and, in absence thereof, on the basis of the proof offered by the applicant. The judicial authority shall examine the competence of the public servant or the defendant person and, if it deems the application well-founded, shall grant the requested protective order. The decision shall be subject to an ex officio revision by the Plurinational Constitutional Court within twenty-four hours following its issuance. V. The final ruling that grants the Action of Constitutional Protection shall be executed immediately and without comment. In case of non-compliance, the case shall proceed in accordance with the provisions applicable to the Action in Defense of Liberty. A judicial authority which does not proceed in accordance with this article shall be subjected to the sanctions established by statute.

SECTION III ACTION OF PROTECTION OF PRIVACY Article 130 I. Any individual or collective entity which believes that it is unjustly or unlawfully prevented from knowing, objecting to, or achieving the elimination or rectification of the data registered by any physical, electronic, magnetic or computerized medium, in public or private files or data banks, which affect its fundamental right to intimacy or personal or family privacy, or its own image, honor and reputation, may file the Action of Protection of Privacy. II. The Action of Protection of Privacy shall not proceed in cases concerning the lifting of secrecy in press matters. Article 131 I. The Action of Protection of Privacy shall follow the procedure set forth for the Action of Constitutional Protection. II. If the competent court or judge admits the action, it shall order the disclosure, elimination or rectification of the data the registration of which has been challenged. III. The decision shall be subject to an ex officio revision by the Plurinational Constitutional Court within twenty-four hours following its issuance, without suspending its execution. IV. The final ruling obtained as a result of the Action of Protection of Privacy shall be executed immediately and without comment. In case of non-compliance, the case shall proceed in accordance with the provisions applicable to the Action in Defense of Liberty. A judicial authority which does not proceed in accordance with this article shall be subjected to the sanctions established by statute. SECTION IV ACTION OF UNCONSTITUTIONALITY Article 132 Any individual or collective entity affected by a legal provision that is contrary to the Constitution shall have the right to file the Action of Unconstitutionality, in accordance with the procedures established by statute. Article 133 The judgment which declares the unconstitutionality of a statute, decree or any other kind of non-judicial resolution renders the challenged provision inapplicable and is binding on all.

SECTION V ACTION OF COMPLIANCE Article 134 I. The Action of Compliance shall proceed in cases of non-compliance with constitutional or statutory provisions by public servants, with the objective of ensuring the execution of the disregarded provision. II. The action shall be filed by the affected individual or collective entity or by another person acting on its behalf with sufficient power of representation before a competent judge or court, and shall proceed in the same way as the Action of Constitutional Protection. III. The final ruling shall be pronounced in a public hearing immediately following the reception of the information from the defendant authority and, in absence thereof, on the basis of the proof offered by the applicant. The judicial authority shall examine the background of the case and, if it deems the application well-founded, shall admit the action and order the immediate fulfillment of the ignored duty. IV. The decision shall be subject to an ex officio revision by the Plurinational Constitutional Court within twenty-four hours following its issuance, without suspending its execution. V. The final ruling obtained as a result of the Action of Compliance shall be executed immediately and without comment. In case of non-compliance, the case shall proceed in accordance with the provisions applicable to the Action in Defense of Liberty. A judicial authority which does not proceed in accordance with this article shall be subjected to the sanctions established by statute. SECTION VI POPULAR ACTION Article 135 The Popular Action proceeds against any act or omission by authorities, individuals or collective entities which violate or threaten to violate collective rights and interests related to state assets, space, security, public health, the environment and other interests of similar nature recognized by this Constitution. Article 136 I. The Popular Action shall be filed during the period in which the violation or threat to the rights and collective interests continues. In order to file this action it is not necessary to exhaust the judicial or administrative remedies which may exist.

II. This action may be filed by any person, on her/his own behalf or in the name of a collective entity, and, obligatorily, by the Public Ministry or Ombudsman when they about these acts in the exercise of their functions. The procedure for the Action of Constitutional Protection shall apply. THIRD CHAPTER STATE OF EMERGENCY Article 137 In case of danger to the security of the State, external threat, internal strife or natural disaster, the President of the State shall have the power to declare a state of emergency in the whole territory or in those parts where it may be necessary. The declaration of the state of emergency may not in any circumstances suspend the guarantees of the rights, or the fundamental rights, the right to due process, the right to information or the rights of the persons deprived of liberty. Article 138 I. The validity of the declaration of state of emergency shall depend on the subsequent approval by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly which shall be sought as soon as circumstances permit, and in any case, within seventy-two hours following the declaration of the state of emergency. The approval of the declaration shall indicate the powers conferred and shall maintain a strict relation and proportion with the case of necessity addressed by the state of emergency. The rights confirmed in the Constitution shall not be suspended by the declaration of the state of emergency. II. Once the state of emergency has ended, no other state of emergency may be declared within the following year unless prior legislative authorization is obtained. Article 139 I. The Executive shall report to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly on the reasons which prompted it to declare the state of emergency, as well as on the use made of the powers conferred by the Constitution and statute. II. Anybody who violates the rights established in this Constitution shall be subject to criminal prosecution for violation of rights. III. States of emergency shall be regulated by statute. Article 140 I. Neither the Plurinational Legislative Assembly nor any other organ or institution, nor association or popular meeting of any type, can grant any organ or person extraordinary powers other than those established in this Constitution.

II. Public power may not be accumulated, nor may any organ or person be granted any kind of supremacy which would leave the rights and guarantees recognized in this Constitution at their mercy. III. Amendments to the Constitution may not be introduced while a state of emergency is still in force. TITLE V NATIONALITY AND CITIZENSHIP CHAPTER I NATIONALITY Article 141 Bolivian nationality is acquired by birth or by naturalization. Bolivians by birth are those persons who are born on Bolivian territory, with the exception of the sons and daughters of the foreign personnel of diplomatic missions; and the persons who were born abroad from a Bolivian mother or Bolivian father. Article 142 Foreigners living legally in Bolivia may acquire the Bolivian nationality if they have resided in the country under the supervision of the State for three years without interruption, expressly affirm their will to obtain the Bolivian nationality and comply with the requirements established by statute. The time of residence shall be reduced to two years in case of foreigners who fit into one of the following categories: 1. Foreigners who have Bolivian spouses, children or surrogate parents. Foreign citizens who acquire the citizenship by marriage with a Bolivian citizen do not lose it due to widowhood or divorce. 2. Foreigners who do military service in Bolivia at the required age and in accordance with the statute. 3. Foreigners who are granted the Bolivian nationality by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly for their service to the country. The time of residence required to obtain the nationality may be modified when there are reciprocal agreements to this effect with other states, preferably Latin-American ones. Article 143

I. Bolivians who get married to foreign citizens shall not lose their nationality of origin. The Bolivian nationality shall not be lost for acquiring a foreign citizenship. II. Foreigners females who acquire the Bolivian nationality shall not be obliged to renounce to their nationality of origin. CHAPTER II CITIZENSHIP Article 144 I. All Bolivians are citizens, and shall exercise their citizenship after reaching the age of 18, regardless of their levels of instruction, occupation or income. II. Citizenship consists in: 1. In take part as a voter or a candidate in the formation and exercise of functions in the organs of the public power, and 2. In the right to exercise public functions without any other prerequisite than aptitude, except those established by statute. III. Citizenship rights are suspended for the causes and in the manner set forth in article 28 of this Constitution. SECOND PART FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION OF THE STATE TITLE I THE LEGISLATIVE ORGAN FIRST CHAPTER COMPOSITION AND POWERS OF THE PLURINATIONAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY Article 145 The Plurinational Legislative Assembly is composed of two chambers, the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Senators, and it is the only [body] with the power to approve and adopt statutes which apply in the entire Bolivian territory. Article 146 I. The Chamber of Deputies is composed of 130 members.

II. In each Department, half of the Deputies are elected in one-member constituencies. The other half are elected in multi-member departmental constituencies from the lists headed by the candidates for President, Vice-President, and Senators of the Republic. III. The Deputies are elected by universal, direct and secret vote: in the one-member constituencies by simple majority, in the multi-member constituencies through the system of representation established by statute. IV. The number of Deputies must reflect the proportion of the votes obtained by each party, citizen group or indigenous people. V. The overall distribution of seats between the departments shall be determined by the Electoral Organ based on the number of inhabitants of each of them, in accordance with the most recent National Census and with the statute. For reasons of equity the statute shall assign a minimum number of seats to the departments with lower population and a lower grade of economic development. If the distribution of seats for any department results uneven, preference shall be given to the one-member seats. VI. The one-member constituencies must have the characteristics of geographical contiguity, affinity and territorial continuity, must not transcend the borders of each department and must be based on criteria of population and territorial extension. The Electoral Organ shall determine the boundaries of the one-member constituencies. VII. The special indigenous originary peasant constituencies shall be governed by the principle of population density in each department. They must not transcend the departmental borders. They shall only be established in rural areas, and in those departments in which the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples constitute a minority population. The Electoral Organ shall determine the special constituencies. These constituencies are part of the total number of deputies. Article 147 I. In the election of the members of the Assembly the equal participation of men and women shall be guaranteed. II. In the election of the members of the Assembly the proportional participation of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples shall be guaranteed. III. The statute shall determine the special indigenous originary peasant constituencies where neither the population density nor the geographic continuity can be considered as relevant criteria. Article 148 I. The Chamber of Senators shall be composed of a total of 36 members.

II. In each department 4 Senators are elected in departmental constituencies by universal, direct and secret vote. III. The allocation of the seats of Senators in each department shall be carried out through the proportional system in accordance with the statute. Article 149 To be a candidate for the Plurinational Legislative Assembly a person must comply with the general conditions for access to public service, have eighteen years of age at the moment of the election, and have resided in the respective constituency without interruption for at least two years immediately prior to the election. Article 150 I. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall have alternate members who shall not receive remuneration except in the cases where they effectively serve as alternates. The statute shall determine the manner of substitution of the Assembly’s members. II. The assembly members shall not discharge any other public function, on penalty of losing their mandate, with the exception of university teaching. III. The resignation of an assembly member shall be final, without the possibility of requesting permissions or temporary substitutions for the purpose of exercising other functions. Article 151 I. The members of the Assembly shall enjoy personal inviolability during the time of their mandate and shall not be liable to criminal prosecution afterwards for the views, communications, representations, requests, parliamentary questions, accusations, proposals, expressions or any act of legislation, information or control which they emit or perform in the discharge of their functions. II. The home, residence or apartment of the assembly members shall be inviolable, and may not be raided in any circumstance. This provision shall also apply to the vehicles of their personal or official use and to their legislative offices. Article 152 The assembly members shall not enjoy immunity. For the duration of their mandate the precautionary measure of preventive arrest in criminal proceedings shall not be applied to them, except in cases where they have been caught in the act (delito flagrante). Article 153 I. The Vice-President shall chair the Plurinational Legislative Assembly.

II. The ordinary sessions of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall be inaugurated on August 6th of each year. III. The ordinary sessions of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall be permanent sessions with two recesses of fifteen days each per year. IV. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly may hold sessions in places other than the one in which it normally convenes in the territory of the State, by decision of the Plenary and by notice of its President. Article 154 During recess, the Commission of the Assembly shall function, in the manner and with the competences determined by the Rules of Procedure of the Chamber of Deputies. In exceptional circumstances the Chamber may be convened by its President or by the President of the State to deliberate on urgent matters. It shall only consider the matters indicated in the convocation. Article 155 The Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall inaugurate its sessions on August 6th in the Capital of Bolivia unless the convocation by its President expressly says otherwise. Article 156 The term of the assembly members lasts five years, with the possibility of immediate reelection for one consecutive term. Article 157 The mandate of an assembly member ends due to death, resignation, revocation of mandate, an enforceable court conviction in penal matters or unjustified failure to discharge the parliamentary functions on six consecutive work days or eleven non-consecutive work days in a year, as determined in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. Article 158 I. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly has the following powers, in addition to those determined by this Constitution and by statute: 1. To autonomously approve and execute its budget; appoint and dismiss administrative personnel, and to deal with everything related to its finances and internal rules. 2. To determine the remuneration of the assembly members which in no circumstances may exceed that of the Vice-President of the State. It is prohibited to receive additional income from [other] remunerated activity.

3. To adopt, interpret, suspend, repeal and modify laws. 4. To elect six of the members of the Plurinational Electoral Organ by a two-thirds vote of the members present. 5. To designate the candidates for membership of the Plurinational Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Agro-Environmental Court and the Council of the Judiciary. 6. To approve the creation of new territorial units and to fix their boundaries, in accordance with the Constitution and the statute. 7. To approve the economic and social development plan presented by the Executive Organ. 8. To approve the statutes in matters of budgeting, public debt, control and auditing of state resources spent on public credit and subsidies for the realization of public works and social needs. 9. To determine the indispensable economic measures of the State in cases of public necessity. 10. To approve the contracting of loans which compromise the general income of the State, and to authorize the contracting of loans by universities. 11. To approve the General Budget of the State presented by the Executive Organ. Once the bill has been introduced, it shall be considered by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly within a period of sixty days. If it fails to be adopted [by the Assembly] within this period, the bill shall be deemed approved. 12. To approve the contracts of public interest related to natural resources and strategic areas, signed by the Executive Organ. 13. To approve the alienation of assets of the public domain of the State. 14. To ratify international treaties signed by the Executive in the forms established by this Constitution. 15. To establish the monetary system. 16. To establish the system of measures. 17. To control and supervise the Organs of the State and public institutions. 18. To question, at the initiative of any of the assembly members, the Ministers of the State individually or collectively, and vote their censure by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Assembly. The censure motion may be introduced in either of the two Chambers. The censure shall entail the dismissal of the Minister.

19. To conduct investigations, within the framework of its supervisory powers, through the commission or the Assembly or commissions specifically elected for that purpose, without prejudice to the control exercised by the competent organs. 20. To supervise and exercise fiscal control over public companies, those of mixed capital and over any entity in which the State participates economically. 21. To authorize the use of military troops, armament and war material outside the territory of the State, and determine the reason and duration of their absence. 22. To exceptionally authorize the entry and temporary transit of foreign military forces, determining the reason and the length of their stay. 23. At the initiative of the Executive Organ, to create or modify taxes which fall within the competence of the central government. However, the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, at the request of one of its members, may ask the Executive Organ to present legislative proposals on the matter. If the Executive Organ does not present the requested bill or a justification for not doing so within a period of twenty days, the representative who had requested the bill, or any other representative, may present her/his own bill for consideration and approval. II. The organization and functions of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by the Rules of Procedure of the Chamber of Deputies. Article 159 The Chamber of Deputies has the following powers, in addition to those determined by this Constitution and by statute: 1. To draft and approve its Rules of Procedure. 2. To examine the credentials granted by the Plurinational Electoral Organ. 3. To elect its executive committee and determine its internal organization and functioning. 4. To impose sanctions on the Deputies, in accordance with its Rules of Procedure, by decision of two-thirds of the members present. 5. To approve and execute its budget; to appoint and dismiss its administrative personnel and to deal with everything related to its finances and internal rules. 6. To initiate the approval of the General Budget of the State. 7. To initiate the approval of the economic and social development plan presented by the Executive Organ.

8. To initiate the approval or modification of laws on taxes, public credit or subsidies. 9. To initiate the approval of the contracting of loans which compromise the general income of the State, and to authorize the contracting of loans by universities. 10. To approve in each legislature the [size of] the armed forces that need to be maintained during peace time. 11. To impeach, before the Chamber of Senators, the members of the Plurinational Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court and the Administrative Control of Justice for crimes committed in the exercise of their functions. 12. To propose lists of candidates to the President of the State for the appointment of the presidents of the economic and social entities, and for other positions in which the State participates in, by absolute majority in accordance with the Constitution. 13. To designate the candidates for the Administrative Control of Justice and send the names of the designated individuals to the Plurinational Electoral Organ so that it can proceed to the organization, solely and exclusively, of the electoral process. Article 160 The Chamber of Senators has the following powers, in addition to those determined by this Constitution and by statute: 1. To draft and approve its Rules of Procedure. 2. To examine the credentials granted by the Plurinational Electoral Organ. 3. To elect its executive committee and determine its internal organization and functioning. 4. To impose sanctions on the Senators, in accordance with its Rules of Procedure, by decision of a two-thirds majority of the members present. 5. To approve and execute its budget; to appoint and dismiss its administrative personnel and to deal with everything related to its finances and internal rules. 6. To be the sole instance to judge the members of the Plurinational Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Agro-Environmental Court and the Central Administration of Justice for crimes committed in the exercise of their functions, with sentences approved by at least two thirds of the members present, in accordance with the statute. 7. To bestow public honors on those who deserve them for eminent services to the State.

8. To ratify the promotions proposed by the Executive Organ for General of the Army, of the Air Force, of the Division and Brigade; for Admiral, Vice-Admiral, Rear-Admiral, and General of the Bolivian Police. 9. To approve or reject the appointments of ambassadors and plenipotentiary Ministers proposed by the President of the State. Article 161 The Chambers shall meet in Plurinational Legislative Assembly to conduct the following functions, in addition to those established in the Constitution: 1. To inaugurate and close its sessions. 2. To receive the oath of the President and the Vice-President of the State. 3. To accept or reject the resignation of the President and of the Vice-President of the State. 4. To consider the statutes vetoed by the Executive Organ. 5. To consider bills which, after having been approved in the Chamber of origin, were not approved in the reviewing Chamber. 6. To approve states of emergency. 7. To authorize the impeachment of the President or Vice-President of the State. 8. To appoint the General Prosecutor of the State and the Ombudsman. SECOND CHAPTER LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE Article 162 I. The right to initiate legislation which must be considered by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly belongs to: 1. The citizens. 2. The assembly members in their respective chamber. 3. The Executive Organ. 4. The Supreme Court, in case of initiatives related to administration of justice. 5. The autonomous governments of the territorial entities.

II. The statutes and the rules of procedure of each Chamber shall regulate in detail the procedures and requirements concerning the exercise of the right to initiate legislation. Article 163 The legislative procedure shall be conducted in the following manner: 1. The bill presented by an assembly member of one of the Chambers initiates the legislative procedure in that Chamber, which shall submit it to the competent commission or commissions for consideration and initial approval. 2. The bill presented by another initiative shall be sent to the Chamber of Deputies, which shall submit it to the commission or the commissions. 3. The legislative initiatives in matters of decentralization, autonomies and territorial regulation shall be introduced in the Chamber of Senators. 4. When the competent commission or commissions have adopted their report on the bill, it shall be submitted to consideration by the plenary of the Chamber, where it shall be discussed and approved in full and in detail. The approval shall require the absolute majority of the members present. 5. The bill approved by the Chamber of origin shall be submitted to the reviewing Chamber for consideration. If the reviewing Chamber gives its approval, it shall be sent to the Executive Organ for its promulgation. 6. If the reviewing Chamber amends or modifies the bill, it shall be considered approved if the Chamber of origin accepts the amendments or modifications by vote of the absolute majority of its members present. In case of non-acceptance, the two Chambers shall meet at the request of the Chamber of origin within the following twenty days to debate the bill. The [final] decision shall be taken by the Plenary of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly with the absolute majority of its members present. 7. In case thirty days pass without a pronouncement of the reviewing Chamber on the bill, the bill shall be considered by the Plenary of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. 8. The approved bill, once it has been sanctioned, shall be submitted to the Executive Organ for its promulgation as law. 9. A bill that was rejected may be proposed again during the following Legislature. 10. The President of the State may make observations on the statute approved by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly and submitted to the Executive Organ within ten workdays followings its reception. The observations of the Executive Organ shall be directed to the Assembly. If the latter is in recess, the President of the State shall send his/ her observations to the Commission of the Assembly.

11. If the Plurinational Legislative Assembly considers the observations of the President to be well-founded, it shall modify the statute in accordance with them and shall return it to Executive Organ for its promulgation. If it considers the observations to be unfounded, the statute shall be promulgated by the President of the Assembly. The decisions of the Assembly shall be taken by the absolute majority of the members present. 12. If the President of the State does not make observations on the statute within the prescribed period, it shall be promulgated by him/her. The statutes not promulgated by the Executive Organ within the periods prescribed by the preceding numerals shall be promulgated by President of the Assembly. Article 164 The statute shall be published immediately in the Official Gazette. It shall have binding effect from the day of its publication, unless another date for its entry into force is specified therein. TITLE III THE EXECUTIVE ORGAN FIRST CHAPTER COMPOSITION AND COMPETENCES OF THE EXECUTIVE ORGAN SECTION I GENERAL PROVISION Article 165 I. The Executive Organ is composed of the President of the State, the Vice-President of the State, and the Ministers of the State. II. The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible for the decisions adopted by it. SECTION II PRESIDENCY AND VICE-PRESIDENCY OF THE STATE Article 166 I. The President and the Vice-President of the State shall be elected by universal, mandatory, direct, free and secret suffrage. The candidates who have received fifty percent plus one of the valid votes cast or, alternatively, who have received at least forty percent of the valid votes cast and are at least ten percent ahead of the candidates in second place, shall be proclaimed President and Vice-President.

II. In case none of the candidacies meet these conditions, a second round of voting shall take place between the two candidacies which have received the most votes, within a period of sixty days following the first ballot. The candidates who receive the majority of votes shall be proclaimed President and Vice-President of the State. Article 167 To be eligible as candidate for President or Vice-President of the State, the prospective candidate must satisfy the general conditions for entering public service, be thirty years of age on the day of the election, and have resided in the country for a minimum of five years without interruption immediately prior to the election. Article 168 The term of office of the President and Vice-President of the State is five years; they may be reelected for a consecutive term only once. Article 169 I. In case of impediment or definitive absence of the President, she/he shall be replaced by the Vice-President and, in the absence of the latter, by the male or female President of the Senate, and in his or her absence by the President of the Chamber of Deputies. In this last case, new elections shall be called within ninety days at the latest. II. In case of temporary absence, the Presidency of the State shall be assumed by the VicePresident, for a period not exceeding ninety days. Article 170 The term of the President of the State shall end due to death; to resignation presented to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly; to definitive absence or impediment; to an enforceable court conviction in a penal case; to a revocation of the mandate. Article 171 In case of revocation of mandate, the President of the State shall immediately cease to exercise her/his functions, with the Vice-President assuming the Presidency and immediately calling for elections to the Presidency of the State, which shall take place within a maximum period of ninety days. Article 172 The President of the State shall have the following powers, in addition to those determined by this Constitution and by statute: 1. To execute and to enforce the Constitution and the statutes.

2. To maintain and to preserve the unity of the Bolivian State. 3. To propose and to direct the policies of the government and the State. 4. To direct the public administration and to coordinate the actions of the Ministers of the State. 5. To direct foreign policy; to sign international treaties; to appoint diplomatic and consular staff in accordance with the statute; and to accredit foreign officials in general. 6. To request the convening of an extraordinary session of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. 7. To promulgate the statutes approved by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. 8. To issue supreme decrees and resolutions. 9. To manage the income of the State and decide on its investment through the Ministry of the relevant field, in accordance with the statutes and in strict observance of the General Budget of the State. 10. To present the economic and social development plan to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. 11. To present to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, during the first thirty days of session, the draft of the General Budget of the State for the following fiscal year and propose, in the course of its execution, the modifications considered necessary. The report on public expenses in accordance with the budget shall be presented annually. 12. To present annually to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, during its first session, the written report on the performance and situation of the Public Administration over the administrative year, accompanied by the ministerial reports. 13. To enforce the judgments of the courts. 14. To grant amnesty or pardon, with the approval of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. 15. To appoint, from the lists of candidates proposed by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, the Comptroller General of the State, the President of the Central Bank of Bolivia, the highest authority of the Banks and Financial Entities Regulation Organ, and the Presidents of the social and economic function entities with participation of the State. 16. To preserve the security and defense of the State. 17. To appoint and dismiss the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and the Commanders of the Army, the Air Force and the Navy.

18. To appoint and dismiss the General Commander of the Bolivian Police. 19. To propose to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly the promotions to General of the Army, of the Air Force, of the Division and the Brigade; to Admiral, Vice-Admiral, and RearAdmiral, and to General of the Police, in accordance with the reports on their services and promotions. 20. To establish and license ports. 21. To appoint her/his representatives to the Electoral Organ. 22. To appoint the Ministers of the State, respecting the [principles of] plurinationality and gender equity in the composition of the ministerial cabinet. 23. To appoint the Attorney General of the State. 24. To submit bills of economic urgency to the consideration by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, which has to discuss them as a matter of priority. 25. To exercise the function of Captain General (Capitana, Capitán General) of the Armed Forces, and to employ them for the defense of the State, its independence and the integrity of the [Bolivian] territory. 26. To declare a state of emergency. 27. To exercise the highest authority in the Agrarian Reform Service of Bolivia and to grant enforceable titles for the distribution and redistribution of land. Article 173 The President of the State may be absent from the Bolivian territory on official missions without the authorization of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly for a maximum period of up to ten days. Article 174 The Vice-President of the State has the following powers, in addition to those determined by this Constitution and by statute: 1. To assume the Presidency of the State in the cases established in this Constitution. 2. To coordinate the relations among the Executive Organ, the Plurinational Legislative Assembly and the autonomous governments. 3. To take part in the meetings of the Council of Ministers.

4. To contribute with the President of the State to the direction of the general policy of the Government. 5. To participate jointly with the President of the State in the formulation of foreign policy and in the accomplishment of diplomatic missions. SECTION III MINISTRIES OF STATE Article 175 I. The Ministers of State are public servants and have the following powers, in addition to those established in this Constitution and by statute: 1. To propose and contribute to the formulation of general policies of Government. 2. To propose and direct the governmental policies in their respective field. 3. To manage the Public Administration of their sector. 4. To issue administrative regulations within their field of competence. 5. To propose drafts of supreme decrees and sign them with the President of the State. 6. To resolve in last instance any administrative matter that falls within the competence of their Ministry. 7. To present to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly any requested reports. 8. To coordinate with the other Ministries the planning and execution of the government policies. II. The female Ministers of State are responsible for the administrative acts adopted in their respective areas. Article 176 To be appointed as a Minister of State a person must satisfy the general conditions for entering public service; be twenty five years of age on the day of nomination; not be a member of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly; not be a director, shareholder or co-owner of a financial entity or company that has a contractual relationship or a conflict of interest with the State; not be the spouse, a blood relative or related by marriage up to the second degree to the acting President or Vice President of the State. Article 177

Nobody who, either directly or as the legal representative of a legal entity, has contracts whose execution is pending or enforceable debts with the State, may be appointed Minister of State. TITLE III THE JUDICIAL ORGAN AND THE PLURINATIONAL CONSTITUTIONAL COURT FIRST CHAPTER GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 178 I. The power to administer justice emanates from the Bolivian people and is based on the principles of independence, impartiality, legal certainty, publicity, probity, promptness, gratuity, legal pluralism, interculturality, equity, service to society, citizen participation, social harmony and respect for rights. II. The guarantees of judicial independence are: 1. The employment of the judges in accordance with the judicial career. 2. The budgetary autonomy of the judicial organs. Article 179 I. The judicial function is one. The ordinary jurisdiction is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice, the departmental courts of justice, the sentencing courts and the judges; the agroenvironmental jurisdiction is exercised by the Agro-Environmental Court and its judges; and the indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction is exercised by its own authorities; there shall be specialized jurisdictions regulated by statute. II. The ordinary jurisdiction and the indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction shall have the same hierarchical structure. III. Constitutional justice is administered by the Plurinational Constitutional Court. IV. The Council of the Judiciary is part of the Judicial Organ. SECOND CHAPTER ORDINARY JURISDICTION Article 180 I. The ordinary jurisdiction is based on the procedural principles of gratuity, publicity, transparency, oral procedure, promptness, probity, honesty, legality, efficacy, efficiency, accessibility, immediacy, material truth, due process, and equality of the parties before the judge.

II. The principle of reviewability of judicial processes is guaranteed. III. The ordinary jurisdiction shall not recognize exemptions, privileges or extraordinary courts. The military jurisdiction shall try the crimes of a military nature regulated by statute. SECTION I THE SUPREME COURT OF JUSTICE Article 181 The Supreme Court of Justice is the highest court of the ordinary jurisdiction. It is composed of magistrates. It is internally organized into specialized chambers. Its composition and organization will be determined by statute. Article 182 I. The Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be elected through universal suffrage. II. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall designate by two thirds of its members present the candidates for each department and shall transmit the names of those selected to the electoral organ so that it may proceed, solely and exclusively, with the organization of the electoral process. III. Nor the candidates nor any other person may wage electoral campaigns in favor of the candidacies, on penalty of disqualification. The Electoral Organ is solely responsible for disseminating information on the merits of the candidates. IV. The magistrates may not be members of political organizations. V. The candidate who obtains a simple majority of the votes shall be elected. The President of the State shall administer the oath of office. VI. To be eligible as Magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice the candidate must satisfy the general requirements for public servants: she/he must be thirty years of age, must have a law degree, must have performed judicial functions, practiced as a lawyer or have been a university professor, with honesty and integrity, for eight years and not have been sanctioned with dismissal by the Council of the Judiciary. The determination of merits shall take into account the performance [of the candidate] as an originary authority under its system of justice. VII. The system of prohibitions and incompatibilities applicable to the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be the same as the one which applies to public servants. Article 183 I. The Magistrates may not be re-elected. Their term of office shall be six years.

II. The Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall stop to exercise their functions due to the end of their term of office, an enforceable sentence resulting from disciplinary proceedings, resignation, death and the other causes provided for by statute. Article 184 The Supreme Court shall have the following powers, in addition to those established by statute: 1. To act as a court of cassation and to rule on applications for annulment in the cases expressly determined by statute. 2. To resolve conflicts of jurisdiction arising between the departmental courts of justice. 3. To sit, hear and decide as the sole instance in extradition processes. 4. To try, as a collegiate court sitting in plenary and as court of first and last instance, the President of the State or the Vice-President of the State for crimes committed in the exercise of their functions. The trial shall take place following the authorization of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, by decision of at least two thirds of its members present, and on the basis of the charges presented by the Prosecutor General of the State who shall formulate the indictment if she/he believes that the investigation has shown a sufficient basis for an impeachment trial. The process shall be oral, public, continuous and uninterrupted. A statute shall determine the procedure. 5. To appoint, from the lists presented by the Council of the Judiciary, the voting members of the departmental courts of justice. 6. To prepare bills on judicial matters and present them to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. 7. To hear and determine extraordinary appeals. Article 185 The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall dedicate themselves exclusively to their functions. THIRD CHAPTER AGRO-ENVIRONMENTAL JURISDICTION Article 186 The Agro-Environmental Court is the highest specialized court of the agro-environmental jurisdiction. It is governed specifically by the principles of social utility, integrality, immediacy, sustainability and interculturality.

Article 187 To the election of Magistrates of the Agro-Environmental Court the same requirements shall apply as to the members of the Supreme Court of Justice; additionally the candidates must be specialized in the area and have practiced, aptly, ethically and honestly, as an agrarian judge, a member of a liberal profession or a university professor in the field for a period of eights years. In the designation process the plural composition shall be respected, by taking into account criteria of plurinationality. Article 188 I. The Magistrates of the Agro-Environmental Court shall be elected by universal suffrage, in accordance with the procedure, mechanisms and formalities for the members of the Supreme Court of Justice. II. The system of prohibitions and incompatibilities applicable to the Magistrates of the AgroEnvironmental Court shall be the same as for public servants. III. The rules on the term of office, the conditions of service and the termination of the functions of the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall also apply to the members of the AgroEnvironmental Court. Article 189 The Agro-Environmental Court shall have the following powers, in addition to those established by statute: 1. To determine appeals for cassation and annulment in erga-omnes proceedings concerning agrarian, forestry, environmental, water matters and the rights of use and exploitation of natural renewable, freshwater, and forest resources, and biodiversity; applications regarding practices that endanger the flora, the fauna, the water and the environment; and applications regarding practices that endanger the ecological system and the conservation of species or animals. 2. To hear and determine as court of first and last instance the applications for nullification and annulment of enforceable titles. 3. To hear and determine as court of first and last instance administrative law disputes resulting from contracts, negotiations, authorizations, grants, distributions and redistributions of rights of use of natural renewable resources, and from the other administrative acts and resolutions. 4. To organize the agro-environmental courts. FOURTH CHAPTER INDIGENOUS ORIGINARY PEASANT JURISDICTION

Article 190 I. The indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples shall exercise their jurisdictional functions and competences through their authorities, and shall apply their own principles, cultural values, norms and procedures. II. The indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction respects the right to life, the right to defense and the rest of the rights and guarantees established in this Constitution. Article 191 I. The indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction is based on the specific bond linking the individuals who are members of the corresponding indigenous originary peasant nation or people to each other. II. The indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction is exercised in accordance with the following criteria of personal, subject matter and territorial jurisdiction: 1. The members of the indigenous originary peasant nation or people are subject to this jurisdiction, whether acting as plaintiffs or defendants, claimants or accusers, denounced or accused, applicants or respondents. 2. This jurisdiction determines the indigenous originary peasant matters in accordance with the provisions of a Law on Jurisdictional Demarcation. 3. This jurisdiction applies to the legal relations and factual situations which occur or produce effects within the jurisdiction of the indigenous originary peasant nation or people. Article 192 I. Every public authority or person shall observe the decisions of the indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction. II. The authorities of the indigenous originary farmer jurisdiction may request the support of the competent organs of the State in order to enforce their decisions. III. The State shall promote and strengthen the indigenous originary peasant justice. The Act on Jurisdictional Demarcation shall determine the mechanisms of coordination and cooperation among the indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction, the ordinary jurisdiction and the agroenvironmental jurisdiction, and with all the other the constitutionally recognized jurisdictions. FIFTH CHAPTER THE COUNCIL OF THE JUDICIARY Article 193

I. The Council of the Judiciary is the body responsible for the disciplinary regime of the ordinary, agro-environmental and specialized jurisdictions; the control and auditing of their administrative and financial management; and the formulation of administrative policies. The Council of the Judiciary shall be governed by the principle of citizen participation. II. Its composition, structure and functions shall be determined by statute. Article 194 I. The members of the Council of the Judiciary shall be elected by universal suffrage from among the candidates proposed by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. The organization and execution of the electoral process shall be the responsibility of the Plurinational Electoral Organ. II. To qualify for membership in the Judiciary Council of Justice the candidates, in addition to satisfying the general conditions for entering public service, must be thirty years of age, be knowledgeable in their field of competence and have performed their duties ethically and honestly. III. The members of the Judiciary Council of Justice shall stay in their functions for six years and may not be re-elected. Article 195 The Judiciary Council of Justice shall have the following powers, in addition to those established by the Constitution and by statute: 1. To push for the revocation of the mandate of the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the Agro-Environmental Court who commit serious faults in the exercise of their functions, as determined by statute. 2. To exercise the disciplinary control over the voting members of the courts, the judges, and the supporting and administrative staff of the Judicial Organ. The exercise of this power shall comprehend the possibility of terminating their functions for serious disciplinary infractions, expressly established by statute. 3. To control and audit the financial and economic administration and all assets of the Judicial Organ. 4. To evaluate the performance of the administrators of justice, and of the supporting staff. 5. To conduct legal and financial management audits. 6. To carry out technical and statistical studies. 7. To designate the candidates for the establishment of the departmental courts of justice who shall be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice.

8. To appoint, by means of a competition based on merits and exams of competence, the trial judges and instruction judges. 9. To appoint its administrative personnel. SIXTH CHAPTER THE PLURINATIONAL CONSTITUTIONAL COURT Article 196 I. The Plurinational Constitutional Court watches over the supremacy of the Constitution, exercises constitutional review, and ensures respect for and enforcement of the constitutional rights and guarantees. II. In its interpretative function, the Plurinational Constitutional Court shall have regard, as a preferential criterion of interpretation, to the will of the constituent power, in accordance with its documents, minutes and resolutions, as well as to the wording of the constitutional text. Article 197 I. The Plurinational Constitutional Court shall consist of Magistrates elected in accordance with the principle of plurinationality, with representation from the ordinary jurisdiction and the indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction. II. The substitute Magistrates of the Plurinational Constitutional Court shall not receive remuneration, and shall assume functions only in the case of absence of the ordinary member, or for other reasons determined by statute. III. The composition, organization and functioning of the Plurinational Constitutional Court shall be regulated by statute. Article 198 The Magistrates of the Plurinational Constitutional Court shall be elected through universal suffrage, in accordance with the procedure, mechanism and formalities which apply to the members of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 199 I. To be eligible as Magistrate of the Plurinational Constitutional Court the candidate must, in addition to satisfying the general requirements for entering public service, be thirty five years of age and shown specialization or recognized experience of at least eight years in the disciplines of Constitutional, Administrative or Human Rights Law. For the consideration of the merits the practice as indigenous originary peasant authority under its system of justice shall be taken into account.

II. The candidates for the Plurinational Constitutional Court shall be proposed by organizations of civil society and of the indigenous originary peasant nations and people. Article 200 The rules on the term of office, the conditions of service and the termination of their functions established for Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall equally apply to the members of the Plurinational Constitutional Court. Article 201 The Magistrates of the Plurinational Constitutional Court shall be governed by the same system of prohibitions and incompatibilities that applies to public servants. Article 202 The Plurinational Constitutional Court has the power, in addition the powers established by the Constitution and by statute, to hear and determine the following cases: 1. As first and last instance, the purely legal issues related to the unconstitutionality of statutes, Autonomy Statutes, Institutional Charters, decrees and all kind of non-judicial ordinances and resolutions. If the application has an abstract character, it may only be presented by the President of the Republic, the Senators, Deputies, legislators, and highest executive authorities of the autonomous territorial entities. 2. The conflicts of jurisdiction and competences between the organs of the public power. 3. The conflicts of jurisdiction between the plurinational government and the autonomous and decentralized territorial entities, and among the latter. 4. The appeals against fees, taxes, tariffs, patents, rights or contributions established, modified or suppressed in violation of the provisions of this Constitution. 5. The appeals against the resolutions of the Legislative Organ which affect one or several rights, regardless of the persons affected. 6. The review of the actions in Defense of Liberty, of Constitutional Protection, of Protection of Privacy, the Popular Action and the Action of Compliance. The review shall not prevent the immediate and mandatory execution of the resolution that entertains the application. 7. The requests for an opinion submitted by the President of the Republic, the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, the Supreme Court of Justice or the Agro-Environmental Court on the constitutionality of draft legislation. The decision of the Constitutional Court is binding.

8. The requests for an opinion submitted by the indigenous originary peasant authorities on the application of their legal norms in a specific case. The decision of the Constitutional Court is binding. 9. The prior control of constitutionality regarding the ratification of international treaties. 10. The constitutionality of the procedure of amending the Constitution. 11. The conflicts of jurisdiction between the indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction and the ordinary and agro-environmental jurisdictions. 12. The direct applications for annulment. Article 203 The decisions and sentences of the Plurinational Constitutional Court are binding and of mandatory execution, and no subsequent ordinary appeal against them is admissible. Article 204 A statute shall determine the procedures that shall apply before the Plurinational Constitutional Court. TITLE IV THE ELECTORAL ORGAN FIRST CHAPTER THE PLURINATIONAL ELECTORAL ORGAN Article 205 I. The Plurinational Electoral Organ is composed of: 1. The Supreme Electoral Court 2. The Departmental Electoral Courts 3. The Electoral Courts 4. The Suffrage Table Jurors 5. The Electoral Notaries II. The jurisdiction, competencies and attributions of the Electoral Organ and its different levels are defined in this Constitution and by statute.

Article 206 I. The Supreme Electoral Court is the highest level of the Electoral Organ with national jurisdiction. II. The Supreme Electoral Court is composed of seven members who exercise their functions during six years without the possibility of re-election; at least two of them shall be of indigenous originary peasant origin. III. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall elect, with two thirds of its members present, six of the members of the Plurinational Electoral Organ. The President of the State shall appoint one of its members. IV. The election of the members of the Plurinational Electoral Organ shall require a prior public announcement and the evaluation of their capabilities and merits through a competitive public selection process. V. The Departmental Legislative Assemblies or Departmental Councils shall establish by two thirds of its members present a list of three candidates for each of the voting members of the Departmental Electoral Courts. From these lists with three candidates the Chamber of Deputies shall elect, by two thirds of its members present, the members of the Departmental Electoral Courts, making sure that at least one of its members belongs to an indigenous originary peasant nation or people from the Department. Article 207 To be appointed a Voting Member of the Supreme and Departmental Electoral Courts it is necessary to satisfy the general requirements for entering public service, to be thirty years of age at the time of the appointment and to have an academic training. Article 208 I. The Supreme Electoral Court is responsible for organizing, managing and executing the electoral processes and proclaiming their results. II. The Court shall guarantee that the suffrage is exercised effectively, in accordance with article 26 of this Constitution. III. It is the function of the Supreme Electoral Court to organize and administer the Civil Registry and the Electoral Roll. SECOND CHAPTER POLITICAL REPRESENTATION Article 209

The candidates for elected public office, with the exception of the elective offices in the Judicial Organ and the Plurinational Constitutional Court, shall be proposed through the organizations of indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, citizens groups and political parties, in equality of conditions and in accordance with the statute. Article 210 I. The organization and functioning of the organizations of indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, citizens groups and political parties must be democratic. II. The internal election of the leaders and candidates of the citizens groups and political parties shall be regulated and supervised by the Plurinational Electoral Organ, which shall guarantee equal participation of men and women. III. The organizations of indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples may elect their candidates in accordance with their own norms of communitarian democracy. Article 211 I. The indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples may elect their political representatives in the respective instances in accordance with their own Election procedures. II. The Electoral Organ shall supervise that the election of the authorities, representatives and candidates of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples in accordance with their own rules and procedures takes place in strict compliance with the norms of those nations and peoples. Article 212 No candidate may run at the same time for more than one elective office or in more than one electoral district. TITLE V FUNCTIONS OF CONTROL, DEFENSE OF SOCIETY AND DEFENSE OF THE STATE FIRST CHAPTER CONTROL FUNCTION SECTION I THE OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE STATE Article 213 I. The Office of Comptroller General of the State is the technical institution that exercises the control function with regard to the administration of the public entities and the entities in which

the State holds a share or economic interest. The Office of Comptroller General is authorized to investigate indications of administrative, executive, civil and criminal responsibility; it has functional, financial, administrative and organizational autonomy. II. Its organization, function and powers, which must be based in the principles of legality, transparency, efficacy, efficiency, economy, equity, opportunity and objectivity, shall be determined by statute. Article 214 The Comptroller General of the State shall be appointed by the vote of two thirds of the members present of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. The election shall require a public prior announcement, and the evaluation of the professional capacity and performance through a competitive public selection process. Article 215 To be appointed as Comptroller General of the State it is necessary to meet the general requirements for entering public service; to be at least thirty years old at the time of appointment; to have obtained a professional degree in an area related to the office and to have practiced the profession for a minimum of eight years; to have shown personal and ethical integrity, demonstrated under public scrutiny. Article 216 The Comptroller General of the State shall exercise her/his functions for a period of six years, without possibility of a new appointment. Article 217 I. The Office of Comptroller General of the State shall be responsible for the supervision and the ex-post control of the public entities and of the entities in which the State holds a share or economic interest. The supervision and control shall also be carried out over the acquisition, management and transfer of assets and services which are of strategic importance or the collective interest. II. The Office of Comptroller General of the State shall present each year a report on its supervision of the public sector to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. SECOND CHAPTER DEFENSE OF SOCIETY FUNCTION SECTION I THE OMBUDSMAN OFFICE Article 218

I. The Ombudsman Office shall oversee the enforcement, promotion, publicizing and implementation of individual as well as collective human rights that are defined in the Constitution, the statutes and the international instruments. The function of the Ombudsman Office shall extend to the administrative activities of the entire public sector and to the activities of private institutions that provide public services. II. The Ombudsman Office shall also promote the defense of the rights of the indigenous originary peasant nations and people, of the urban and intercultural communities, and of the Bolivians living are abroad. III. The Ombudsman Office is an institution with functional, financial and administrative autonomy, within the framework of the law. Its functioning shall be governed by the principles of gratuity, accessibility, swiftness and solidarity. While exercising its functions it does not receive instructions from the organs of the State. Article 219 I. The Ombudsman Office shall be headed by an Ombudswoman or an Ombudsman who shall exercise her/his functions for a period of six years, without the possibility of reappointment. II. The Ombudswoman or Ombudsman shall not be subject to prosecution, detention, accusation or trial for acts carried in the exercise of her/his functions. Article 220 The Ombudswoman or Ombudsman shall be appointed by at least two thirds of the members present of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. The appointment shall require a public prior announcement and the evaluation of the professional capacity and performance through a competitive public selection process, among people with a recognized record of defending human rights. Article 221 To be appointed Ombudswoman or Ombudsman it is necessary to satisfy the general requirements for entering public service; to be at least thirty years old at the time of appointment and to have shown personal integrity and ethics, demonstrated under public scrutiny. Article 222 The powers of the Ombudsman Office, in addition to those defined by the Constitution and by statute, are the following: 1. To file actions of Unconstitutionality, in Defense of Liberty, of Constitutional Protection, of Protection of Privacy, Popular actions, actions for Compliance and applications for annulment, without need of special authorization.

2. To propose bills and amendments to laws, decrees and non-judicial resolutions within the field of its competence. 3. To investigate, ex officio or at the request of a party, the acts or omissions that imply violations of the individual and collective rights which are defined in the Constitution, the statutes and the international instruments, and to request the Public Ministry to initiate the corresponding legal actions. 4. To request information from the authorities and public servants with regard to the investigations that the Ombudsman Office is conducting, to which no objection is admissible. 5. To formulate recommendations, reminders of legal duties, and suggestions for the immediate adoption of corrective measures to all organs and institutions of the State, and to censure publicly acts or behavior contrary to these recommendations. 6. To have free access to detention and prison centers, to which no objection is admissible. 7. To exercise its functions without interruption of any kind, even in the case of a declaration of a state of emergency. 8. To assist the persons who request its services promptly and without discrimination. 9. To draft the rules of procedure needed for the exercise of its functions. Article 223 The authorities and public servants have the obligation of providing the Ombudsman Office with the information which it requests in relation to the exercise of its functions. In case its request is not duly acted upon, the Office shall file the appropriate actions against the authority, which shall be tried and dismissed if the noncompliance is proved. Article 224 Each year, the Ombudswoman or Ombudsman shall report to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly and to the Institution of Social Control on the situation of human rights in the country and the management of its administration. The Ombudswoman or Ombudsman may be summoned at any moment by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly or by the Institution of Social Control, in order to provide a report on the exercise of its functions. SECTION II THE PUBLIC MINISTRY Article 225

I. The Public Ministry shall defend the principle of legality and the general interests of society and shall initiate public criminal proceedings. The Public Ministry has functional, administrative and financial autonomy. II. The Public Ministry shall exercise its functions in accordance with the principles of legality, opportunity, objectivity, responsibility, autonomy, unity and hierarchy. Article 226 I. The Prosecutor General of the State is the highest hierarchal authority of the Public Ministry and represents the institution. II. The Public Ministry shall have departmental prosecutors, prosecutors for specific matters and other prosecutors established by statute. Article 227 I. The Prosecutor General of the State shall be appointed by the vote of two thirds of the members present of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. The appointment shall require a public prior announcement and the evaluation of the professional capacity and performance through a competitive public selection process. II. The Prosecutor General of the State shall satisfy the general requirements for public servants, as well as the specific ones established for Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 228 The Prosecutor General of the State shall exercise her/his functions for six years, without possibility of reappointment. THIRD CHAPTER DEFENSE OF THE STATE FUNCTION SECTION I THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S OFFICE Article 229 The Attorney General’s Office is the public law enforcement institution which has the power of promoting, defending, and safeguarding the interests of the State. Its organization and structure shall be determined by statute. Article 230 I. The Attorney General’s Office is composed of the Attorney General as its head and other public servants as determined by statute.

II. The appointment of the Attorney General of the State shall be the prerogative of the President of the State. The appointed person must satisfy the requirements established for the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. III. The designation may be vetoed by decision of at least two thirds of the members present of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly within a period not exceeding sixty calendar days from the designation. The veto shall have the effect of terminating the functions of the designated person. Article 231 The Attorney General’s Office has the following powers, in addition to those determined by the Constitution and by statute: 1. To defend the interests of the State before and outside the courts by assuming its legal representation and intervening as government representative with full rights in all judicial and administrative proceedings, within the framework of the Constitution and the statutes. 2. To file ordinary appeals and actions in defense of the interests of the State. 3. To evaluate and oversee the conduct of legal proceedings which are brought by the legal units of the Public Administration before the judicial or administrative authorities. In the case of negligent action, it must push for the initiation of the appropriate actions. 4. To request from the public servants and other individuals the information considered necessary for the exercise of its authority. This information may not be denied for any reason or cause; a statute shall establish the appropriate sanctions. 5. To request from the highest executive authority of the public entities the impeachment of public servants who, by their negligent or corrupt conduct, cause financial damage to the State. 6. To take up the reasoned complaints and claims submitted by citizens and entities which form part of the Institution of Social Control, in the cases in which the interests of the State are violated. 7. To request the Prosecutor General of the State to institute the appropriate judicial proceedings for crimes committed against the financial interests of the States about which it has learned. 8. To present bills on matters related to its competence. FOURTH CHAPTER PUBLIC SERVANTS Article 232

The Public Administration is governed by the principles of legitimacy, legality, publicity, social commitment and interest, ethics, transparency, equality, competence, efficiency, quality, friendliness, honesty, responsibility and results. Article 233 Public Servants are the persons who perform public functions. Public servants form part of the administrative career staff, except for those who hold elective office or exercise functions subject to designation or free appointment. Article 234 In order to be admitted to the discharge of public functions it is necessary: 1. To have the Bolivian nationality. 2. To be of legal age. 3. To have completed military service. 4. Not to be registered as facing enforceable charges or convictions in penal matters which have yet to be served. 5. Not to fall under the prohibitions and incompatibilities established in the Constitution. 6. To be registered in the voting roll. 7. To speak at least two official languages of the country. Article 235 The obligations of the public servants are: 1. To observe the Constitution and the law. 2. To meet their responsibilities, in accordance with the principles of public service. 3. To provide a sworn declaration of their assets and income, before, during and after the exercise of their public functions. 4. To render accounts how they have met the economic, political, technical and administrative responsibilities in the exercise of their public functions. 5. To respect and to protect the assets of the State, and to abstain from using them for electoral purposes or any other purpose alien to the public function.

Article 236 The following prohibitions apply to the exercise of public functions: I. To have more than one full-time remunerated public job at any given time. II. To act when the interests of the public servant conflict with those of the entity she/he serves, and to enter into contracts or conduct business with the Public Administration, directly, indirectly or on behalf of a third party. III. To appoint a person to a public function to whom the public servant is related by blood up to the fourth degree or by marriage to the second degree. Article 237 I. The exercise of the public function is subject to the following obligations: 1. To register and guard the documents belonging to the public administration, without the possibility of removing or destroying them. A statute shall regulate how the archives are run and the conditions for the destruction of public records. 2. To maintain the confidentiality of classified information, which may not be disclosed even after the termination of the public functions. The procedure for categorizing classified information shall be determined by statute. II. A statute shall determine the sanctions for violations of these obligations. Article 238 The persons falling under one or several of the following grounds for ineligibility may not hold elective public office: 1. Those who have been or are directors of enterprises or companies that have contracts or agreements with the State, and who have not resigned from their post at least three months prior to the day of the election. 2. Those who have been directors of foreign transnational enterprises that have contracts or agreements with the State, and who have not resigned from their post at least five years prior to the day of the election. 3. Those who hold elected positions, or positions subject to designation or free appointment, and who have not resigned from their position at least three months prior to the date of the election, with the exception of the President or Vice-President of the Republic. 4. The members of the Armed Forces and the Bolivian Police on active service who have not resigned at least three months prior to the date of the election.

5. The ministers of any religious cult who have not resigned at least three months prior to the date of the election. Article 239 The following activities are incompatible with the exercise of a public function: 1. The acquisition or leasing of public assets on behalf of the public servant or of third persons. 2. The signing of administrative contracts or the obtaining of any other kind of personal benefit from the State. 3. Professional practice as employees, representatives, advisors, or managers of entities, companies or enterprises that have a contractual relationship with the State. Article 240 I. Any person who holds elected office, except in the Judicial Organ, may have her/his mandate revoked in accordance with the statute. II. The revocation of the mandate may be requested when at least half of the term of office has been completed. The revocation of the mandate may not take place during the last year of the term in office. III. The revocation referendum shall proceed by citizen initiative, at the request of at least fifteen percent of the voters of the electoral roll in the district that elected the public servant. IV. The revocation of the mandate of public servants shall proceed in accordance with the statute. V. The revocation of the mandate shall result in the immediate termination of the functions of the officeholder, who shall be replaced in the terms provided for by statute. VI. The revocation procedure shall take place only once during the constitutional mandate of the elected person. TITLE VI PARTICIPATION AND SOCIAL CONTROL Article 241 I. The sovereign people shall take part in the designing of public policies through the organized civil society.

II. The organized civil society shall exercise control over the public management at all levels of the State, and over the public enterprises and institutions, mixed and private, which administer fiscal resources. III. It shall exercise control over the quality of public services. IV. A statute shall establish the general framework for the exercise of control by civil society. V. The civil society shall organize itself to define the structure and make-up of social participation and control. VI. The entities of the State shall provide spaces for participation and control on the part of society. Article 242 Participation and social control involve the following elements, in addition to those established by the Constitution and by statute: 1. To participate in the formulation of the policies of the State. 2. To support the Legislative Organ in the collective elaboration of the statutes. 3. To develop social control at all levels of the government and of the autonomous, selfsufficient, decentralized and deconcentrated territorial entities. 4. To develop a transparent information management and use of resources in all areas of public administration. The information requested for public monitoring purposes may not be denied and shall be provided in a complete, truthful, adequate and timely manner. 5. To formulate reports which form the basis of the petition for revocation of mandate, in accordance with the procedure established in the Constitution and by statute. 6. To know and comment on the management reports of the organs and functions of the State. 7. To coordinate the planning and control with the organs and functions of the State. 8. To file complaints with the competent institutions for investigation and trial in appropriate cases. 9. To participate in the public scrutiny of candidates in appointment procedures who are subject to them. 10. To support the electoral organ in making public the nominations of candidates for public office in the appropriate cases.

TITLE VII THE ARMED FORCES AND THE BOLIVIAN POLICE FIRST CHAPTER THE ARMED FORCES Article 243 The Armed Forces of the State are organically composed of the High Command, the Army, the Air Force and the Navy of Bolivia, the total numbers of which shall be determined by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly upon proposal of the Executive Organ. Article 244 The Armed Forces have as their fundamental mission the defense and preservation of the independence, security and stability of the State, the honor and sovereignty of the country; the upholding of the supremacy of the Constitution; the guarantee of the stability of the legitimately constituted Government; and the participation in the integral development of the country. Article 245 The organization of the Armed Forces rests on its hierarchy and discipline. It essentially follows orders, does not deliberate and is subject to the laws and military regulations. As an institution it does not conduct any political activity; individually, its members enjoy and exercise the rights of citizens in the conditions established by statute. Article 246 I. The Armed Forces are subordinate to the President of the State and receive their orders, in the administrative area, through the Minister of Defense and, in respect of the technical aspects, from the Commander in Chief. II. In the event of war, the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces shall direct the operations. Article 247 I. No foreigner may occupy a military or administrative position in the Armed Forces without the prior authorization of the Captain General. II. To occupy the positions of Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, the Head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Commanders and Chiefs of Staff of the Army, the Air Force, and the Navy of Bolivia, and of large units, it shall be indispensable to be Bolivian by birth and to satisfy the requirements set forth by statute. The same requirements apply to the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Defense. Article 248

The Supreme Council of Defense of the Plurinational State, the composition, organization and powers of which shall be determined by statute, shall be chaired by the Captain General of the Armed Forces. Article 249 Every Bolivian shall be under a duty to do military service, in accordance with the statute. Article 250 The promotions in the Armed Forces shall be granted in accordance with the applicable law. SECOND CHAPTER THE BOLIVIAN POLICE Article 251 I. The Bolivian Police, as a public force, has the specific mission of defending society and maintaining public order, and of ensuring compliance with the law in the entire territory of Bolivia. It shall carry out the police function in an integral and indivisible manner and under a unified command, in accordance with Institutional Act on the Bolivian Police and the other laws of the State. II. As an institution, it does not deliberate or take part in party political activities, but individually its members enjoy and exercise their rights as citizens, in accordance with the statute. Article 252 The Bolivian Police Force is subordinate to the President of the State, through the Minister of Government. Article 253 To be appointed Commander General of the Bolivian Police it shall be indispensable to be Bolivian by birth, a General of the institution, and to satisfy the requirements established by statute. Article 254 In case of international war the forces of the Bolivian Police shall be subordinated to the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces as long as the conflict lasts. TITLE VIII INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS, BORDERS, INTEGRATION AND MARITIME CLAIMS

FIRST CHAPTER INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS Article 255 I. International relations and the negotiation, signing and ratification of international treaties have to conform to the objectives of the State with regard to sovereignty and people’s interests. II. The negotiation, signing and ratification of international treaties shall be guided by the principles of: 1. Independence and equality among states, non-intervention in domestic matters and a peaceful resolution of disputes. 2. Rejection and condemnation of all forms of dictatorship, colonialism, neocolonialism and imperialism. 3. Defense and promotion of human, economic, social, cultural and environmental rights, with repudiation of all forms of racism and discrimination. 4. Respect for the rights of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples. 5. Cooperation and solidarity among states and peoples. 6. Preservation of the financial foundations and capacity of management and regulation of the State. 7. Harmony with nature, defense of biodiversity, and prohibition of forms of private appropriation for the exclusive use and exploitation of plants, animals, microorganisms and any living matter. 8. Food security and sovereignty for the entire population; the prohibition of importation, production and trade of genetically modified organisms and toxic elements that harm health and the environment. 9. Access of the entire population to basic services for their wellbeing and development. 10. Preservation of the population’s right to have access to all medications, primarily the generic ones. 11. Protection and preference for Bolivian production, and promotion of exports with added value. Article 256

I. The international treaties and instruments on human rights issues which have been signed, ratified or joined by the State and which define rights more favorable than those in the Constitution shall have preferential application over those in this Constitution. II. The rights recognized in the Constitution shall be interpreted in conformity with international human rights treaties when these provide for more favorable norms. Article 257 I. Ratified international treaties are part of the domestic legal order with statutory rank. II. International treaties that deal with any of the following matters shall require prior approval by binding popular referendum: 1. Border issues. 2. Monetary integration. 3. Structural economic integration. 4. Transfer of institutional competences to international or supra-national bodies in the framework of integration processes. Article 258 The procedure for the signing of international treaties shall be established by statute. Article 259 I. Any international treaty shall require approval by popular referendum if requested by five percent of the citizens registered in the voting roll or thirty five percent of the representatives of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. These initiatives may also be initiated in order to request the Executive Organ to sign a treaty. II. The announcement of the decision to call a referendum shall suspend, in accordance with the delays established by statute, the process of ratification of an international treaty until the result [of the referendum] is in. Article 260 I. The termination of international treaties shall follow the procedures established in the relevant international treaty, the general rules of International Law, and the procedures established in the Constitution and the ratifying statute. II. The termination of ratified treaties must be approved by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly before being executed by the President of the State.

III. The treaties approved by referendum must be submitted to a new referendum prior to their termination by the President of the State. SECOND CHAPTER NATIONAL BORDERS Article 261 The [defense of] territorial integrity, the preservation and the development of the border regions are a duty of the State. Article 262 I. The fifty kilometers near the borderline constitute the zone of border security. No foreigner, individually or through a company, may acquire, directly or indirectly, property in this region, nor possess any property right in the waters, soil or subsoil, except in the case of state necessity expressly declared by statute approved by two thirds of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. In case of non-compliance with this prohibition, the property or the possession affected shall devolve on the State, without any compensation. II. The zone of border security is subject to a special legal, economic, administrative and security regime, designed to promote and prioritize its development and to guarantee the integrity of the State. Article 263 The defense, security and control of the zones of border security are the fundamental duty of the Armed Forces. The Armed Forces shall participate in the policies of integral and sustainable development of these zones and shall maintain their permanent physical presence therein. Article 264 I. The State shall establish a permanent policy of harmonious, integral, sustainable and strategic development of the frontiers, with the objective of improving the living conditions of its population, and especially of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples living in the border area. II. It is the duty of the State to implement preservation and control policies for the natural resources in the border areas. III. The regulation of the border regime shall be determined by statute. THIRD CHAPTER INTEGRATION Article 265

I. The State shall promote, on the basis of the principles of balanced and equitable relations with recognition of asymmetries, relations of social, political, cultural and economic integration with the other states, nations and peoples of the world and, in particular, Latin American integration. II. The state shall strengthen the integration of its indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples with the indigenous peoples of the world. Article 266 The representatives of Bolivia in supra-national parliamentary bodies which may be established as a result of integration processes shall be elected by universal suffrage. FOURTH CHAPTER MARITIME CLAIMS Article 267 I. The Bolivian State declares its inalienable and imprescriptible right over the territory that gives it access to the Pacific Ocean and its maritime space. II. The effective settlement of the maritime dispute through peaceful means and the unfettered exercise of the sovereignty over such territory are the permanent and inalienable objectives of the Bolivian State. Article 268 The development of the interests related to the oceans, rivers, lakes and the merchant navy shall be a priority of the State, and their management and protection shall be carried out by the Bolivian Navy, in accordance with the statute. THIRD PART TERRITORIAL STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION OF THE STATE TITLE I TERRITORIAL ORGANIZATION OF THE STATE FIRST CHAPTER GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 269 I. The territory of Bolivia is subdivided into departments, provinces, municipalities and indigenous originary peasant territories.

II. The creation and modification of the territorial units and the drawing of their boundaries shall be determined by the democratic will of their inhabitants, in accordance with the conditions established by the Constitution and by statute. III. The regions shall form part of the territorial organization, in the terms and conditions provided for by statute. Article 270 The principles that shall govern the territorial organization and the decentralized and autonomous territorial entities are: unity, voluntariness, solidarity, equity, the common good, selfgovernment, equality, complementariness, reciprocity, gender equity, subsidiarity, gradualness, institutional coordination and loyalty, transparency, social participation and control, provision of economic resources and the pre-existence of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, in the terms established in this Constitution. Article 271 I. The Framework Act on Autonomies and Decentralization shall establish the procedures for the drafting of the Autonomy Statutes and the Institutional Charters, the transfer and delegation of competences, the financial and economic regime, and the coordination between the central government and the decentralized and autonomous territorial entities. II. The Framework Act on Autonomies and Decentralization shall be approved by a two-thirds vote of the members present of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. Article 272 Autonomy implies the direct election of the authorities by the citizens, the management of its economic resources, and the exercise of the legislative, regulatory, fiscal and executive powers by the organs of the autonomous government within the scope of its jurisdiction, powers and competences. Article 273 A statute shall regulate the establishment of communities of municipalities, regions and indigenous originary peasant territories for the purpose of achieving their objectives. Article 274 In the decentralized departments the election of the prefects and departmental councilors shall take place by universal suffrage. These departments may achieve the status of autonomous departments by way of referendum. Article 275

Each deliberative organ of the territorial entities shall draft in a inclusive manner the draft Autonomy Statute or Institutional Charter, which must be approved by two thirds of its total membership and, following a review of its constitutionality, shall enter into effect as the basic institutional norm of the territorial entity after having been approved by referendum within the relevant jurisdiction. Article 276 The autonomous territorial entities shall not be subordinated to each other and shall have equal constitutional rank. SECOND CHAPTER DEPARTMENTAL AUTONOMY Article 277 The autonomous departmental government is composed of a Departmental Assembly, with deliberative, supervisory and legislative powers within the area of its jurisdiction, and by an executive organ. Article 278 I. The Departmental Assembly shall be composed of departmental assembly members, elected by universal, direct, free, secret and mandatory vote; and by departmental assembly members elected by the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, in accordance with their own norms and procedures. II. A statute shall determine the general criteria for the election of departmental assembly members, by taking into account criteria of demographic and territorial, as well as cultural identity and linguistic representation where there are indigenous originary peasant minorities, and of parity and alternation of gender. The Autonomy Statutes shall define their application in accordance with the specific realities and conditions of the relevant jurisdiction. Article 279 The departmental executive organ in its capacity as the highest executive authority is directed by the Governor. THIRD CHAPTER REGIONAL AUTONOMY Article 280 I. The region, composed of various municipalities or provinces which have geographic continuity and do not transcend departmental boundaries, which share culture, language, history, economy

and ecosystems in each department, shall constitute a [distinct] space of planning and management. Exceptionally a region may consist of a single province which by itself displays the characteristics that define a region. In suburbs larger than 500,000 inhabitants metropolitan regions may be established. II. The Framework Act on Autonomies and Decentralization shall establish the terms and procedures for the orderly and premeditated establishment of regions. Provincial authorities may not be elected in areas where regions are established. III. The region may establish itself as autonomous region, at the initiative of the municipalities belonging to it, by way of referendum in the relevant jurisdictions. Its competences must be conferred by a two-thirds vote of the total membership of the departmental deliberative organ. Article 281 The government of each autonomous region shall be composed of a Regional Assembly with deliberative, rule-making and control powers within the scope of its jurisdiction, and an executive organ. Article 282 I. The members of the Regional Assembly shall be elected in each municipality together with the lists of candidates for the municipal councils, in accordance with demographic and territorial criteria. II. The region shall draft its Statute in an inclusive manner, in accordance with the procedures established for autonomous regions. FOURTH CHAPTER MUNICIPAL AUTONOMY Article 283 The autonomous municipal government shall be composed of a Municipal Council with deliberative, supervisory and legislative powers within the area of its jurisdiction, and an executive organ, chaired by the Mayor. Article 284 I. The Municipal Council shall be composed of council members elected by universal suffrage. II. The indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples in the municipalities which do not establish an indigenous originary peasant autonomy may directly elect their representatives to the

Municipal Council following their own norms and procedures and in accordance with the Municipal Institutional Charter. III. A statute shall establish the general criteria for the election and calculation of the number of municipal councilors. The Municipal Institutional Charter shall define its application, according to the specific reality and conditions of the relevant jurisdiction. IV. The Municipal Council may prepare the Draft Institutional Charter which shall be approved in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. FIFTH CHAPTER EXECUTIVE ORGANS OF THE AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENTS Article 285 I. To be a candidate for an elective position in the autonomous governments’ executive organs it is necessary to satisfy the general conditions for entering public service, and: 1. To have resided without interruption in the relevant department, region or municipality for at least two years immediately prior to the election. 2. In case of the election of the Mayor and the regional authority, to be twenty one years of age. 3. In case of the election of the Prefect or Governor, to be twenty five years of age. II. The term of office of the highest executive authorities of the autonomous governments is five years, with the possibility of reelection for only one consecutive term. Article 286 I. The temporary replacement of the highest executive authority of an autonomous government shall be incumbent upon a member of the Council or Assembly in accordance with the Autonomy Statute or the Institutional Charter, as the case may be. II. In the event of the resignation or death, permanent disability or revocation of the mandate of the highest executive authority of the autonomous government, a new election shall take place, provided that she/she is still in the first half of her/his term. Otherwise the substitute shall be an authority already elected in accordance with the Autonomy Statute or the Institutional Charter, as the case may be. SIXTH CHAPTER LEGISLATIVE, DELIBERATIVE AND CONTROL ORGANS OF THE AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENTS Article 287

I. The candidates for the councils and assemblies of the autonomous governments must satisfy the general conditions for entering public service and: 1. Have resided without interruption in the relevant jurisdiction for at least two years immediately prior to the election. 2. Be 18 years of age on the day of the election. II. The election of the assemblies and councils of the autonomous governments shall be conducted on the basis of lists separate from those for the election of the executive organs. Article 288 The term of office of the members of the councils and assemblies of the autonomous governments shall be five years, with the possibility of reelection for only one consecutive term. SEVENTH CHAPTER INDIGENOUS ORIGINARY PEASANT AUTONOMY Article 289 Indigenous originary peasant autonomy consists in self-government as an exercise of selfdetermination of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples which share a territory, culture, history, languages and their own legal, political, social and economic organization or institutions. Article 290 I. The establishment of indigenous originary peasant autonomy is based on the ancestral territories currently inhabited by those nations and peoples and the will of their population as expressed in consultation in accordance with the Constitution and statute. II. The self-government of the indigenous originary peasant autonomies is exercised in accordance with their norms, institutions, authorities and procedures, within the area of their powers and competences, in harmony with the Constitution and statute. Article 291 I. Subject to the indigenous originary peasant autonomies are indigenous originary peasant territories and the municipalities and regions which adopt that character in accordance with the provisions in the Constitution and the statute. II. Two or more indigenous originary peasant peoples may establish a unified indigenous originary peasant autonomy. Article 292

Each indigenous originary peasant autonomy shall draft its Statute in accordance with its own norms and procedures and in conformity with the Constitution and statute. Article 293 I. The indigenous autonomy based on consolidated indigenous territories and those in the process of consolidation shall be established by the will of the population expressed in consultation and in conformity with their own norms and procedures as the sole precondition. II. If the establishment of an indigenous originary peasant autonomy affects the boundaries of municipal districts, the indigenous originary peasant nation or people and the municipal government must agree on a new district demarcation. If it affects municipal boundaries, a procedure for its approval shall be conducted by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, following the fulfillment of the special requirements and conditions provided for by statute. III. Statute shall establish the minimum population requirements and other modalities for the constitution of an indigenous peasant farmer autonomy. IV. To constitute an indigenous originary peasant autonomy extending to territories in one or more municipalities, statute shall determine the articulation, coordination and cooperation mechanisms for the exercise of its government. Article 294 I. The decision to establish an indigenous originary peasant autonomy shall be adopted in accordance with the norms and procedures for consultation, pursuant to the requirements and conditions established by the Constitution and by statute. II. The decision to transform a municipality into an indigenous originary peasant autonomy shall be adopted by referendum, in accordance with the requirements and conditions established by statute. III. In municipalities with indigenous communities who have their own organizational structures for their articulation and geographic continuity, a new municipality may be established following the procedure for its approval before the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, upon prior compliance with the requirements and conditions set forth by the Constitution and by statute. Article 295 I. The establishment of an indigenous originary peasant region that affects municipal boundaries requires a prior procedure conducted before the Plurinational Legislative Assembly that complies with the special requirements and conditions defined by the Constitution and by statute. II. The merger of municipalities, municipal districts and/or indigenous originary peasant autonomies into an indigenous originary peasant region shall be determined by referendum and/or in accordance with their [indigenous] norms and procedures for consultation, as the case

may be, and in accordance with the requirements and conditions established by the Constitution and by statute. Article 296 The government of the indigenous originary peasant autonomies operates on the basis of their own norms and forms of organization, with the denomination typical of each people, nation or community, as established in their statutes and subject to the Constitution and the [general] statute. EIGHTH CHAPTER DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS Article 297 I. The areas of jurisdiction defined in this Constitution fall into one of the following categories: 1. Central non-transferable jurisdiction areas, i.e. areas of jurisdiction where the powers of legislation, regulation and implementation may not be transferred or delegated and are reserved to the central government. 2. Exclusive areas of jurisdiction, i.e. those areas of jurisdiction where the powers of legislation, regulation and implementation are assigned to one level of government with regard to specific matters, with the possibility of transferring and delegating the powers of regulation and implementation. 3. Concurrent areas of jurisdiction, i.e. those areas in which the powers of legislation belong to the central government while the powers of regulation and implementation may be exercised also by the other levels of government. 4. Shared areas of jurisdiction, i.e. those areas which are subject to the basic legislation of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly while the further development of the legislation belongs to the autonomous territorial entities, in accordance with their character and nature. The powers of regulation and implementation shall belong to the autonomous territorial entities. II. Any area of jurisdiction not included in this Constitution shall be assigned to the central government, which may transfer or delegate it by statute. Article 298 I. The non-transferable areas of jurisdiction of the central government include: 1. The financial system. 2. Monetary policy, Central Bank, monetary system, and the policy of foreign exchange.

3. System of weights and measurements, as well as the determination of the official time. 4. Customs regime. 5. Foreign trade. 6. State Security, Defense, Armed Forces, and Bolivian Police. 7. Weapons and explosives. 8. Foreign policy. 9. Nationality, citizenship, immigration law, the right to asylum. 10. Border control related to the security of the State. 11. Migration control and policies. 12. Establishment, supervision and management of the strategic public enterprises of national importance. 13. Management of the heritage of the Plurinational State and of the public entities of the central government. 14. Control of air space and transit throughout the entire national territory; construction, maintenance, and management of the international airports and inter-departmental air traffic. 15. The Civil Registry. 16. Official census. 17. General policies in relation to land and territory, and the issuance of titles. 18. Hydrocarbons. 19. Establishment of national taxes, rates and special tax contributions within the tax domain of the central government. 20. General policy of Biodiversity and Environment. 21. Codification of the substantive and procedural law in civil, family, criminal, tax, labor, commercial, mining and electoral matters. 22. National economic and planning policy. II. The exclusive areas of jurisdiction of the central government include:

1. The national electoral regime for the election of national and sub-national authorities, and for national consultations. 2. General communications and telecommunications systems. 3. Postal service. 4. Strategic natural resources, which include minerals, the electromagnetic spectrum, genetic and biogenetic resources and water sources. 5. General system of hydraulic resources and services. 6. General system of biodiversity and environment. 7. Forestry policy and the general rules on soils, forestry and woods. 8. Policy of generation, production, control, transmission and distribution of energy in the interconnected system. 9. Planning, design, construction, conservation and management of the highways of the Basic Network. 10. Construction, maintenance and management of the railroad and railway lines of the Basic Network. 11. Public infrastructure projects of national importance. 12. Drafting and approval of plans and official cartographic maps; geodesy. 13. Preparation and approval of official statistics. 14. Granting of legal status to social organizations which conduct activities in more than one Department. 15. Granting and registration of legal status of Non-Governmental Organizations, Foundations and non-profit civil entities that conduct activities in more than one Department. 16. Social Security system. 17. Policies on the education and health systems. 18. System of Real Estate Property Rights in mandatory coordination with the technical registry of the municipalities. 19. Protected areas under the responsibility of the central government.

20. Fiscal reserves with respect to natural resources. 21. Livestock health and safety. 22. Control of agrarian management and land registry. 23. Tax policy. 24. Administration of Justice. 25. Promotion of culture and conservation of the cultural, historic, artistic, monumental, architectural, archeological, paleontological, scientific, tangible and intangible heritage of national importance. 26. Expropriation of real estate for reasons of public utility and necessity, in accordance with the procedure established by statute. 27. Centers of information and documentation, archives, libraries, museums, periodical libraries and others of national importance. 28. Public enterprises of national importance. 29. Rural human settlements. 30. Policies on basic services. 31. Labor policies and rules. 32. Ground, air, river and other transportation which reaches more than one department. 33. Policies of territorial planning and land registry regulations. 34. Internal and external public debt. 35. General policies of productive development. 36. General housing policies. 37. General tourism policies. 38. Land regime. A statute shall determine the powers to be transferred or delegated to the autonomies. Article 299

I. The shared areas of jurisdiction of the central government and the autonomous territorial entities include: 1. The departmental and municipal electoral systems. 2. Fixed and mobile telephone and telecommunications services. 3. Urban electrification. 4. Lottery games and gambling. 5. International relations within the framework of the foreign policy of the State. 6. The establishment of citizens’ mediation mechanisms for the settlement of disputes between neighbors in municipal matters. 7. Rules on the establishment and modification of taxes of the exclusive domain of the autonomous governments. II. The following areas shall be subject to the concurrent jurisdiction of the central government and the autonomous territorial entities: 1. To preserve and safeguard the environment and the wild fauna and to contribute to their protection by maintaining the ecological equilibrium and controlling environmental pollution. 2. Management of the health and education systems. 3. Science, technology and research. 4. Conservation of soils, forestry resources and forests. 5. Weather Service. 6. Electromagnetic frequencies in the areas of their respective jurisdiction and within the framework of the policies of the State. 7. Promotion and administration of hydraulic and energy projects. 8. Industrial waste and toxic materials. 9. Potable water projects and treatment of solid waste. 10. Irrigation projects. 11. Protection of basins.

12. Management of river ports. 13. Public security. 14. Government control system. 15. Housing and social housing. 16. Agriculture, livestock, hunting and fishing. Article 300 I. The following matters are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the departmental governments with their respective territories: 1. To draft their Statute pursuant to the procedures established by the Constitution and by statute. 2. To plan and develop human development within their jurisdiction. 3. To initiate and announce departmental consultations and referendums on matters within their competence. 4. Promotion of employment and improvement of working conditions within the framework of national policies. 5. Preparation and execution of the Plans of Territorial Zoning and use of soils in coordination with the plans of the central government, the municipalities and the indigenous originary peasants. 6. Projects of generation and transport of energy in isolated systems. 7. Planning, design, construction, conservation and management of the highways of the departmental network in accordance with state policies, including those of the Basic Network failing projects of the central government, in accordance with the norms established for this purpose. 8. Construction and maintenance of railroad and railway lines in the department in accordance with state policies, intervening in those of the Basic Network in coordination with the central government. 9. Inter-province ground, river, railroad and other means of transportation in the department. 10. Construction, maintenance and administration of the public departmental airports. 11. Departmental statistics.

12. Granting of legal personality to public organizations which conduct activities in the department. 13. Granting of legal personality to Non-Governmental Organizations, Foundations and nonprofit civil entities which conduct activities in the department. 14. Agricultural health and safety services. 15. Projects of rural electrification. 16. Projects concerning alternative and renewable sources of energy within the department, by maintaining food security. 17. Sports within the area of their jurisdiction. 18. Promotion and conservation of the departmental natural heritage. 19. Promotion and conservation of culture, cultural, historic, artistic, monumental, architectural, archeological, paleontological, scientific, tangible and intangible departmental heritage. 20. Departmental tourism policies. 21. Departmental infrastructure projects to support production. 22. Creation and administration of taxes of departmental character which may only be imposed if they are not substantially similar to national or municipal taxes. 23. Creation and administration of fees and special contributions of departmental character. 24. Commerce, industry and services for development and competitiveness within the department. 25. Expropriation of real estate under its jurisdiction for reasons of public departmental utility and necessity, in accordance with the procedure established by statute, as well as the imposition of administrative limitations and servitudes on property for reasons of a technical or legal nature and in the public interest. 26. To draft, approve and execute their action plans and budgets. 27. Fiduciary funds, investment funds and mechanisms of transfer of resources necessary and inherent in their competences. 28. Departmental centers of information and documentation, archives, libraries, museums, periodicals libraries and similar establishments.

29. Departmental public enterprises. 30. Promotion and development of projects and policies for children and adolescents, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities. 31. Promotion and administration of services for productive and agricultural development. 32. Preparation and execution of departmental economic and social development plans. 33. To participate in enterprises exploiting, distributing and marketing hydrocarbons in the departmental territory, in association with the national entities of the sector. 34. Promotion of private investment in the department within the framework of the national economic policies. 35. Planning of the departmental development in concordance with national planning. 36. Management of the royalties, which shall be transferred automatically to the Departmental Treasury, within the framework of the general budget of the nation. II. The Departmental Autonomy Statutes may define as concurrent some its exclusive powers, to be exercised with the other territorial entities of the department. III. The powers which are transferred or delegated to the departments shall also include the power of implementation. Article 301 The region, once it has been established as an autonomous region, shall exercise the powers that may be transferred or delegated to it. Article 302 I. The following matters are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the autonomous municipal governments within their respective territories: 1. To draft the Municipal Institutional Charter in accordance with the procedures established by this Constitution and by statute. 2. To plan and promote human development within their territorial jurisdiction. 3. To initiate and call municipal consultations and referendums on matters within their competence. 4. Promotion of employment and improvement of working conditions within the framework of national policies.

5. To preserve and safeguard the environment and natural resources, wild fauna and domestic animals, and to contribute to their protection. 6. Preparation of the Plans of Territorial Zoning and use of soils, in coordination with the plans of the central government, departmental and indigenous entities. 7. Planning, design, construction, conservation and administration of neighborhood roads, in coordination with the indigenous originary peasant peoples, if applicable. 8. Construction, maintenance and administration of public local airports. 9. Municipal statistics. 10. The urban land registry in their jurisdiction, in conformity with the criteria and technical parameters established by the Municipal Governments. 11. Municipally protected areas, in accordance with the parameters and conditions established by the Municipal Governments. 12. Projects of alternative and renewable sources of energy, by maintaining food security at the municipal level. 13. To control the compliance with quality and health standards in the manufacturing, transportation and sale of food products for human and animal consumption. 14. Sports in the area of their jurisdiction. 15. Promotion and conservation of the natural municipal heritage. 16. Promotion and conservation of culture and municipal cultural, historic, artistic, monumental, architectural, archeological, paleontological, scientific, tangible and intangible municipal heritage. 17. Local tourism policies. 18. Urban transportation, automobile ownership registry, road regulation and education, urban traffic administration and control. 19. Creation and administration of taxes of municipal character which may only be imposed if they are not substantially similar to national or departmental taxes. 20. Creation and administration of fees, economic licenses and special contributions of municipal character. 21. Productive infrastructure projects.

22. Expropriation of real estate within their territory for reasons of public municipal utility and necessity, in accordance with the procedure established by statute, as well as the establishment of administrative limitations and servitudes on property, for reasons of technical and legal nature and in the public interest. 23. To draft, approve and execute their action programs budgets. 24. Fiduciary funds, investment funds and mechanisms of transfer of resources necessary and inherent in their competences. 25. Municipal centers of information and documentation, archives, libraries, museums, periodicals libraries and similar establishments. 26. Municipal public enterprises. 27. Urban sanitation, management and treatment of solid waste within the framework of State policy. 28. To design, construct, equip and maintain the infrastructure and works of public interest and the assets of the municipal domain within their respective territory. 29. Urban development and urban settlements. 30. Public lighting in their territory. 31. Promotion of cultural and artistic activities in their territory. 32. Public shows and recreational games. 33. Urban advertising and announcements. 34. To promote and sign agreements of association or community with other municipalities. 35. Agreements and/or contracts with natural or collective persons, public and private, for the development and exercise of their powers, competences and purposes. 36. To establish and regulate the Municipal Guard in order to support the fulfillment, exercise and execution of their competences as well as the compliance with the municipal norms and the resolutions issued by the municipal governments. 37. Policies for the defense of consumers and users in the municipal area. 38. Systems of micro-irrigation in coordination with the indigenous originary peasant peoples. 39. Promotion and development of projects and policies for children and adolescents, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities.

40. Basic services as well as the approval of the corresponding fees in their territory. 41. Grains and sharecroppers, in coordination with the indigenous originary peasant peoples, if applicable. 42. Planning of municipal development in conformity with departmental and national planning. 43. To participate in enterprises exploiting, distributing and marketing hydrocarbons in the municipal territory, in association with the national entities of the sector. II. The powers which are transferred or delegated to the municipalities shall also include the power of implementation. Article 303 I. The indigenous originary peasant autonomy, in addition to its powers, shall assume those of the municipalities, in accordance with a process of institutional development and with their cultural characteristics and in conformity with the Constitution and the Framework Act on Autonomies and Decentralization. II. The indigenous originary peasant region shall assume the powers which may be transferred or delegated to it. Article 304 I. The exclusive indigenous originary peasant autonomies may exercise exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters: 1. The drafting of the Statute for the exercise of their autonomy in accordance with the Constitution and the [general] Statute. 2. Definition and management of their own forms of economic, social, political, organizational and cultural development, in accordance with their identity and the vision of each people. 3. Management and administration of renewable natural resources in accordance with the Constitution. 4. Preparation of Plans of Territorial Zoning and use of soils, in coordination with the plans of the central government and those of the departments and municipalities. 5. Electrification in isolated systems in their territory. 6. Maintenance and administration of local and communal roads.

7. Administration and preservation of protected areas in their territory within the framework of the policy of the State. 8. Exercise of the indigenous originary peasant jurisdiction for the administration of justice and the settlement of disputes through their own norms and procedures in accordance with the Constitution and the statute. 9. Sports, leisure activities and recreation. 10. Tangible and intangible cultural heritage; the conservation, stimulation and promotion of their cultures, art, identity, archeological centers, religious and cultural places, and museums. 11. Tourism policies. 12. To create and administer fees, licenses and special contributions in their territories in accordance with statute. 13. Administer the taxes within their territory. 14. To draft, approve and execute their action programs and budgets. 15. Planning and management of land use. 16. Housing, town planning and redistribution of population in accordance with the cultural practices in their respective territory. 17. To promote and sign agreements of cooperation with other peoples and public and private entities. 18. Maintenance and administration of its micro-irrigation systems. 19. Stimulation and development of productive activity. 20. Construction, maintenance and administration of the infrastructure necessary for development in their territory. 21. To take part in the development and implementation of the mechanisms of prior, free and informed consultation in relation to the application of legislative, executive and administrative measures affecting them. 22. Preservation of the habitat and the landscape in accordance with their principles, norms, and cultural, technological, and historical practices. 23. Development and practice of their democratic institutions in accordance with their own norms and procedures.

II. The indigenous originary peasant autonomies may exercise shared jurisdiction over the following matters: 1. International exchanges within the framework of the foreign policy of the State. 2. Participation and control in relation to the use of grains. 3. The defense and registration of collective intellectual property related to knowledge of genetic resources, traditional medicine and germ plasma, in accordance with the statute. 4. Measures of control and regulation of foreign institutions and organizations conducting activities in their territory which are inherent to the development of their institutions, culture, environment and natural heritage. III. The indigenous originary peasant autonomies may exercise concurrent jurisdiction over the following matters: 1. Organization, planning and execution of the health policy in their territories. 2. Organization, planning and execution of plans, programs and projects related to education, science, technology and research within the framework of State legislation. 3. Conservation of forestry resources, biodiversity and the environment. 4. Irrigation systems, water resources, sources of water and energy in their territories within the framework of State policy. 5. Construction of micro-irrigation systems. 6. Construction of local and communal roads. 7. Promotion of productive infrastructures projects. 8. Promotion and stimulation of agriculture and stockbreeding. 9. Control and socio-environmental monitoring of the hydrocarbon and mining activities conducted in their territories. 10. Systems of financial control and management of assets and services. IV. The resources necessary for the exercise of their powers shall be transferred automatically by the Plurinational State in accordance with the statute. Article 305

Every assignment or transfer of powers must be accompanied by the determination of the source of economic and financial resources necessary for their exercise. FOURTH PART ECONOMIC STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION OF THE STATE TITLE I ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE STATE FIRST CHAPTER GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 306 I. The Bolivian economic model is based on a plurality of forms of organization and seeks to improve the quality of life and the well-being of all Bolivians. II. The plural economy is constituted by forms of communitarian, state, private and social cooperative economic organization. III. The plural economy realizes different forms of economic organization based on the principles of complementariness, reciprocity, solidarity, redistribution, equality, legal certainty, sustainability, equilibrium, justice and transparency. The social and communitarian economy shall complement the individual interest with the collective well-being. IV. The forms of economic organization recognized in this Constitution may establish mixed companies. V. The State recognizes the human being as the supreme value and shall ensure development through the equitable redistribution of the economic surplus in social health, educational, and cultural policies, and in the re-investment in productive economic development. Article 307 The State shall recognize, respect, protect and promote the communitarian economic organization. This form of communitarian economic organization covers the productive and reproductive systems of social life based on the principles and visions of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples. Article 308 I. The State recognizes, respects and protects the private initiative which contributes to the economic and social development and strengthens the economic independence of the country. II. Free enterprise and the full exercise of business activities are guaranteed and shall be regulated by statute.

Article 309 The form of state economic organization comprises the enterprises and other economic entities in the property of the State which shall comply with the following objectives: 1. To manage property rights over natural resources on behalf of the Bolivian people and to exercise strategic control of the productive chains and the processes of industrial expropriation of these resources. 2. To manage basic services of potable water and sewer systems directly or by means of public, communitarian, cooperative or mixed enterprises. 3. To directly produce goods and services. 4. To promote economic democracy and the achievement of food sovereignty of the population. 5. To guarantee participation and social control over its organization and management, as well as the participation of the workers in the decision-making process and the distribution of profits. Article 310 The State recognizes and protects cooperatives as forms of labor solidarity and cooperation which do not seek to make profit. The organization of cooperatives shall be promoted primarily in production activities. Article 311 I. All forms of economic organization established in this Constitution shall enjoy equality before the law. II. The plural economy comprises the following aspects: 1. The State shall have full control over the direction of the economic development and its planning processes. 2. The natural resources are the property of the Bolivian people and shall be managed by the State. The individual and collective ownership of land shall be respected and guaranteed. Agriculture, stockbreeding, as well as hunting and fishing not involving protected species are activities which are governed by what is established in Part Four of this Constitution relating to the economic structure and organization of the State. 3. The industrial exploitation of natural resources to overcome the dependence on the export of raw materials and to achieve an economy with a productive base, within the framework of sustainable development and in harmony with nature.

4. The State may intervene in any of the strategic sectors of the productive chain, seeking to guarantee its supply in order to preserve the quality of life of all Bolivians. 5. Respect for enterprise initiative and legal certainty. 6. The State shall encourage and promote the communitarian area of the economy as an alternative in rural and urban areas. Article 312 I. Every economic activity must contribute to the strengthening of the economic sovereignty of the country. The private accumulation of economic power to the degree that it might endanger the economic sovereignty of the State shall not be permitted. II. All forms of economic organization must provide opportunities for dignified work and contribute to the reduction of inequalities and the elimination of poverty. III. All forms of economic organization must protect the environment. Article 313 To eliminate poverty and social and economic exclusion, and in order to achieve the ideal of the good life in its multiple dimensions, the economic organization of Bolivia has the following goals: 1. The generation of social wealth within the framework of respect for individual rights, as well as the rights of the peoples and nations. 2. The fair production, distribution and redistribution of wealth and economic surplus. 3. The reduction of inequalities of access to productive resources. 4. The reduction of regional inequalities. 5. The productive development of the industrial exploitation of natural resources. 6. The active participation of the public and communitarian economies in the productive apparatus. Article 314 Private monopoly and oligopoly are prohibited, as well as any other form of association or agreement of natural or legal persons, Bolivian or foreign, which aim for control and exclusive rights in relation to the production and commercialization of goods and services. Article 315

I. The State recognizes the ownership of land of all legal persons which have been legally established in the national territory, provided that its use serves to realize the objective of the creation of an economic actor, the generation of employment, and the production and commercialization of goods and/or services. II. The legal persons mentioned in the paragraph above which are established after the entry into force of the Constitution shall have a corporate structure a number of owners not inferior to the number which results from the division of the total surface by five thousand hectares, rounding up the result to the higher whole number. SECOND CHAPTER ROLE OF THE STATE IN THE ECONOMY Article 316 The role of the State in the economy consists in: 1. Conducting the process of economic and social planning, with the participation of, and in consultation with, the citizens. The statute shall establish a system of comprehensive state planning which shall incorporate all the territorial entities. 2. Directing the economy and regulating the processes of production, distribution and commercialization of goods and services, in accordance with the principles established in this Constitution. 3. Directing and controlling the strategic sectors of the economy. 4. Directly participating in the economy by way of incentives and the production of economic and social goods and services in order to promote economic and social equity and to encourage development, preventing an oligopolistic control of the economy. 5. Promoting the integration of different economic forms of production, with the objective of achieving economic and social development. 6. Promoting as a priority the industrial exploitation of renewable and non-renewable natural resources, within the framework of respect for and protection of the environment, in order to guarantee the generation of employment and the economic and social goods for the population. 7. Promoting policies of equitable distribution of wealth and of the economic resources of the country, for the purpose of preventing inequality, social and economic exclusion, and to eliminate poverty in its multiple dimensions. 8. Establishing a state monopoly over productive and commercial activities which are considered vital in a state of public necessity.

9. Periodically formulating, with the participation of and in consultation with the citizens, the general development plan which has to be executed mandatorily by every form of economic organization. 10. To manage economic resources for research, technical assistance and transfer of technology to promote productive activities and industrialization. 11. To regulate aeronautic activity in the country’s air space. Article 317 The State shall guarantee the creation, organization and functioning of a participatory planning entity that includes representatives of public institutions and the organized civil society. THIRD CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICIES Article 318 I. The State shall determine a policy for the industrial and commercial production which guarantees a sufficient supply of goods and services to cover the basic domestic needs in an adequate manner and to strengthen the export capacity. II. The State recognizes and shall give priority to the support of associations of small and medium urban and rural businesses. III. The State shall strengthen the productive, manufacturing and industrial infrastructure and the basic services for the productive sector. IV. The State shall give priority to the promotion of rural productive development as the basis of the development policies of the country. V. The State shall promote and support the export of value added goods and services. Article 319 I. The industrial exploitation of natural resources shall be a priority of economic policy, within the framework of respect for and protection of the environment and of the rights of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples and their territories. The harmonization of the exploitation of natural resources with the internal productive apparatus shall be a priority of the economic policies of the State. II. With regard to the commercialization of strategic natural and energy resources the State shall take into account, in order to determine their commercial price, the taxes, royalties and contributions which must be paid to the public treasury.

Article 320 I. Bolivian investment shall be given priority over foreign investment. II. Every foreign investment shall be subject to the Bolivian jurisdiction, laws and authorities, and nobody may invoke an exceptional situation, nor have recourse to diplomatic representations, in order to obtain a more favorable treatment. III. The economic relations with foreign states or companies shall be conducted in conditions of independence, mutual respect and equity. No conditions may be granted to foreign States or companies more favorable than those established for Bolivians. IV. The State is independent in all its decisions on domestic economic policy, and shall not accept demands or conditions on this policy imposed by states, Bolivian or foreign banks or foreign financial institutions, multilateral bodies or transnational companies. V. Public policies shall promote the internal consumption of products made in Bolivia. SECTION I FISCAL POLICY Article 321 I. The economic and financial administration of the State and of all the public entities is governed by its budget. II. Public expenditure and investment shall be determined by mechanisms of citizen participation and state planning and implementation. The allocations shall be directed particularly to education, health, nutrition, housing and productive development. III. The Executive Organ shall present to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly at least two months before the end of each fiscal year the draft law of the General Budget for the following term, including all the entities of the public sector. IV. Every bill that implies expenditure or investment by the State must indicate the source of funding, the way in which the expenditure shall be covered, and the manner of its investment. If the bill was not initiated by the Executive Organ it requires prior consultation with the latter. V. The Executive Organ, through the Ministry of the relevant branch, shall have direct access to the information concerning the expenditure projected in the budget and spent for the whole public sector. This access shall include information on the expenditure projected and spent by the Armed Forces and the Bolivian Police. Article 322

I. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall authorize the contracting of public debt if the capacity to generate revenue to cover the capital and the interest payments is demonstrated and it is shown that from a technical point of view the interest rates, payment schedules, amounts and other circumstances on offer are most favorable. II. Public debt may not include obligations that have not been expressly authorized and underwritten by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. Article 323 I. Fiscal policy is based on the principles of economic capacity, equality, progression, proportionality, transparency, universality, control, administrative simplicity and collecting capacity. II. The taxes which fall within the national tax domain shall be approved by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. The taxes which fall within the exclusive domain of the autonomous departments and municipalities shall be approved, modified or eliminated by their Councils or Assemblies at the request of their executive organs. The tax domain of the Decentralized Departments and regions shall consist of departmental taxes, fees and special contributions, respectively. III. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall classify and define the taxes that fall within the national, departmental and municipal tax domains by way of statute. IV. The creation, suppression or modification of taxes under the dominion of the autonomous governments exercising such powers shall observe the following limits: 1. No taxes may be created if the activities or assets which are to be taxed [hechos impunibles] are substantially similar to those for which national taxes or other departmental or municipal taxes are already being levied, regardless of the tax domain into which they fall. 2. No taxes may be created that are levied on goods, activities, rent or assets outside the territorial jurisdiction of the taxing authority, except for revenues generated by its citizens or companies outside of the country. This prohibition extends to fees, dues and special contributions. 3. No taxes may be created that impede the free circulation and establishment of persons, goods, activities or services within the respective territorial jurisdiction. This prohibition extends to fees, dues and special contributions. 4. No taxes may be created that entail privileges for residents and discriminate against nonresidents. This prohibition extends to fees, dues and special contributions. Article 324

The liability resulting from damages caused to the State shall not come under the statute of limitations. Article 325 Illicit economic activity, speculation, hoarding, stock exchange manipulation, usury, contraband, tax evasion and other related economic crimes shall be punished by statute. SECTION II MONETARY POLICY Article 326 I. The State, through the Executive Organ, shall determine the goals of the monetary and exchange policies of the country in coordination with the Central Bank of Bolivia. II. Public transactions in the country shall be conducted in national currency. Article 327 The Central Bank of Bolivia is an institution governed by public law, with distinct legal personality and its own assets. It is the task of the Central Bank of Bolivia to maintain the stability of the domestic purchasing power of the currency within the framework of the economic policy of the State in order to contribute to economic and social development. Article 328 I. In addition to those defined by statute, the Central Bank shall have the following powers, to be exercised in accordance with the economic policy determined by the Executive Organ: 1. To determine and implement the monetary policy. 2. To implement the exchange policy. 3. To regulate the system of payments. 4. To authorize the issuance of currency. 5. To manage the international reserves. Article 329 I. The Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Bolivia shall be composed of a President and five directors appointed by the President of the State from lists of three candidates presented by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly for each position.

II. The term of office of the members of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Bolivia shall be five years, without re-election. They shall be considered as public servants within the meaning of the Constitution and the statute. The specific requirements for the position shall be established by statute. III. The members of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Bolivia shall report on and account for the performance of the institution whenever they are requested to do so by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly or its Chambers. The Central Bank of Bolivia shall submit an annual report to the Legislative Assembly and is subject to the governmental and fiscal control system of the State. SECTION III FINANCIAL POLICY Article 330 I. The State shall regulate the financial system based on the criteria of equality of opportunity, solidarity, equitable distribution and redistribution. II. The State, through its financial policy, shall give priority to the demand of financial services by the small and very small businesses, artisans, shops, service providers, communitarian organizations and production cooperatives. III. The State shall stimulate the creation of non-banking financial entities with the goal of socially productive investment. IV. The Central Bank of Bolivia and the public entities and institutions shall not recognize the debts of private banks or financial entities. The latter must mandatorily contribute to and bolster a fund for financial restructuring, which shall be used in cases of bank insolvency. V. The financial operations of the Public Administration at its different levels shall be conducted by a public banking entity. A statute shall provide for its establishment. Article 331 Banking activities, the provision of financial services and any other activity related to the management, use and investment of savings, are matters of public interest and may only be performed with prior authorization of the State, in accordance with the statute. Article 332 I. The financial entities shall be regulated and supervised by an institution for the regulation of banks and financial entities. This institution shall be established under public law and shall have jurisdiction in the entire territory of Bolivia.

II. The highest authority of the institution for the regulation of banks and financial entities shall be appointed by the President of the State from among a list of three candidates proposed by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly in accordance with the procedure established by statute. Article 333 The financial operations conducted by natural or legal persons, Bolivians or foreigners, shall benefit from the right to confidentiality, except in judicial proceedings, in cases of the alleged commission of financial crimes, in those in which assets are being investigated and in the other cases defined by statute. The instances designated by statute to investigate such cases shall have the power to collect information about such financial operations without the need for special judicial authorization. SECTION IV SECTOR POLICIES Article 334 Within the framework of the sectoral policies, the State shall protect and encourage: 1. The peasant economic organizations, and the associations or organizations of small urban producers and artisans, as alternative forms of organizations based on solidarity and reciprocity. The economic policy shall facilitate access to technical training and technology, to credit, to the opening of markets, and to the improvement of productive processes. 2. The guild sector, the self-employed and the retail commerce in the areas of production, services and sales shall be strengthened by means of access to credit and technical assistance. 3. The production of crafts with cultural identity. 4. The small and very small businesses, as well as the peasant economic organizations, and organizations or associations of small producers, who shall enjoy preference in the purchases of the State. Article 335 The public service cooperatives shall be organizations of collective interest, non-profit entities subjected to governmental control which are run democratically. The election of their administrative and supervisory authorities shall be conducted in accordance with their own bylaws and supervised by the Plurinational Electoral Organ. Their organization and functioning shall be regulated by statute. Article 336 The State shall support communitarian economic organizations so that they can obtain credit and have access to funding.

Article 337 I. Tourism is a strategic economic activity which must be developed in a sustainable manner; to this end it shall take into account the wealth of cultures and the respect or the environment. II. The State shall promote and protect communitarian tourism with the objective of benefiting urban and rural communities and the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples where this activity takes place. Article 338 The State recognizes the economic value of housework as a source of wealth which shall listed in quantitative terms in the public accounts. FOURTH CHAPTER ASSETS AND REVENUE OF THE STATE AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION Article 339 I. The President of the Republic may order payments which are not authorized by the budget only to meet urgent needs resulting from public calamities, internal disturbances or the exhaustion of resources for the maintenances of services whose breakdown would cause serious harm. The expenditure expenses for these purposes shall not exceed one percent of the total expenditures authorized by the General Budget. II. The assets of the State and of the public entities are property of the Bolivian people, inviolable, unseizable, inalienable and exempt from expropriation; they may not be used for the benefit of individuals. Their categorization, inventory, management, disposal and mandatory registration and the manner in which they may be claimed shall be regulated by statute. III. The revenue of the State shall be invested in accordance with the general economic and social development plan of the country, the General Budget of the State and the statute. Article 340 I. The revenue of the State is divided into national, departmental, municipal and indigenous originary peasant revenue and shall be invested independently by their Treasuries in accordance with their respective budgets. II. A statute shall classify the national, departmental, municipal and indigenous originary peasant revenue. III. The departmental, municipal, indigenous originary peasant, judicial and university revenue collected by offices which depend of the central government shall not be centralized in the National Treasury.

IV. The national Executive Organ shall establish the rules on the preparation and presentation of the draft budgets of the entire public sector, including the autonomous entities. Article 341 The departmental resources consist of the following: 1. The departmental royalties created by statute. 2. A share of the revenue resulting from taxes on Hydrocarbons according to the percentages defined by statute. 3. Taxes, fees, special contributions and departmental dues from natural resources. 4. The transfers from the General Treasury of the Nation designed to cover the expenditure for personal health, education and social assistance services. 5. The extraordinary transfers of the General Treasury of the Nation in the cases established in article 339.I of this Constitution. 6. The domestic and foreign credits and loans contracted in accordance with the norms on public debt and of the National system of Treasury and Public Credit. 7. The revenue derived from the sale of goods, services and the sale of assets. 8. Bequests, donations and other similar revenues. TITLE II ENVIRONMENT, NATURAL RESOURCES, LAND AND TERRITORY FIRST CHAPTER ENVIRONMENT Article 342 It is the duty of the State and the population to conserve, protect and use natural resources and biodiversity in a sustainable manner, as well as to maintain the equilibrium of the environment. Article 343 The population has the right to participate in environmental management and to be consulted and informed prior to any decision that could affect the quality of the environment. Article 344

I. The production and use of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons on Bolivian territory, as well as the import, transit and deposit of nuclear and toxic waste, are prohibited. II. The State shall regulate the import, production, sale and employment of techniques, methods, supplies and substances which affect health and the environment. Article 345 The policies of environmental management are based on: 1. Participatory planning and management, subject to social control. 2. The application of evaluation systems of environmental impact and control of the quality of the environment, without exception and including across-the-board all activities producing goods and services which use, transform or affect natural resources and the environment. 3. Liability for any activity that causes environmental harm and civil, criminal and administrative sanctions for non-compliance with the norms for the protection of the environment. Article 346 The natural assets are of public importance and of strategic significance for the sustainable development of the country. Their conservation and use for the benefit of the population shall be the responsibility and exclusive competence of the State which shall not compromise the sovereignty over the natural resources. A statute shall establish the principles and provisions for their management. Article 347 I. State and society shall promote the mitigation of harmful effects on the environment and of environmental pollution affecting the country. Liability is established for historic environmental damages, and environmental crimes shall not be subject to the statute of limitations. II. Those who conduct activities that affect the environment must, at all stages of production, avoid, minimize, mitigate, remedy, repair and make compensation for the damage caused to the environment and the health of persons, and shall establish the security measures necessary to neutralize the potential effects of environmental pollution. SECOND CHAPTER NATURAL RESOURCES Article 348

I. Minerals of all types, hydrocarbons, water, air, soil and subsoil, forests, biodiversity, the electromagnetic spectrum and all elements and physical forces capable of use are natural resources. II. The natural resources are of strategic character and of public significance for the development of the country. Article 349 I. The natural resources are in the property and direct domain, indivisible and inalienable, of the Bolivian people, and their management is incumbent on the State on behalf of the collective interest. II. The State shall recognize, respect and grant individual and collective ownership rights over land, as well as rights of use and exploitation of natural resources. III. Agriculture, stockbreeding, and the activities of hunting and fishing which do not involve protected animal species are activities governed by the provisions of the fourth part of this Constitution on the economic organization and structure of the State. Article 350 Any title granted over fiscal reserves shall be null as of law, except by express authorization for reasons of state necessity and public utility in accordance with the statute. Article 351 I. The State shall assume control and direction of the exploration, exploitation, industrial use, transport and trade of strategic natural resources through public, cooperative or communitarian entities, which may in turn contract private enterprises and establish mixed enterprises. II. The State may enter into contracts on joint ventures with legal entities, Bolivian or foreign, for the exploitation of natural resources. It must make sure that the resulting economic benefits are reinvested in the country. III. The management and administration of natural resources shall guarantee social participation and control in the design of the sector policies. Mixed enterprises may be established in the management and administration, with representation from State and society, which shall safeguard the collective welfare. IV. Private enterprises, Bolivian or foreign, shall pay taxes and royalties when they participate in the exploitation of natural resources; the payments may not be refunded. The royalties for the use of natural resources are a right and a compensation for their exploitation, and they shall be regulated by the Constitution and by statute. Article 352

The exploitation of natural resources in a specified territory shall be subject to a consultation process with the affected population, initiated by the State, which shall be based on the principles of free, prior and informed consultation. Citizen participation is guaranteed in the process of management of the environment, and the conservation of ecosystems shall be promoted, in accordance with the Constitution and the statute. In the indigenous originary peasant nations and people, the consultation shall take place respecting their norms and procedures. Article 353 The Bolivian people shall have equitable access to the benefits resulting from the use of all natural resources. Preference shall be given to the territories where these resources are found, and to the indigenous originary peasant nations and people. Article 354 The State shall develop and promote research related to the management, conservation and use of natural resources and biodiversity. Article 355 I. The industrial use and sale of the natural resources shall be a priority of the State. II. The profits gained from the exploitation and sale of the natural resources shall be distributed and reinvested to promote economic diversification at the different levels of territorial organization of the State. The percentages to be distributed shall be approved by statute. III. The processes of industrial use shall take place preferably in the place of origin of the production and shall create conditions that favor competitiveness in the internal and international market. Article 356 The activities of exploration, exploitation, refining, industrial use, transportation and sale of nonrenewable natural resources shall have the character of state necessity and public utility. Article 357 In view of their status as social property of the Bolivian people, no foreign person or company, nor any Bolivian person or private company may register property titles to Bolivian natural resources in stock markets or employ them as means in financial operations aiming at the transfer of assets or their use as security. The notation and registry of reserves is the exclusive power of the State. Article 358

The rights of use and exploitation of natural resources shall be subject to the provisions of the Constitution and the statute. These rights shall be subject to periodic review for compliance with the technical, economic and environmental regulations. A lack of compliance shall entail the reversion or nullification of the rights of use and exploitation. THIRD CHAPTER HYDROCARBONS Article 359 I. The hydrocarbons, whatever their condition or the form in which they appear, are the inalienable and permanent property of the Bolivian people. The State, on behalf and in representation of the Bolivian people, owns the entire production of hydrocarbons of the country and is the only one authorized to sell it. The totality of the revenue derived from the sale of hydrocarbons shall be the property of the State. II. No contract, agreement or convention, formal, direct or indirect, tacit or express, may violate totally or partially the provisions of this article. In the event of violation, the contracts shall be null as a matter of law, and those who have agreed to, signed, approved or executed them, have committed the crime of high treason. Article 360 The state shall define the policy on hydrocarbons, shall promote their comprehensive, sustainable and equitable development, and shall guarantee energy sovereignty. Article 361 I. Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB) is a self-sufficient company governed by public law, unseizable, with autonomy of administrative, technical and economic management within the framework of the state hydrocarbon policy. YPFB, under the guidance of the competent Ministry and as the operative arm of the State, is the only entity authorized to conduct activities in the productive chain of hydrocarbons and their sale. II. YPFB may not transfer its rights or obligations in any form or modality, whether tacit or express, direct or indirectly. Article 362 I. YPFB is authorized to sign service contracts with public, mixed or private enterprises, Bolivian or foreign, so that these enterprises, in the name and representation of YPFB, realize specified activities in the productive chain in exchange for compensation or payment of their services. The signing of these contracts may in no circumstances result in losses for YPFB or the State.

II. The contracts relating to activities of exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons must obtain the prior authorization and express approval of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. In case the authorization is refused the contracts shall be null as a matter of law, without the necessity of a judicial or extra-judicial declaration. Article 363 I. The Empresa Boliviana de Industrialización de Hidrocarburos (EBIH) is a self sufficient company governed by public law, with autonomy in its administrative, technical and economic management, under the guidance of the competent Ministry and YPFB, which acts within the framework of state hydrocarbon policy. EBIH, in representation of the State and within its territory, shall be responsible for the industrial use of the hydrocarbons. II. YPFB may establish associations or mixed economic enterprises for the exploration, exploitation, refining, industrial use, transport and sale of hydrocarbons. In these associations and companies, YPBF must hold no less than fifty one percent of the total capital of the company. Article 364 On behalf and in representation of the Bolivian State YPFB shall hold and exercise property rights in the territories of other states. Article 365 A self-sufficient institution of public law, with autonomy in its administrative, technical and economic management, under the guidance of the competent Ministry, shall be responsible for the regulation, control, supervision and audit of the activities of the entire productive chain until industrial use, within the framework of the state hydrocarbons policy in accordance with the statute. Article 366 Every foreign enterprise which carries out activities in the productive chain of hydrocarbons on behalf and in representation of the State shall submit to the sovereignty of the State, and to the laws and authority of the State. No foreign court or jurisdiction shall be recognized in any circumstances, and the recourse to international arbitration or to diplomatic protection shall not be accepted even in exceptional cases. Article 367 The exploitation, consumption and sale of hydrocarbons and its derivatives must conform to a policy of development which guarantees domestic consumption. The export of the excess production shall contain as much added value as possible. Article 368

The departments which are producers of hydrocarbons shall receive a royalty of eleven percent of their audited departmental production of hydrocarbons. The non-producing departments and the General Treasury of the State shall also obtain a percentage of the revenue which shall be determined by a special statute. FOURTH CHAPTER MINING AND METALLURGY Article 369 I. The State shall be responsible for the mineral riches that are found in the soil and subsoil, whatever their origin, and their use shall be regulated by statute. The state mining industry, the private mining industry and the cooperative companies are recognized as producing entities. II. The non-metallic natural resources existing in the salts, brines, evaporations, sulfurs and other substances are of strategic character for the country. III. The direction of the mining and metallurgy policy, as well as the encouragement, promotion and control of mining activity, shall be the responsibility of the State. IV. The State shall control and audit the entire productive chain of mining and of the activities developed by the owners and parties of mining rights, mining contracts or pre-existing rights. Article 370 I. The State shall grant mining rights in the entire productive chain and sign mining contracts with individuals and collective entities upon compliance with the norms established by statute. II. The State shall promote and strengthen cooperative mines so that they contribute to the socialeconomic development of the country. III. The mining rights in the entire productive chain as well as in mining contracts must fulfill a social economic function performed directly by their owners. IV. The mining right which covers investments and the work of prospecting, exploration, exploitation, concentration, industrial use or sale of minerals and metals is the domain of the owners. A statute shall define the scope of this right. V. The mining contract shall oblige the beneficiaries to develop mining activities to satisfy the social-economic interest. The failure to fulfill this obligation shall trigger the immediate dissolution of the contract. VI. The State, through self-sufficient entities, shall promote and develop policies concerning the management, prospecting, exploration, exploitation, industrial use, commercialization and technical, geological and scientific information and evaluation of non-renewable natural resources for the development of mining.

Article 371 I. The areas of mining exploitation granted by contract are non-transferable, unseizable, and may not be passed on by hereditary succession. II. The legal domicile of the mining companies shall be established in the local jurisdiction where the largest mining operation takes place. Article 372 I. The nationalized mining groups, their industrial plants and their foundries are part of the people’s property and may not be transferred or judicially assigned as property to private businesses under any title. II. The higher-level direction and management of the mining industry shall be entrusted to a selfsufficient entity whose powers are determined by statute. III. The State shall participate in the industrial use and the sale of metallic and non-metallic mineralogical resources, as regulated by statute. IV. The new self-sufficient companies created by the State shall establish their legal domicile in the departments of greatest mining production, Potosí and Oruro. FIFTH CHAPTER WATER RESOURCES Article 373 I. Water constitutes a most fundamental right for life, within the framework of the sovereignty of the people. The State shall promote the use of and access to water on the basis of principles of solidarity, complementariness, reciprocity, equity, diversity and sustainability. II. Water resources in all their forms, surface and subterranean, constitute limited, vulnerable, and strategic resources, and serve a social, cultural and environmental function. These resources may not be the object of private appropriation and they, as well as the services related to them, shall not be given as concessions and are subject to a system of licensing, registration and authorization in accordance with the statute. Article 374 I. The State shall protect and guarantee the preferential use of water for life. It is the duty of the State to manage, regulate, protect and plan the adequate and sustainable use of water resources, with social participation, guaranteeing access to water for all inhabitants. A statute shall establish the conditions and limits of all its uses.

II. The State shall recognize, respect and protect the uses and customs of the community, of its local authorities and the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples in relation to the right to, and the sustainable management and administration of the water. III. Fossil, glacial, wetland, subterranean, mineral, medicinal and other waters are priorities for the State which must guarantee their conservation, protection, preservation, restoration, sustainable use and integral management; they are inalienable, unseizable and not subject to the statute of limitations. Article 375 I. It is the duty of the State to develop plans for the sustainable use, conservation, management and exploitation of the river basins. II. The State shall regulate the sustainable management and administration of the water resources and the basins for irrigation, food security and basic services, respecting the uses and customs of the communities. III. It is the duty of the State to conduct the studies for the identification of fossil waters and their subsequent protection, management and sustainable use. Article 376 Water resources from rivers, lakes and lagoons that form water basins are considered strategic resources for the development and sovereignty of Bolivia for their potential, the variety of natural resources they contain and their fundamental role in the ecosystems. The State shall avoid actions near the headwaters and medium zones of rivers that may cause damages to the ecosystems or diminish the flow volume, preserve their natural state and watch over the development and well-being of the population. Article 377 I. Every international treaty on water resources signed by the State shall safeguard the sovereignty of the country and give priority to the interests of the State. II. The State shall safeguard the border and transborder waters permanently for the conservation of the water riches that contribute to the integration of the people. SIXTH CHAPTER ENERGY Article 378 I. The different forms of energy and their sources constitute a strategic resource, access to them is a fundamental and essential right for the integral and social development of the country, and

shall be governed by the principles of efficiency, continuity, adaptability, and environmental preservation. II. It is the non-transferable power of the of the central government to develop the chain of energy production in its phases of generation, transport, and distribution, by means of public and mixed enterprises, non-profit institutions, cooperatives, private companies, and communitarian and social enterprises, with social participation and control. The chain of energy production may not be controlled exclusively by private interests, nor may it be given in concession. Private participation shall be regulated by statute. Article 379 I. The State shall develop and promote research and the use of new forms of production of alternative energies which are compatible with the conservation of the environment. II. The State shall guarantee the generation of energy for domestic consumption; the export of excess energy must provide for the necessary reserves of the country. SEVENTH CHAPTER BIODIVERSITY, COCA, PROTECTED AREAS AND FORESTRY RESOURCES SECTION I BIODIVERSITY Article 380 I. The renewable natural resources shall be exploited in a sustainable manner, respecting the characteristics and natural value of each ecosystem. II. In order to guarantee the ecological equilibrium, soils must be used in accordance with their capacity for greater use within the framework of the process of the organization of the use and occupation of land, taking into account their biophysical, socioeconomic, and cultural characteristics, and institutional policies. A statute shall regulate its implementation. Article 381 I. Native species of animal and vegetable origin are natural assets. The State shall establish the necessary measures for their conservation, exploitation and development. II. The State shall protect all genetic resources and microorganisms which are found in the ecosystems of the territory, as well as the knowledge related to their use and exploitation. For their protection a system of registration which safeguards their existence as well as an intellectual property protection in favor of the State or the collective local subjects claiming it shall be established. For all the resources which are not registered the State shall establish protection procedures by statute.

Article 382 It is the power and the duty of the State to defend, recover, protect and repatriate biological material derived from natural resources, from ancestral knowledge and other sources that originate in the territory. Article 383 The State shall establish measures for the partial or total, temporary or permanent restriction of the extracting uses of biodiversity resources. The measures shall be directed towards the need to preserve, conserve, recover and restore the biodiversity at risk of extinction. Illegal possession, handling and trafficking of biodiversity species shall be criminally sanctioned. SECTION II COCA Article 384 The State protects the originary and ancestral coca as cultural heritage, as a renewable natural resource of the biodiversity of Bolivia, and as a factor of social cohesion; in its natural state it is not a narcotic. The reevaluation, production, sale and industrial use of coca shall be governed by statute. SECTION III PROTECTED AREAS Article 385 I. The protected areas constitute a common good, and they form part of the natural and cultural heritage of the country; they fulfill environmental, cultural, social and economic functions for sustainable development. II. Where protected areas and indigenous originary peasant territories overlap, the joint management of the area shall take place subject to the norms and procedures of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples, respecting the objective of creation of these areas. SECTION IV FORESTRY RESOURCES Article 386 The natural forests and forest soils are of strategic character for the development of the Bolivian people. The State shall recognize the rights to use the forests for the benefit of communities and individual operators. It shall also promote activities of conservation and sustainable use, the generation of added value to its products, and the rehabilitation and reforestation of degraded areas.

Article 387 I. The State must guarantee the conservation of natural forests in forestry areas, their sustainable exploitation and the conservation and recovery of the flora, fauna, and degraded areas. II. A statute shall regulate the protection and use of forestry species that have socio-economic, cultural and ecological relevance. Article 388 The indigenous originary peasant communities living within forest areas shall have the exclusive right to their use and their management, in accordance with the statute. Article 389 I. The conversion of woodland for agriculture, cattle breeding and other purposes shall only proceed in areas legally allocated for that use, in accordance with the planning policies and the statute. II. A statute shall determine the ecological servitudes and the zoning of internal uses in order to guarantee the long term conservation of the land and water reservoirs. III. All conversions of land in areas not classified for such purposes shall constitute a punishable offense and shall give rise to the obligation to repair the damage caused. EIGHTH CHAPTER AMAZONIA Article 390 I. The Bolivian Amazonia basin constitutes a specially protected strategic space for the integral development of the country due to its sensitive environment, existing biodiversity, water resources and eco-regions. II. The Bolivian Amazonia includes the entire Department of Pando, Iturralde Province of the Department of La Paz and the provinces of Vaca Diez and Ballivan of the Department of Beni. The integral development of the Bolivian Amazonia, as a territorial area of tropical rainforests, in accordance with the specific characteristics of the forestry wealth which it offers for extracting and harvesting, shall be governed by a special statute for the benefit of the region and the country. Article 391 I. The State shall give priority to the sustainable, integral development of the Bolivian Amazonia, through a comprehensive, participatory, joint and equitable management of the Amazon jungle. The management shall be directed towards the generation of employment and

the increase of the income of its inhabitants within the framework of protection and sustainable use of the environment. II. The State shall promote access to financing for tourism, eco-tourism and other initiatives of regional entrepreneurship. III. The State shall create, in coordination with the indigenous originary peasant authorities and the inhabitants of the Amazonia, a special decentralized organ with its headquarter in the Amazonian region to promote activities typical of the region. Article 392 I. The State shall implement special policies for the benefit of the indigenous originary peasant nations and peoples of the region in order to create the necessary conditions for the reactivation, stimulation, industrial use, commercialization, protection and conservation of traditional extract products. II. The historical, cultural and economic value of the siringa and the chestnut tree, symbols of the Bolivian Amazonia, is recognized; their cutting shall be punished, except in the cases of public interest as regulated by statute. NINTH CHAPTER LAND AND TERRITORY Article 393 The State recognizes, protects and guarantees individual and communitarian or collective property of land, as long as it fulfills a social purpose or social-economic purpose, as the case may be. Article 394 I. Individual agrarian property is classified as small, medium and corporate, depending on the surface area, production mode and development criteria. Its maximum and minimum size, characteristics and forms of conversion shall be regulated by statute. Legally acquired rights by individual owners whose piece of land is located inside indigenous originary peasant territories are guaranteed. II. The small property is an indivisible, unseizable family asset exempt from agrarian property taxes. The indivisibility does not affect the right of hereditary succession in the conditions established by statute. III. The State recognizes, protects and guarantees communitarian or collective property, which includes indigenous originary peasant territory and the territory of the originary intercultural communities and rural communities. Collective property is declared indivisible, imprescriptible, unseizable, inalienable and irreversible, and shall be exempt from agrarian property taxes. The

communities may be the titleholders, recognizing the complementary character of collective and individual rights and respecting the identity-based territorial unity. Article 395 I. Fiscal lands shall be granted to indigenous originary peasants, intercultural indigenous communities, Afro-Bolivians and peasant communities which do not have them or do not have them to a sufficient extent, in accordance with a State policy which takes into account the ecological and geographic realities as well as the demographic, social, cultural and economic necessities. The grant shall take place in accordance with the policies of sustainable rural development and the entitlement of women to access, distribution and redistribution of land without discrimination based on civil status or marital union. II. Double grants, purchase and sale, exchange and donation of granted lands are prohibited. III. The generation of income through the speculative use of land is prohibited as contrary to the collective interest. Article 396 I. The State shall regulate the land market, preventing the accumulation of surface areas exceeding those admitted by statute as well as the division into surface areas smaller than those permitted for the small property. II. Foreigners may not acquire lands of the State under any title. Article 397 I. Labor is the fundamental source for the acquisition and retention of agrarian property. Properties must be used to serve a social purpose or a social-economic purpose depending on the nature of the property, in order to safeguard the right. II. Social purpose shall be understood as the sustainable use of the land by the indigenous originary peasant peoples and communities, as well as the use made of small properties, which constitutes the source of subsistence, well-being and sociocultural development of the titleholders. The norms of the communities are recognized in the fulfillment of the social purpose. III. The social-economic purpose must be understood as the sustainable use of the land in the development of productive activities, in accordance with its capacity for extended use, for the benefit of the society, the collective interest and its owner. The corporate property is subject to review in accordance with the statute, to verify the compliance with the social-economic purpose. Article 398

Latifundio and double titles are prohibited for being contrary to the collective interest and the development of the country. Latifundio is understood to mean the unproductive holding of land; the land that does not fulfill a social-economic function; the exploitation of land which makes use of a system of servitude, semi-slavery or slavery in labor relations or the property that exceeds the maximum surface area zone provided for by statute. In no case may the maximum surface exceed five thousand hectars. Article 399 I. The new limits of zoned agrarian property shall apply to pieces of land that have been acquired after this Constitution enters into force. For purposes of the non-retroactivity of the law, the rights of possession and agrarian property are recognized and respected in accordance with the statute. II. The surface areas exceeding those which fulfill the Social Economic Purpose shall be expropriated. The double titles provided for in the previous article refer to the double grants processed before the former Consejo Nacional de Reforma Agraria, CNRA. The prohibition of double grants does not apply to legally acquired rights of third parties. Article 400 The division of land into surface areas smaller than the maximum area recognized for a small property by statute is prohibited for affecting the sustainable use of the land and being contrary to the collective interest. The maximum area for a small property established by statute shall take into account the characteristics of the geographic zones. The State shall establish legal mechanisms to avoid the division of the small property. Article 401 I. The failure to fulfill the social-economic purpose and the holding of latifundios shall constitute grounds for the reversion of the land, and the land shall pass into the domain and property of the Bolivian people. II. The expropriation of land shall occur for reasons of public necessity and utility, and upon prior payment of a fair compensation. Article 402 The State has the obligation to: 1. Encourage plans for human settlement to achieve a rational demographic distribution and better use of the land and the natural resources, granting to the new settlers the facilities to have access to education, health, food security and production, within the framework of the Territorial Organization of the State and the conservation of the environment.

2. Promote policies aimed at eliminating all forms of discrimination against women with regard to the access to and ownership and inheritance of land. Article 403 I. The totality of the indigenous originary peasant territory is recognized, which includes the right to the land, to the use and exclusive exploitation of the renewable natural resources in the conditions determined by statute; to prior and informed consultation and to a sharing of the benefits of the exploitation of the non-renewable natural resources that are found in their territories; to the application of their own norms, by their representative organs, and to the definition of their development in accordance to their own cultural criteria and principles of harmonious coexistence with nature. The indigenous originary peasant territories may be composed of communities. II. The indigenous originary peasant territory includes areas of production, areas of use and conservation of natural resources and spaces for social, spiritual and cultural reproduction. A statute shall establish the procedure for the recognition of these rights. Article 404 The Servicio Boliviano de Reforma Agraria, whose supreme authority is the President of the State, is the entity responsible for planning, implementing and consolidating the agrarian reform process and has jurisdiction in the entire territory of the country. TITLE III COMPREHENSIVE SUSTAINABLE RURAL DEVELOPMENT Article 405 The comprehensive sustainable rural development is a fundamental part of the economic policies of the State which shall give priority to actions promoting all forms of communitarian economic undertakings and the totality of the rural actors, emphasizing food security and sovereignty, by means of: 1. The sustained and sustainable increase of productivity in agriculture, cattle breeding, manufacturing, agro-industrial activities and tourism, as well as of their commercial competitiveness. 2. The definition and internal complementariness of the structures of the agricultural, livestock and agro-industrial production. 3. The achievement of better conditions for economic exchange of the rural productive sector in relation to the rest of the Bolivian economy. 4. The reevaluation and respect of the indigenous originary peasant communities in all aspects of their life.

5. The strengthening of the economy of the small agricultural and livestock producers and of the family and communitarian economy. Article 406 I. The State shall guarantee the sustainable comprehensive rural development by means of policies, plans, programs and comprehensive projects which promote agricultural, artisan and forestry production and tourism, with the objective of achieving the best possible use, transformation, industrialization and commercialization of the renewable natural resources. II. The State shall promote and strengthen the rural economic productive organizations, including are the artisans, the cooperatives, the associations of agricultural producers and manufacturers, and the small, very small and medium communitarian agricultural businesses, which contribute to the social-economic development of the country, in accordance with their cultural and productive identity. Article 407 The objectives of the State policy for comprehensive rural development, to be pursued in coordination with the autonomous and decentralized territorial entities, are the following: 1. To guaranty food security and sovereignty, giving priority to the production and consumption of agricultural foods produced in the Bolivian territory. 2. To establish mechanisms for the protection of Bolivian agricultural and livestock production. 3. To promote the production and sale of agro-ecological products. 4. To protect the agricultural and agro-industrial production against natural disasters and climatic, geological and other fateful catastrophes. A statute shall make provision for the creation of an agricultural insurance. 5. To implement and develop technical, productive and ecological education at all levels and in all modalities. 6. To establish policies and projects in a sustainable way, achieving the conservation and recuperation of the soils. 7. To promote irrigation systems for the purpose of guaranteeing agricultural and livestock production. 8. To guarantee technical assistance and the establishment of mechanisms of innovation and technology transfer in the entire agricultural productive chain. 9. To establish a seed bank and centers of genetic research.

10. To establish policies to encourage and support the productive agricultural sectors with natural structural weaknesses. 11. To control the entry and exit of biological and genetic resources. 12. To establish policies and programs to guarantee agricultural sanitation and food safety. 13. To provide productive, manufacturing and industrial infrastructure and basic services for the agricultural sector. Article 408 The State shall determine stimulus measures for the benefit of small and medium producers designed to compensate them for the disadvantages resulting from the unequal exchange between agricultural and livestock products and the rest of the economy. Article 409 The production, import and commercialization of genetically modified products shall be regulated by statute. FIFTH PART NORMATIVE HIERARCHY AND CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM SOLE TITLE SUPREMACY AND REFORM OF THE CONSTITUTION Article 410 I. All persons, natural and legal, as well as the public organs, public functions and institutions are subject to this Constitution. II. The Constitution is the supreme law of the Bolivian legal system and enjoys supremacy over any other law. The provisions of constitutional rank include the international Treaties and Conventions on human rights and the provisions of Community Law, as ratified by the country. The application of the legal provisions shall be governed by the following hierarchy, in accordance with the competences of the territorial entities: 1. The Political Constitution of the State. 2. The international treaties. 3. The national [statutes, the autonomy statutes, the institutional charters and the other departmental, municipal and indigenous legislation. 4. Decrees, regulations and other resolutions issued by the competent executive organs.

Article 411 I. A comprehensive reform of the Constitution, or one which affects its fundamental bases, the rights, duties and guarantees, or [the provisions on] the supremacy and reform of the Constitution, shall proceed through originary plenipotentiary Constituent Assembly, activated by the popular will by way of referendum. The referendum shall be called by a citizen initiative, with the signatures of at least twenty percent of the electorate; by an absolute majority of the members of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly; or by the President of the State. The Constituent Assembly shall draft its own rules of procedures for all matters, but must approve the constitutional text by two thirds of the total number of its members present. The validity of the reform shall require its approval by constitutional referendum. II. A partial reform of the Constitution may be initiated by popular initiative, with the signatures of at least twenty percent of the electorate, or by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly through a constitutional reform act approved by two thirds of the total number of members present of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly. Any partial reform shall require approval by constitutional referendum. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS First. I. The Congress of the Republic shall, within a period of 60 days following the promulgation of this Constitution, approve a new electoral regime for the election of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly, the President, and Vice-President of the Republic; the election shall take place on December 6th, 2009. II. The mandates predating the entry into force of this Constitution shall be taken into account for the purpose of calculating the new terms of office. III. The elections of the departmental and municipal authorities shall take place on April 4th, 2010. IV. Exceptionally the terms of office of the Mayors, Municipal Councilors and Prefects of the Departments shall be extended until the newly elected authorities assume their functions in accordance with the previous paragraph. Second. The Plurinational Legislative Assembly shall approve, within a maximum period of eighty days following its installation, the Act on the Plurinational Electoral Organ, the Act on the Electoral Regime, the Act on the Judicial Organ, the Act on the Plurinational Constitutional Court, and the Framework Act on Autonomies and Decentralization. Third. I. The departments which opted for departmental autonomy in the referendum of July 2nd, 2006, shall directly achieve the status of departmental autonomy, in accordance with the Constitution. II. The departments which opted for departmental autonomy in the referendum of July 2nd, 2006, must adjust their statutes to this Constitution and submit them to constitutional review.

Fourth. The election of the authorities of the organs referred to in the second provision shall take place in conformity with the electoral calendar established by the Plurinational Electoral Organ. Fifth. During the first term of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly the statutes necessary for the development of the constitutional provisions shall be approved. Sixth. Within a maximum period of one year following the entry into force of the Act on the Judicial Organ, and in accordance with it, the judicial hierarchy shall be reviewed. Seventh. For the purpose of the application of paragraph I of article 293 of this Constitution, the indigenous territory shall have as the basis of its demarcation the Communitarian Lands of Origin. Within one year following the election of the Executive and Legislative Organs the category of Communitarian Land of Origin shall be subjected to an administrative procedure for its conversion to Indigenous Originary Peasant Territory, within the framework established by this Constitution. Eight. I. Within a period of one year following the election of the Executive and Legislative Organs, the concessions concerning natural resources, electricity, telecommunications and basic services must be brought into line with the new legal system. In no case shall the transfer of the concessions to the new legal system imply a disregard for acquired rights. II. Within the same period, the mining concessions concerning metallic and non-metallic minerals, crystals, salts, sulfurs and others, granted in the fiscal reserves of Bolivian territory, shall cease to be effective. III. The mining concessions granted to national and foreign companies prior to the enactment of this Constitution must be brought into line with it through mining contracts within a period of one year. IV. The State recognizes and respects the pre-existing rights of the cooperative mining companies in view of their social productive character. V. The concessions regarding radioactive minerals granted prior to the enactment of the Constitution are abolished and revert to the State. Ninth. The international treaties existing prior to the Constitution which do not contradict it remain part of the domestic legal system with statutory rank. Within a period of four years following the election of the new Executive Organ, the latter shall terminate and, if desirable, renegotiate the international treaties that are contrary to the Constitution. Tenth. The requirement of speaking at least two official languages for the discharge of public functions prescribed in Article 234.7 shall be applied progressively in accordance with the statute. ABROGATING PROVISION

Abrogating provision. The Political Constitution of the State of 1967 and its subsequent reforms are abolished. FINAL PROVISION This Constitution, approved through referendum by the Bolivian people, shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Gazette.

NOTES [*] The wiphala is a square emblem which represents the native peoples of the Andean regions of Bolivia. It is commonly used as a flag and symbolizes the Inca Empire (Tahuantinsuyu) and its four regions.

Oceana™ 198 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10016 (212) 726-6000

