In the name of God: 'The Bolivian people, represented by the national convention of eighteen hundred and eighty, do hereby sanction and proclaim the Constitution of eighteen hundred and seventy-eight, as amended in the following way:
<preamble>

SECTION I.
<title> The Nation.
ARTICLE 1. Bolivia, a free and independent nation, constituted as a unitary Republic, adopts for its government the democratic representative form. 
ART. 2. The State recognizes and supports the Roman Catholic Apostolic religion, and prohibits the public exercise of any other form of worship, except in the colonial territories, where there shall be toleration.

SECTION II.
<title> Individual rights and guaranties.
ART. 3. Slavery does not exist in Bolivia. 
Every slave is free from the moment in which he sets his foot on Bolivian soil. 
ART. 4. Every man has the right to enter the territory of the Republic, remain therein, travel through it, leave it, without any other restrictions than those established by international Jaw; to work and engage in any lawful business; to publish his ideas through the press, without previous censorship; to teach, under the supervision of the State, without other conditions than those of ability and morality; to enter into associations; to assemble peacefully, and to make petitions individually or collectively. 
Primary instruction is free and compulsory. 
ART. 5. No one shall be arrested, detained, or imprisoned, except in the cases and according to the forms established by law, and no warrants of arrest shall be obeyed if not issued by competent authority. Service of the warrant shall be made in writing. 
ART. 6. Offenders caught in, flagrante delicto may be arrested by any person, even without a warrant, provided that it is for the sole purpose of taking them before the proper authority, who must examine them within twenty-four hours after the arrest, at the latest. 
ART. 7. Wardens of prisons shall not admit - any one as arrested, imprisoned, or detained, without entering on their register a copy of the respective warrant. They can, nevertheless, retain within the prison limits those who have been arrested with the object of being brought before the proper judge, but in such case they are under obligation to report the fact to the said judge, within twenty-four hours. 
ART. 8. Attacks against personal security make the immediate authors thereof responsible, and the fact that the offense was committed by order of a superior authority shall not be accepted as an excuse. 
ART. 9. No one shall be tried by special commissions, or by other courts than those established prior to the time of the offense. Only those who are under military jurisdiction may be tried by councils of war.
ART. 10. No one shall be compelled to testify against himself in a criminal cause, nor shall his blood relations up to the fourth degree inclusive, or the second degree of affinity, be bound to depose against him. 
In no case shall torture of any kind be employed. 
ART. 11. Confiscation of property shall never be applied as punishment for political offenses. 
Private papers and correspondence are inviolable and shall not be seized except in the cases determined by law and by written order of the competent authority. Intercepted letters and private papers seized in violation of this provision shall produce no legal effect. 
ART. 12. Every house is an inviolable asylum; at night it shall not be entered without the consent of the person who inhabits it, and in the daytime entrance thereto is only allowed on the written order of the lawful authority, except in cases of in flagrante delicto. 
No soldier or military man shall be quartered in a private house in time of peace without the consent of the owner; nor in time of war except in the manner prescribed by law. 
ART. 13. Private property is inviolable; condemnation thereof shall not be ordered except for public utility and according to law, and upon previous and just indemnity. 
ART. 14. No tax shall be obligatory if not established by the legislative power according to the provisions of this constitution. Any person may apply to the proper judicial authorities and claim against any illegal taxation. 
Municipal taxes are obligatory when levied in accordance with the principles established in this constitution.
ART. 15. No money shall be withdrawn from the national, departmental, municipal, or educational treasuries, except when the expense is authorized by the respective appropriation. A quarterly account of the public expenditures shall be published within sixty days, at the latest, after the expiration of the quarter. 
The minister of the Treasury shall publish the accounts corresponding to the national expenses; the superintendents, those of their respective departments. 
ART. 16. Equality is the basis of taxation and of all public burdens. No personal service shall be exacted of anyone if not in accordance with law or by virtue of a final decision. 
ART. 17. Real estate belonging to the church and property belonging to charitable, educational, and municipal establishments or religious corporations, shall enjoy the same guaranties as are granted to property of private individuals. 
ART. 18. The public debt is guaranteed. All obligations or engagements contracted by the State in conformity with the law are inviolable. 
ART. 19. All persons in Bolivia shall enjoy civil rights, the exercise of which shall be regulated by civil law. 
ART. 20. The legislative power alone has authority to alter or amend the codes or enact rules or provisions concerning judicial procedure. 
ART. 21. The penalty of death is abolished, but it may be imposed in cases of assassination, parricide, and treason to the country. Treason to the country means complicity with the enemy in time of foreign war. 
ART. 22. The penalties of infamy and civil death are abolished.
ART. 23. The acts of those who usurp public functions are null and void, as are also the acts of those who exercise jurisdiction or power not emanating from law. 
ART. 24. The principles,, guaranties, and rights recognized in the foregoing articles shall not be changed by laws intended to regulate their exercise. 
ART. 25. Those guilty of violation of constitutional rights and guaranties shall enjoy no jurisdictional privileges, and shall be subject to ordinary jurisdiction. 

SECTION III.
<title> Preservation of public order.
ART. 26. In cases of grave danger caused by internal commotion or foreign war threatening the security of the Republic, the Chief Executive may, with the approval of the council of ministers, declare in state of siege such portion of the, territory as may be necessary, said' state to continue as long as it may be indispensable. 
ART. 27. The declaration of the state of siege produces the following effects: 
<list>
1. The Executive shall have the power to increase the standing army and call to active service the national guard. 
2. It shall have the power to collect in advance such portions of the national taxes and revenues as may be indispensable, and to raise in the form of a loan a sufficient sum of money in case that the expenses cannot be met with the ordinary revenues.
In case of forced loans, the Executive shall fix the quota corresponding to each Department, and it shall be the duty of the municipal councils to make the distribution thereof among the property-owners of their respective districts. 
3. It may reduce the payment of the civil and ecclesiastical lists, and of the sums allowed to the respective municipalities, this reduction to be made in such proportion as may be required to cover the necessary military expenses caused by the disturbance of public order; but the said reduction may not exceed fifty per cent on the amounts fixed in the appropriations law. 
4. The guaranties and rights granted by this constitution shall not be de facto suspended in general through the declaration of the state of siege; but they may be so suspended in regard to individuals charged upon good grounds of conspiring against the tranquillity of the Republic. This suspension shall take place in the manner set forth in the following paragraphs: 
5. The legitimate authority may issue summons or orders of arrest against the persons mentioned in the foregoing paragraph; but the persons arrested shall be placed at the disposal of the competent court, within seventy-two hours, if possible, from the moment of the arrest, and all documents that' have given authority for the arrest and the record of the judicial investigations made shall be forwarded to that court. If the proceedings can not be instituted within the said time, the case may be postponed until public order is reestablished; but in. no case, except that of amnesty, shall the proceedings be omitted. 
Should the maintenance of public peace necessitate the transportation of the suspected persons to some other place, the authorities may order it, provided it is not to a greater distance than fifty leagues or to an unhealthy locality. The banishment or arrest can only take place in the event that the suspected or accused person does not prefer to leave the Republic. 
6. The Executive may also withhold or retain private correspondence, without tampering with it, and reestablish the use of passports for those entering or leaving the territory declared to be in a state of siege.
</list>
ART. 28. The Government shall report to Congress, at the next session on the use made by it of the authority conferred by the state of siege, stating the result of the judicial proceedings instituted, and suggesting the necessary measures for the payment of the debts contracted, whether by direct loans or by reduction in the payment of the lists and the collection of taxes in advance. 
ART. 29. Congress shall devote its first meetings to the examination of the accounts referred to in the preceding article, and either approve them or fix the responsibility incurred by the executive. 
ART. 30. Neither Congress nor any association or public gathering shall have authority to grant to the executive extraordinary faculties, or the whole public power, or give to it supremacy by which the life, honor, and property of the Bolivian people should be at the mercy of the Government or of any person whatever. 
Deputies who initiate, favor, or carry out these acts shall become, by so doing, unworthy of the confidence of the nation.
SECTION IV.
<title> Bolivians.
ART. 31. Bolivians by birth are:
<list>
1. Those born in the territory of the Republic. 
2. Those born in a foreign country of a Bolivian father or mother in the service of the Republic, or who emigrated for political reasons. These shall be held to be Bolivians even in case that under any special law actual nativity in Bolivian territory may be required. 
</list>
ART. 32. The following are also Bolivians: 
<list>
1. Children of Bolivian fathers or mothers, born in a foreign country, by the simple fact of acquiring domicile in Bolivia. 
2. Foreigners who, having 'resided one year in the Republic, declare before the municipal authorities of the place where they live their desire to become Bolivians. 
3. Foreigners who, as a concession, have obtained letters of naturalization from the Chamber of Deputies.
</list>

SECTION V.
<title> Citizenship.
ART. 33. To be a citizen it is required: 
<list>
1. To be a Bolivian. 
2. To be twenty-one years of age if unmarried, or eighteen if married. 
3. To be able to read and write, to own real estate, or have an annual income of two hundred bolivianos, provided that this amount does not represent wages for services rendered as a domestic. 
4. To be inscribed in the civ register.
</list>ART. 34. Citizens shall have the following rights: 
<list>
1. To concur to the constitution or exercise of the public powers, either as an elector, or an eligible candidate. 
2. To be eligible for all public functions, with no other requisite than that of fitness, saving the exceptions established by this Constitution. 
</list>
ART. 35. The rights of citizenship shall be forfeited: 
<list>
1. By naturalization in a foreign country. 
2. By judicial sentence passed by a competent tribunal inflicting any form of corporal punishment, until rehabilitation is obtained. 
3. By declaration of fraudulent bankruptcy. 
4. By acceptance of employment, functions, or decorations from a foreign Government without special permission from the Senate. 
</list>
ART. 36. The rights of citizenship are suspended and shall remain sub judice, as long as the citizen is under indictment or subject to a writ of execution for debt to the National Treasury. 

SECTION VI.
<title> The sovereignty.
ART. 37. The sovereignty is vested essentially in the Nation; it is inalienable and imprescriptible, and its exercise is delegated to the legislative, executive, and judicial powers. The independence of these three powers is the basis of the Government. 
ART. 38. The people do not deliberate or govern, except through their representatives and the authorities established by the Constitution. Armed forces or gatherings of individuals assuming to exercise the rights of the people shall be guilty of sedition.
SECTION VII.
<title> The legislative power.
ART. 39. The legislative power is vested in the National Congress, composed of two chambers, one of deputies and another of senators. 
ART. 40. Congress shall meet in ordinary. session every year in the capital of the Republic on the sixth day of August, without the necessity of a previous call. The session shall last sixty working days, which may be extended to ninety, either by the will of Congress, or upon request of the Executive power. 
ART. 41. If at any time, for some grave reasons, the Executive deems it expedient for the ordinary Congress not to meet in the capital of the Republic, a call may be issued designating another place for the meeting. 
ART. 42. Congress may assemble in extra session, when so resolved by absolute majority of both houses, or by call of the Executive, which, in such case, shall determine the place of meeting. 
In both cases the Congress shall devote itself exclusively to the business designated in the call. 
ART. 43. The chambers shall meet simultaneously, in the same city, with the attendance at least; of an absolute majority of their respective members, and one house shall not open or close its sessions on a different day from the, other. 
ART. 44. Any deputy or senator may be made President or VicePresident of the Republic, minister of state, diplomatic agent, (1r military commander in time of war, but he shall be suspended from the exercise of his legislative functions as long as he should hold such positions.
The Vice-Presidents shall not be in suspended from their legislative functions, except when holding the Presidency or any other of the aforesaid positions. 
ART. 45. Except in the cases set forth in the foregoing article, no deputy or senator shall accept positions whose appointment or removal depends upon the Executive, Civil, ecclesiastic, and military employees, whose appointment, and removal depend exclusively on the Executive, shall not be deputies or senators for any electoral district. Neither shall any other paid functionary be elected deputy or senator for the electoral district where he exercises jurisdiction or authority. 
ART. 46. Deputies and counters are inviolable at all times for the opinions expressed by them in the discharge of their duties.
ART. 47. No deputy or senator shall be accused, prosecuted, or arrested from the day of his election until the end of the time needed by him to return to his residence, without the consent of the house to which he belongs, except in case of in flagrante delicto if the perpetration of the offense renders him liable to corporal punishment. 
Neither shall senators or dotal, ties be sued civilly during the period named in the above paragraph. 
During their constitutional lei in of office they may make representations to the Executive power to secure compliance with the laws and congressional resolutions, and also set forth the needs of their respective electoral districts and the manner of providing for them. 
ART. 48. The sessions of Congress and of both houses shall be public; but they may be secret if two-thirds of the members thereof so resolve.
ART. 49. When the same citizen is elected deputy and senator at the same time, he shall give preference to the seat of senator. 
ART. 50. If he is elected deputy or senator for two different districts or departments, he shall be free to accept either. 
ART. 51. Senators and deputies may resign their positions at will. 
ART. 52. The functions of the legislative power are the following: 
<list>
1. To enact laws, repeal, amend, or interpret them. 
2. To levy taxes and imposts of all kinds, abolish the existing ones, and determine, if necessary, their distribution among the departments and provinces. 
3. To fix, in each legislative session, the expenses of the public administration. 
4. To fix also, in each legislative session, the strength of the military force to be maintained in time of peace. Taxes shall be levied for eighteen months only; the military force shall remain standing for the same period. 
5. To authorize the Executive to contract loans, and provide the funds necessary to meet the interest and capital; to recognize the debts contracted and to provide the means of paying them. 
6. To create new departments or provinces and designate their limits; to create ports of entry and establish custom-houses. 
7. To fix the weight, fineness, value, type, and denomination of the national coins; authorize the issue and circulation of bank notes; and regulate the system of weights and measures. 
8. To grant subsidies and guaranties of interest for the construction of railroads, canals, post-roads, and any other means of communication. 
9. To permit the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic, determining the length of their stay therein. 
10. To allow bodies of the permanent army to be stationed in the place where the sessions of Congress are held or within a radius of 10 leagues. 
11. To allow national troops to leave the territory of the Republic, fixing the time for their return. 
12. To create and abolish public offices, determining or modifying their functions and fixing their salaries. 
13. To decree amnesties and to grant individual pardons after hearing the opinion of the supreme court. 
14. To approve or reject treaties or conventions of all kinds.
</list>

SECTION VIII.
<title> The Congress.
ART. 53. Each house shall be the judge of the election of its own members, and shall have the power to suspend or expel the latter, to punish all violations of its rules, to organize the office of its secretary; to appoint all the employees in its service, to make estimates of its expenses and order the payment thereof, and to control everything relating to its internal government and police. 
ART. 54. Both houses shall meet in joint session in the following cases: 
<list>
1. To open and close its sessions.
2. To examine the certificates of election for President and VicePresident of the Republic, and count the votes; and to make by itself the election, if the electors did not act in conformity with articles 84, 85, 86, and 87 of this Constitution. 
3. To administer the oath of office to the functionaries named in the preceding paragraph.
4. To accept or refuse to accept their resignations. 
5. To approve or reject treaties and public conventions negotiated by the Executive power. 
6. To reconsider the bills objected to by the Executive. 
7. To declare war on petition of the Executive. 
8. To approve or disapprove the accounts of the Treasury to be rendered by the Executive. 
9. To determine the strength of the permanent military force. 
10. To decide, by a majority of two-thirds of its total members, the conflicts of jurisdiction between it and the Executive or the supreme court of justice, and by absolute majority of votes those between these powers with each other, or between the district courts and the Supreme Tribunal. 
</list>
ART. 55. The Congress shall not delegate to one or more of its members, nor to any other power, the functions that are given to it by this constitution.

SECTION IX.
<title> Chamber of Deputies.
ART. 56. This chamber shall be composed of deputies directly elected by the citizens, by simple plurality of votes. A special law shall regulate these elections and fix the number of deputies to be elected. 
ART. 57. To be a deputy it is necessary: 
<list>
1. To be inscribed in the national register. 
2. To be twenty-five years of age; to be a Bolivian by birth, or if by naturalization, to have at least five years' permanent residence in the Republic, and to enjoy an annual income of four hundred bolivianos derived from a profession, industry, or real property. 
3. Not to have been condemned to corporal punishment by sentence of an ordinary tribunal.
</list>ART. 58. The deputies shall serve for four years; but half of their number shall be renewed every two years. The members of the First Congress to be retired shall be designated by lot. 
ART. 59. The right to originate legislation in the matters set forth in clauses 2, 3, 4, and 5, art. 52, belongs exclusively to the Chamber of Deputies. 
ART. 60. The following are the functions of the Chamber of Deputies: 
<list>
1. To impeach before the Senate, the President and vice-president of the Republic, the ministers of state, the judges of the supreme court, and the diplomatic agents, for offenses committed in the discharge of their respective functions. 
2. To elect the justices of the supreme court upon nomination, three names for each position, made by the Senate. 
</list>

SECTION X.
<title> The Chamber of Senators.
ART. 61. The Senate of the Republic shall be composed of two senators for each Department. 
ART. 62. To be a senator it is necessary: 
<list>
1. To be a Bolivian by birth, or if by naturalization, to have five years' permanent residence in the country, and to be inscribed as a citizen in the national register. 
2. To be thirty-five years of age. 
3. To have an annual income of eight hundred bolivianos, whether derived from a profession, industry, or real property. 
4. Not to have been sentenced by the ordinary courts of justice to corporal punishment. 
5. To have resided four years in the Republic immediately before the election, unless his absence from the country has been by reason of employment in the public service. 
</list>
ART. 63. Senators shall serve for six years, and may be reelected indefinitely. 
The Senate shall be renewed by thirds every two years. The senators to retire at the end of each period shall be designated by lot. 
ART. 64. The following are the functions of the Chamber of Senators: 
<list>
1. To hear the accusations made by the Chamber of Deputies against the functionaries named in art. 60. In this case the Senate shall limit its action to decide whether or not there is ground for the prosecution, and, if the decision is in the affirmative, the accused official shall be suspended and placed at the disposal of the supreme court, to be tried by it according to law. 
The Senate shall finally try the cases of impeachment of the justices of the Supreme Court, and shall exact from them the proper responsibility, whether the accusation proceeds from the Chamber of Deputies, complaint of injured parties, or' information from any private citizen. 
In the cases mentioned in the two foregoing paragraphs a majority of two-thirds of the votes of the members present shall be required. 
A special law shall regulate the course of proceedings and the formalities to be observed in these trials. 
2. To submit to the Executive for the proper nomination of archbishop and bishops the names of three ecclesiastics. 
3. To submit to the Chamber of Deputies the names of three persons for each position of justice of the supreme court in order that it may elect from among them.
4. To restore to Bolivian nationality or citizenship, as the case may be, those who have • lost it. 
5. To allow Bolivians to accept honors, offices, titles, or emoluments from foreign governments, if nothing to the contrary is established by the laws of the Republic. 
6. To elect by secret ballot from among the three persons nominated for each place, by the Executive power, the generals and colonels of the army. 
7. To grant rewards and public honors to those who may deserve them for their services to the Republic.
</list>

SECTION XI.
<title> The enactment and promulgation of laws and resolutions.
ART. 65. The laws may originate in the Senate or in the Chamber of Deputies by bills introduced by their members, or transmitted with a written message by the President of the Republic, on condition, in the latter case, that the bill is supported during the discussion by at least one of the members of the cabinet, who, however, shall have no vote. 
The cases enumerated in article 59 are excepted from this provision. 
ART. 66. Bills passed in the chamber of origin shall be forwarded immediately to the other chamber for discussion and concurrence during the session. 
ART. 67. Bills rejected in the chamber of origin shall not be reintroduced in either chamber until the next session.
ART. 68. When the revising chamber rejects the bill in its entirety, the chamber of origin shall take it up anew, and if a majority of two-thirds of the members present insists upon its passage it shall be sent again to the revising chamber. It shall not be understood that the latter reiterates its disapproval of the bill if the new rejection is not made by a majority of two-thirds of the members present. The bill shall be considered agreed upon if the rejection thereof is not reiterated. 
In case of reiteration of the rejection, or if the chamber of origin does not insist upon the passage of the bill, the latter shall not be reintroduced in another session in the same year. 
ART. 69. If the revising chamber confines its action to amending the bill, the latter shall be considered accepted by the chamber of origin, if it concurs by absolute majority in the amendments made. But if the amendments are not accepted or amended, the two chambers shall meet in joint session to deliberate in a single debate, under the direction of the President of the Senate, on the amended bill. If the latter passes, it shall be sent to the Executive for its promulgation as a law of the Republic; but if it fails to pass, it shall not be reintroduced except at a subsequent session. 
ART. 70. All bills sanctioned by both chambers may be objected to by the President of the Republic within ten days from the date on which he received them, if during the discussion thereof the secretary of state, to whose department the matter belongs, was not present during the discussion. 
Bills not objected to within the period aforesaid shall be promulgated as laws; and if Congress adjourns before the expiration of said period, the President shall publish in the official newspaper the message containing his objections, in order that they may be taken into consideration in the next session of Congress. 
ART. 71. The remarks of the Executive objecting to the bill shall be addressed to the chamber where the bill originated, and if it and the revising chamber find that the objections are well founded and amend the bill accordingly, the bill as amended shall be returned to the Executive for promulgation. 
If the objections made by the President are found by both chambers, by a majority of two-thirds of the members present, to be groundless, the President of the Republic shall be bound to promulgate it as law. 
If he refuses to do so, the President of the Senate shall make the promulgation validly.
ART. 72. When the subject of discussion in the chambers is merely a resolution of their own exclusive concern, the approval of both houses shall be sufficient. The promulgation of the measure shall be made in this case not by the Executive but by the presidents of the two houses assisted by their secretaries. 
The course of proceedings to be followed in these cases for the regulation of the debates and the decisions concerning the relations between the chamber of origin and the revising chamber shall be the same as established for ordinary bills. 
ART. 73. The chambers may, on motion of any one of their members, pass a vote of censure on the mere political acts of the Executive, provided that it is addressed to the secretaries of state separately or jointly, as the case may be, and provided also that it is intended for no other purpose than obtaining a modification in the political action of the Executive.
For the exercise of this power, the decision of the chamber where the subject was introduced, taken by absolute majority of vote, shall be sufficient. 
ART. 74. The promulgation of the laws shall be made by the President of the Republic in this form: 
"Whereas the National Congress has sanctioned the following raw: * * * I hereby promulgate it, and order it to be kept and obeyed as a law of the Republic." 
Congressional resolutions shall be promulgated in the following form: 
"The National Congress of the Republic decrees: * * * Therefore this decree shall be observed and complied with according to the Constitution."

SECTION XII.
<title> The Executive power.
ART. 75. The Executive power shall be vested in a citizen, to be known as President of the Republic, and this power can only be exercised by him through the secretaries of state. 
ART. 76. The constitutional term of office of the President of the Republic shall be four years, but the President shall not be reelected until the expiration of one intervening period. 
ART. 77. When, during his term of office, the President of the Republic fails to perform his duties, either through resignation, inability, or death, the first vice president, who shall be elected at the same time as the President, as provided elsewhere in this Constitution, shall be called to fill his place until the end of the constitutional period. 
When the President of the Republic places himself at the head of the army, in case of foreign or civil war, the first vice-president shall also replace him. 
If there is no first vice-president, the second vice-president, who shall be elected in the same manner as the first, shall be called to fill his place in all the cases set forth in this article.
ART. 78. The vice-presidents shall not be reelected, or elected President for the period immediately following their terms of office, if they have acted as President to complete the former Presidential term. 
If there is no vice-president, the president of the Senate, or the president of the Chamber of Deputies if the president of the Senate can not act, shall act as President. 
ART. 79. No one shall be elected President or vice-president of the Republic who is not a native Bolivian citizen, duly qualified to be a senator. During their terms of office the President and vice-presidents shall receive an annual salary to be established by law, and this salary shall not be increased or decreased during their time. Neither shall they receive any other compensation whatever. 
ART. 80. In entering upon the discharge of the executive duties, the President of the Republic shall take solemn oath before Congress to faithfully fulfill his office and preserve and defend the constitution of the Republic. 
ART. 81. The vice-presidents shall take the same oath before Congress, after the President has done it. 
As long as the first vice-president is not acting as President of the Republic, he shall be the president of the Senate; but the Senate shall elect nevertheless a president pro tem, who shall serve in his absence. 
ART. 82. The salary of the vice president when temporarily discharging the duties of President of the Republic shall be the one belonging to his own position; but when he acts as President to complete the constitutional period his salary shall be that of the President. 
ART. 83. The President and vice-presidents of 'the Republic shall be elected by the direct secret vote of citizens in the full enjoyment of their rights. The law shall regulate this election. 
ART. 84. The president of the Congress shall, in the presence of the latter, open the sealed envelopes containing the certificates of election forwarded by the electoral districts. The secretaries, assisted by four members of Congress, shall proceed immediately to count the votes in favor of each candidate. 
Those having an absolute majority of votes shall be proclaimed President and vice-presidents of the Republic. 
ART. 85. If none of the candidates for the Presidency or vicepresidencies of the Republic has obtained absolute plurality of ' votes, the Congress shall take three of those who obtained the greatest number of votes for the positions above mentioned, and shall make the election from among them. 
ART. 86. This election shall take place in a public and permanent session. If after the first ballot no one secures an absolute majority of votes of the representatives present, a second ballot shall take place; but only the two candidates who received the highest number of votes shall be balloted for. If the votes are equally divided, the vote shall be repeated until some one of the candidates obtains an absolute majority of votes. 
ART. 87. The counting of votes and the proclamation of President and vice-presidents of the Republic shall be made in public session. 
ART. 88. The election of President and vice-presidents of the Republic, made by the people and proclaimed by Congress, or made by the latter under the foregoing provisions, shall be announced to the nation by means of a law. 
ART. 89. The President of the Republic shall have the following powers and duties: 
<list>
1. To negotiate and conclude treaties with foreign nations, ratify and exchange them when approved by Congress; appoint consuls, consular agents, and diplomatic ministers, admit foreign functionaries of the same character, and conduct the foreign relations generally. 
2. To conduct the operations of war declared by law, and personally command the forces of the Republic, subject, however, to the provisions of article 77. In time of peace he has command of the regular army and of the national guard, according to the laws and ordinances which Congress may enact. 
3. To concur in the enactment of the laws by means of his direct initiative in special messages, with the parliamentary intervention Of the respective secretary of state, and promulgate them according to this Constitution. 
4. To call Congress to convene in extraordinary session whenever urgent business may require it. 
5. To comply, and cause others to comply, with the provisions of the laws, and issue to that effect the orders and decrees which may be necessary, without entering into any definition of rights or alterations of the rights defined by the la*, and without changing or contravening any of their provisions, keeping in mind the restriction contained in article 20.
6. To supervise the collection and management of the national revenue and order its disbursement according to law. No disbursement shall be made without his written order, countersigned by the respective secretary of state, setting forth expressly the law authorizing the expenditure. 
7. To submit to Congress annually the budget, of the national expenses for the following year, and also the account of the expenditures made according to the respective appropriation during the past year. 
8. To watch over the resolutions passed by the municipalities, especially in regard to revenue and taxation, and denounce before the Senate those which are contrary to the Constitution and laws, unless the offending municipality yields to the remonstrances of the Executive. 
9. To submit annually to Congress, in its first ordinary meeting, a written message on the state of the business of the administration during the year, said message to be accompanied by the reports of the members of the cabinet. In addition to this he shall, through the same channel, furnish Congress all the information on specific subjects which may be needed by it, but he may omit everything relating to diplomatic business, which, in his judgment, should not be made public. 
10. To grant commutation of the sentence of death in conformity with the law. 
11. To enforce the decisions of the courts. 
12. To grant amnesties for political offenses without detriment to the authority to grant them vested in the legislative power. 
13. To grant pensions in accordance with the law. 
14. To exercise the rights of patronage in the churches and over ecclesiastical persons and benefices.
15. To nominate archbishops and bishops, selecting them from among the names submitted, three for each place, by the Senate. 
16. To appoint canons, prebendaries, and other church dignitaries from among those suggested by the chapters of the cathedrals. 
17. To grant or refuse, with the advice of the Senate, the acceptance of the decrees of the councils, or the briefs, bulls, and rescripts of the supreme pontiff. A law shall be required when the ecclesiastical provisions above referred to contain general and permanent provisions. 
18. To appoint the members of the national tribunal of accounts, selecting them from among those, three for each place, nominated by the Senate. These officers shall not be removed except by virtue of a decision of the supreme court. 
19. To appoint all employees of the Republic whose appointment or nomination is not reserved by law to another power. 
20. To issue in the name of the Nation the commissions of all the public employees, even if appointed by any other power. 
21. To appoint ad interim., in cases of resignation or death, officers who should be elected or nominated by some other power. 
22. To attend the opening and closing of the sessions of Congress. 
23. To preserve and defend the internal order and external safety of the Republic according to the Constitution. 
24. To send to the Senate, in case of vacancy, the nominations of generals and colonels of the army, three names for, each place with a report on their services and promotions. 
25. To confer, in the Nation's name, but only when on the field of battle in a foreign war, the ranks of colonel and general of the army. 
26. To grant, according to law, exclusive temporary privileges to inventors, improvers, or importers of processes or methods useful in the arts or sciences, and to indemnify the inventors in case the secret of the invention, improvement, or importation is published. 
27. To create and organize second-class ports of entry. 
</list>
ART. 90. The rank of captain general of the army is inherent in the position of President of the Republic. 

SECTION XIII. 
<title> The secretaries of state. 
ART. 91. The business of the public administration shall be transacted by secretaries of state, whose number shall be designated by law. 
ART. 92. To be a secretary of state the same qualifications are required as to be a member of the Chamber of Deputies. 
ART. 93. The secretaries of state are responsible for the acts of the administration in their respective branches jointly with the President of the Republic. 
ART. 94. The responsibility of the secretaries of state shall be incurred jointly and severally for everything agreed upon in council of ministers. 
ART. 95. All decrees and orders of the President of the Republic shall be countersigned by the secretary of state of the respective department, and shall not be obeyed without this requisite. Decrees relating to the appointment or removal of a secretary of state shall only require the signature of the President. 
ART. 96. The cabinet may take part in the debates either house, but they shall withdraw before the vote is taken. 
ART. 97. As soon as Congress opens its sessions the secretaries of state shall submit to it their respective reports on the condition of business in their departments, in the form set forth in clause 9, art. 89. 
ART. 98. The account of the disbursement of the revenues, which the secretary of the treasury must render, carries with it the presumption that it was examined and approved by the other secretaries so far as their respective departments are concerned. The said account shall be submitted to Congress with a report thereon of the national tribunal of accounts. 
In the making up of the general budget, all the secretaries of state shall concur, each one in representation of his Department. 
ART. 99. A verbal or written order of the President of the Republic shall not exempt from responsibility the secretaries of state. 
ART. 100. They may be prosecuted by private parties before the supreme court for common offenses committed by them, and the trial shall be conducted according to law. 

SECTION XIV.
<title> Internal regime.
ART. 101. The superior administration of the government of each department, in political, administrative, and economic matters, is vested in a magistrate, to be known by the name of prefect, depending upon the Chief Executive of the Nation, whose immediate agent he shall be, and with whom he shall communicate through the channel of the respective secretary of state.
In the branches above named and in everything concerning public order and safety in the department, all the public functionaries of whatever class or name, residing within the territory thereof, shall be subordinate to the prefect. 
ART. 102. To be a prefect it shall be required: 
<list>
1. To be a Bolivian by birth, or if by naturalization, to have five years' actual residence in the country, and to be in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship. 
2. To be at least thirty years of age. 
</list>
ART. 103. The government of each province is vested in a subprefect, subordinate to the prefect. 
The subprefects are appointed by the President of the Republic. 
ART. 104. In each canton there shall be a corregidor, immediately dependent upon the subprefect. The appointment of corregidors shall be made by the prefect upon nomination by the subprefect. 
In the country districts there shall be mayors appointed by the subprefect. 
ART. 105. The prefect and subprefects shall serve for the constitutional period of four years. They may be removed by the President of the Republic for causes gravely affecting the good of the service or endangering public order. 
The secretary of government shall report to Congress the removals made and the reasons therefor. Corregidors and mayors shall serve for one year, and shall not be reelected until another year has elapsed. 
ART. 106. To be a subprefect or corregidor, it shall be required to be a Bolivian citizen in the full exercise of his rights as such.
ART. 107. The law shall determine the duties and powers of the functionaries referred to in this section. 

SECTION XV.
<title> The judicial power.
ART. 108. Justice shall be administered by the supreme court, the district courts, and the other tribunals and courts established by law. 
ART. 109. The administration of justice is gratuitous on the part of the functionaries who exercise jurisdiction and receive salary. 
ART. 110. The supreme court shall consist of seven justices to be elected by the Chamber of Deputies upon nomination, three names for each place, made by the Senate. 
To be a justice of the supreme court it shall be required: 
<list>
1. To be a Bolivian by birth, or if by naturalization to have five years of actual residence, and be over forty years of age. 
2. To have been justice of any superior court, district attorney for five years, or practiced law creditably for ten years.
3. Not to have been condemned to corporal punishment by a final sentence. 
</list>
ART. 111. In addition to its powers and duties according to law, the supreme court shall have the following: 
<list>
1. To take cognizance on writs of error of all cases in which this can be done according to law, and decide also, at the same time, upon the subject-matter of the controversy. 
2. To take cognizance in only one instance of cases of pure law, wherein the contention rests upon the constitutionality or unconstitutionality of any law, decree, or resolution of any kind.
3. To take cognizance of all cases over which it has original jurisdiction according to the Constitution. 
4. To take cognizance of the impeachment of diplomatic and consular agents, national commissioners, justices of the superior courts, district attorneys, members Of the national tribunal of accounts, and prefects, for offenses committed in the exercise of their functions. 
5. To take cognizance of the claims arising out of contracts, negotiations, and concessions made ° by the Executive power, and of the claims against the Government for injuries sustained by the claimants, through some government measure. 
6. To take cognizance of all matters subject to litigation relating to the national patronage vested in the Supreme Government of the Republic. 
7. To settle conflicts of jurisdiction between municipal councils, or between municipal councils and political authorities, or between municipal councils or political authorities with provincial municipal boards. 
</list>
ART. 112. The supreme court shall, in its first session, after having taken the oath before Congress to comply with the Constitution and the laws, elect its president, who shall be also the president of every one of its divisions, and whose term of office shall be ten years, with right of reelection. 
When the meetings of Congress are held outside of the capital of the Republic, the court shall delegate to the ecclesiastical chapter, which shall meet for this purpose at the hall of sessions of the legislative body, the power to administer the oath. 
ART. 113. The president or the supreme court shall watch over I lie strict and full administration of justice throughout the Republic, and shall address to all the functionaries of the judicial order, with the advice and consent of the court, the remarks, admonitions, or suggestions which he may deem proper, or cause the attorney-general to initiate prosecutions or submit such petitions as the Constitution and the laws may allow. 
ART. 114. The attorney-general shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from among three names submitted to him by the Chamber of Deputies. 
The term of office of the attorney-general shall be ten years, with option to reelection. The attorney-general shall not be removed unless by virtue of a decision of the supreme court. 
ART. 115. The members of the district courts shall be elected by the Senate from among three names submitted by the supreme court. 
ART. 116. In addition to the duties and powers established by law, the district courts shall have jurisdiction to try the officials of the municipalities for offenses committed in the exercise of their functions, whether individually or collectively. 
The subprefects are subject to the same jurisdiction. 
ART. 117. The judges of the inferior courts shall be appointed by the supreme court from among three names submitted by the district courts. 
ART. 118. The district attorneys and their agents and subordinates shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from among three names submitted by the attorney general. 
ART. 119. No justice or judge shall be removed, except by final judicial sentence, nor shall he be suspended, except in the cases determined by law, or transferred from one place to another without their consent.
ART. 120. Publicity in trials is an essential condition in the administration of justice, except when public morals may be offended thereby. 
ART. 121. The defense of the Government to be made in the name of the Nation shall be entrusted, respectively, as the case may be, to committees appointed for that purpose by the Chamber of Deputies, to the attorney-general, or to any other public functionaries established by law for this purpose. 
ART. 122. The tribunals or courts shall not, on their own responsibility, allow justices or judges, not appointed in conformity with. this Constitution, to enter into the discharge of judicial duties. 
ART. 123. The secretaries and subaltern officers of the judicial power shall be appointed by the district courts from among three names submitted by the judge under whom they must serve. 
The supreme court shall appoint its own secretary and subalterns. 

SECTION XVI.
<title> The municipal regime.
ART. 124. There shall be a municipal council in the capital of each Department. In the provinces and their divisions, as well as in each port, there shall be municipal boards, the number of which shall be determined by law. In the cantons there shall be municipal agents depending upon the boards, which in their turn shall depend upon the councils. 
ART. 125. The organic municipal law shall determine the number of municipal officers in each locality, the manner in which they shall be elected, the qualifications they must have, the length of their terms of office, and the manner in which they shall perform their duties.
ART. 126. The municipalities shall have the following powers and duties: 
<list>
1. To promote and watch over the construction of public works in their districts. 
2. To establish and abolish municipal taxes, upon previous approval of the Senate. 
3. To establish and superintend primary schools, manage their funds, make rules for their government, appoint teachers and fix their salaries. In regard to the schools supported by the State, they shall have only the right of. inspection and vigilance. 
4. To make police regulations regarding public health, comfort, city ornamentation, and public amusements. 
5. To take care of the charitable institutions according to their respective rules. 
6. To take the census of the population and wealth of the municipal district. 
7. To compile the departmental statistics. 
8. To determine, according to the conscription law and the quota ascribed to their respective territories, the number of those who should enter the military service in place of those who have been discharged. 
9. To ask the interposition of the public force to carry their resolutions into effect whenever necessary. 
10. To collect, manage, and disburse their funds. 
11. To accept legacies and gifts and negotiate loans to promote charitable works or works of public utility. 
12. To watch over the sale of food and provisions upon the basis, however, of liberty of trade. 
13. To appoint jurors for the trial of offenses committed through the public press. 
14. To appoint from among three names submitted by the inferior courts, the canton municipal agents, the secretary, treasurer, and all other employees in their service. 
</list>
ART. 127. The municipal councils may enter into contracts and arrangements with each other for the purpose of promoting and constructing roads connecting two or more departments, provided that this combination is based upon disbursements made or engagements entered into by the municipal treas urers of the Departments interested in the transaction. 

SECTION XVII.
<title> The public force.
ART. 128. There shall be in the Republic a standing army, the strength of which shall be determined by Congress at each session, provided that this strength does not exceed the limits of absolute necessity. 
ART. 129. The armed force is essentially obedient. In no case shall it have the right to deliberate, and in everything relating to the service it shall be subject to the military rules and ordinances. 
ART. 130. There shall be also a national guard in each Department. Its organization and duties shall be determined by law. 
ART. 131. No one who is not a Bolivian by birth, or a naturalized Bolivian with five years of permanent residence in the country, shall serve in the army in the capacity of general or chief without the consent of Congress. 

SECTION XVIII.
<title> Amending the Constitution.
ART. 132. This Constitution may be amended, wholly or in part, but the necessity for the amendment; and the determination thereof in a precise manner shall be previously made by means of an ordinary law passed by two-thirds of the votes of the members present in each chamber. 
Said law may be originated in constitutional form in either chamber. 
The law providing for the amendment shall be sent to the Executive for its promulgation. 
ART. 133. The constitutional amendment shall be taken up by the chamber in which it originated at the first meeting of the session of Congress in which the members of the Chamber of Deputies have been renewed. And if the amendment is declared necessary by two-thirds of the members present, the subject shall be referred to the other chamber, where it shall also require a two-thirds vote. 
All other stages through which the measure has to pass shall be the same established by the Constitution when fixing the relations between both chambers. 
ART. 134. The chambers shall deliberate and vote upon the amendment, causing it to be in conformity with the constitutional provisions determined by the law under which it was ordered. 
The amendment, once enacted, shall be forwarded to the Executive for its promulgation, the President of the Republic having power to make objections to it. 
ART. 135. When the amendment refers to the constitutional term of office of the President of the Republic it shall not be taken up and considered, according to the provisions of the foregoing articles, until the following presidential period. 
ART. 136. The chambers shall have power to dispel any doubt which may occur in regard to the construction to be placed on one or more articles of this Constitution, if said doubts are declared by two-thirds of the votes to be well founded. All the formalities established for an ordinary law shall be observed in all other respects. 
ART. 137. The colonies may be ruled by special laws and regulations. 
ART. 138. The authorities and tribunals shall give preference to this Constitution over all laws, and to the laws over all decrees or resolutions. 
ART. 139. Laws and decrees contrary to this Constitution are hereby repealed. 

<title> TRANSIENT PROVISIONS. 
ARTICLE 1. The constitutional term of office of the President and vice-presidents appointed by the present convention shall last until the sixth of August, eighteen hundred and eighty-four, the candidacy of the present President and of the Vice-president or vice-presidents, who should actually fill those positions, being eliminated from the election to be held that year, in order that the principle of alternation in office be fully observed. 
ART. 2. The national convention shall continue to be in existence until the sixth of August, eighteen hundred and eighty-one, and during this time the Executive power may call it to assemble as often as necessary. It may also assemble, when one-half of its members file with the President, or in his absence with the vice-president who closed its sessions, a request to that effect. 
ART. 3. The convention reserves the right to amend the Constitution as required by the exigencies of the occasion which may present itself, without observing the methods established by it. 
ART. 4. The Executive power is hereby authorized to use for the purposes of the present war all the funds from fiscal, municipal, and educational revenues. It is likewise authorized to contract loans, whether national or foreign, by resolutions passed in the cabinet meeting. 
Authority is also given the Executive to mortgage or sell the national property. 
ART. 5. During the present war all persons convicted of rebellion shall be punished as traitors to the country. 
During the same situation, if the declaration of state of siege has been made, the Executive shall have power to expel from the territory of the Republic, with the advice and consent of the cabinet, any individual who should attempt to disturb public order. 