We, Andres Santa-Cruz, Chief Citizen, Regenerator of the Country, and President of the Bolivian Republic, make known to all Bolivians, that the General Constituent Assembly has decreed, and that We proclaim, the following POLITICAL CONSTITUTION. In the name of God, Legislator of the Universe. The Bolivian Nation, lawfully met together in a General Constituent Assembly, for the purpose of reforming, by means of its Representatives, the Political Constitution, sanctioned on the 6th day of November, 1826, decrees as follows:
<preamble>

TITLE I.
<title> Of the Nation.
CHAPTER I.
<title> Of the Bolivian Nation. 
I. The Bolivian Nation is for ever free and independent: nor can it become the property or patrimony of any person, or of any family. The name of Bolivia is unalterable.
II. The Sovereignty resides essentially in the Nation ; and to it alone belongs the exclusive right of enacting, annulling, and interpreting its Laws, conformably to this Constitution.

CHAPTER II.
<title> Of the Territory. 
III. The Territory of the Bolivian Nation comprehends the Departments of Potosi, Chuquisaca, La Paz, Santa-Cruz, Cochabamba and Oruro, the Sea Coast Province, and that of Tarija. 
IV. It is divided into Departments, Provinces, and Cantons. 
V. The above division shall be still further regulated by a Law; the limits of the Territory shall, also, with the concurrence of the neighbouring Nations, be fixed by a similar Act. 

TITLE II.
<title> Of the Reliqion.
VI. The Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion is that of the State, to the exclusion of every other Public Worship. But while protecting that Religion, and causing it to be respected, the Government acknowledges the principle of man's conscience being above human control. 

TITLE III.
<title> Of the Government.
CHAPTER I.
<title> Of the Form of the Government. 
VII. Under the form of Unity, the Government of Bolivia is Republican, Popular, and Representative. 
VIII. The Nation delegates the exercise of its Sovereignty to 3 High Powers, namely, the Legislative, Executive and Judicial. 
IX. Each of the Powers shall exercise the functions conferred upon it by this Constitution, without exceeding the limits therein prescribed.

CHAPTER II.
<title> Of the Bolivians. 
X. Are Bolivians: 
<list>
1. All Persons born within the Territory of Bolivia. 
2. The Children of a Bolivian Father or Mother, born out of tile Territory, so soon as they legally declare their wish to settle in Bolivia. 
3. Foreigners who obtain Letters of Naturalization, or who have resided 3 years within the Territory of the Republic. 
</list>
XI. It is the duty of every Bolivian: 
<list>
1. To live in obedience to the Constitution and the Laws. 
2. To respect and obey the Constituted Authorities. 
3. To contribute to the public charges in proportion to his property. 
4. To watch over the preservation of the public rights and liberties. 
5. To sacrifice his property, and even his life, if necessary, for the welfare of the Republic.
</list>

CHAPTER III. 
<title> Of the Citizens 
XII. Are Citizens of Bolivia: 
<list>
1. All Bolivians who are married, or who, having attained the age of 21 years, are in the exercise of some profession, art, or trade, and are not acting in the capacity of a menial or domestic servant. 
2. Foreigners married to a Bolivian Female, provided they possess the qualifications mentioned in § 1. 
3. Foreigners who are not married, provided they have lived 4 years in the Republic, and possess the said qualifications. 
4. Foreigners who are in the service of the Republic, as well as those who have fought in its defence. 
5. Foreigners who obtain Letters of Naturalization. 
</list>
XIII. Those only who are in the full exercise of the right of Citizenship, can obtain public employment and fill public Offices. 
XIV. The exercise of Citizenship is suspended: 
<list>
1. By the deprivation of reason. 
2. By the crime of fraudulent bankruptcy, declared as such. 
3. By being under prosecution for any crime meriting corporal or degrading punishment. 
4. By being a notorious drunkard, gambler, or mendicant. 
</list>
XV. The right of Citizenship is forfeited: 
<list>
1. By treason to the public cause. 
2. By becoming naturalized in a Foreign Country. 
3. By having suffered a corporal or degrading punishment, in virtue of a judicial sentence. 
4. By accepting employments, titles, or emoluments from another Government, without the consent of the Senate. 
</list>
XVI. The persons included in the preceding Article may be reinstated by the Chamber of Representatives.

TITLE IV.
<title> Of the Legislative Power
CHAPTER I.
<title> Of the Division, Attributes, and Limitations of this Power. 
XVII. The Legislative Power shall be administered by a Congress, composed of 2 Chambers, one of Representatives and the other of Senators. 
XVIII. On the 6th day of August, in every year, the Congress shall assemble in the Capital of the Republic. 
XIX. The peculiar functions of each Chamber shall be detailed in their proper place: the general ones of the Congress are: 
<list>
1. To confirm the nomination of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, at the periods assigned by the Constitution. 
2. To select the place for the seat of Government, and to transfer the same to another Place, when it may be required by urgent circumstances, and be determined upon by a majority of 2-thirds of the Members composing the Chambers. 
3. To select the Councillors of State from the List of Candidates proposed by each Department. 
4. To invest the President of the Republic, in time of war or of extraordinary danger, with the powers which may be considered necessary for the salvation of the State. 
</list>
XX. The Members of the Legislative Body may be nominated President and Vice-President of the Republic, Ministers and Councillors of State, and Diplomatic Agents ; but in this case they cease to be Members of their respective Chamber. 
XXI. No Member of the Legislative Body can be arrested during his Delegation, except by the order of his respective Chamber, unless he be taken in the actual commission of any crime meriting capital punishment. 
XXII. The Members of the Congress shall not be responsible for any opinions they may utter in the exercise of their functions. 
XXIII. The Session of the Chambers shall last 3 months; both of them shall open and close simultaneously. 
XXIV. The Opening of the Sessions shall take place in the presence of the Executive Power. 
XXV. The Sittings shall be public, and such affairs of State only as require secrecy shall be debated upon with closed doors. 
XXVI. The Questions before each Chamber shall be determined by an absolute majority of votes of the Members present. 
XXVII. The limitations upon the Legislative Body are 
<list>
1. Neither of the Chambers can hold its Sittings, unless there be present 2-thirds of the Members composing it. 
2. Neither Chamber can introduce a Bill relating to any branch of the public business, which the Constitution has assigned to the other; but it may request the other to take into consideration the Propositions which it transmits to it. 
3. No Extraordinary Assembly of the Chambers can enter upon the consideration of any other subjects than those for which it has been convoked by the Government. 
</list>
XXVIII. No Member of the Congress can receive, during his Delegation, nor for 2 years afterwards, any Employment from the Executive Power; excepting those designated in Article XX., and those which are in the regular course of preferment. 
XXIX. The Chambers shall unite: 
<list>
1. To open and close the Session. 
2. To perform the functions designated in Article XIX. 
3. To reconsider the Laws returned by the Executive. 
4. To revise the Constitution.
5. To meet the desire of either Chamber. 
</list>
XXX. The two Chambers being united, their Presidents shall preside in turn. The union shall take place in the Chamber of Senators, the President of the latter taking the Chair, in the first instance. 

CHAPTER II.
<title> Of the Chamber of Representatives. 
XXXI. The basis for forming the Chamber of Representatives shall be the Population. 
XXXII. In order to ascertain the Population, an exact Census shall be taken every 5 years : the last Census shall be employed for the first Legislature. X
XXIII. The Chamber of Representatives shall be composed of the Deputies elected by the People, conformably to the Law. 
XXXIV. For a Population of 40,000 souls, and for a fraction beyond amounting to 20,000, one Representative shall be elected. 
XXXV. The qualifications for a Representative are: 
<list> 
1. To be a Citizen in the full exercise of his rights. 
2. To have been born in the Department, or to have lived 5 years in it. 
3. To possess a capital of 6000 dollars, in landed property; and, in default thereof, to exercise a profession, art, or trade, producing an annual income of 500 dollars. 
4. To have completed 25 years of age. 
5. To have never been sentenced to any corporal or degrading punishment. 
</list>
XXXVI. It belongs to the Chamber of Representatives to originate: 
<list>
1. The regulation of the Territorial Division. 
2. The Annual Supplies and Public Expences. 
3. The granting authority to the Executive Power to negotiate Loans, and provide means for the liquidation of the Public Debt. 
4. The assigning the salaries of the Magistrates, Judges, and other Officers of the Republic. 
5. The Reforms which may be thought necessary in the Finance and War Departments. 
6. The creation and suppression of Offices. 
7. The fixing the expences of Government, according to the Estimates presented by the Executive Power; and the examination and passing of the Accounts of the preceding year. 
8. The making of Peace or War. 
9. The contracting of Alliances, and Treaties of every description. 
10. The entering into Foreign Negotiations. 
11. The allowing a transit to Foreign Troops. 
12. The fixing for the year, the armed Land and Naval Forces. 
13. The drawing up of Regulations for the Navy, Army, and National Guard.
14. The establishment of Ports of every description. 
15. The fixing the value, type, alloy, weight, and denomination of the Coinage, as well as the regulation of the Weights and Measures. 
16. The construction of Roads, Causeways, Bridges, and Public Edifices, the improvement of the Police, as well as of every branch of industry. 
17. The granting of general Pardons, and Letters of Naturalization, and of Citizenship. 
18. The restoration of those who have been deprived of the exercise of Citizenship. 
</list>
XXXVII. It is also the duty of the Chamber of Representatives to impeach before that of the Senators, the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Ministers, Councillors of State, Members of both Chambers, and the Puisne Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, for treason, malversation of the public Funds, violations of the Constitution, and other crimes, which are liable to the penalty of death, degradation, or of temporary or perpetual disqualification for every public Employment or Office. 
XXXVIII. The Chamber of Representatives shall be renewed in the proportion of one-half every 2 years: the first half shall retire by lot, and if any fraction remain, that also shall retire in the second biennial period. 
XXXIX. The Representatives cannot be re-elected for the same Chamber, until 2 years have expired from the time of its renovation.

CHAPTER III.
<title> Of the Chamber of Senators. 
XL. The same Electors who nominate the Representatives, shall also elect the Senators, by means of Delegates, in the proportion of 5 for each Senator to be appointed. 
XLI. Three Senators shall be appointed for each Department, one for the Province of Tarija, and one for that of the Sea Coast. 
XLII. The qualifications required for a Senator are: 
<list>
1. The being in the full exercise of the rights of Citizenship, and the having resided for 10 years in the Republic. 
2. The having been born in the Department, or resided in it for 5 years. 
3. The having attained the age of 35. 
4. The having a capital of 12,000 dollars in landed property, or an income of 1,000 dollars, or a profession producing that amount. 
5. The not having been condemned to a corporal or degrading punishment. 
</list>
XLIII. The functions of the Senate are: 
<list>
1. To form the Civil and Penal Codes; those concerning Law Suits, Mining, and Commerce in general, and the Ecclesiastical Regulations.
2. To originate the Laws relative to Judicial Reforms. 
3. To originate the Laws to repress infractions of the Constitution by Magistrates, Judges, and Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Military Authorities. 
4. To hear all complaints made against the Ministers of the Supreme Court, to decide them definitively, and to make the parties responsible. A particular Law shall regulate this power. 
5. To originate the Laws respecting the exercise of Ecclesiastical Patronage, and whatever has relation to it. 
6. To examine the Counciliary Decisions, Bulls, Briefs, and Papal Rescripts, in order to the withholding or confirming the same. 
7. To originate the Laws respecting the Press, and those relative to Education, and the mode of Public Instruction. 
8. To found Public Institutions, and to encourage those already established. 
9. To protect the Liberty of the Press. 
10. To decree rewards and public honors to those who have deserved the same by services rendered to the Republic. 
11. To condemn to everlasting infamy the Usurpers of the Supreme Authority, as well as other great Delinquents. 
12. To allow to Bolivians the acceptance of such employments, titles, and emoluments, as may be granted to them by another Government, when they shall have merited them by their services. 
</list>
XLIV. It is also the province of the Senate to try, publicly, Persons impeached by the Chamber of Representatives. In this case, the concurrence of 2-thirds of the Votes shall be sufficient to remove the Party from his Office or Employment; when the cause shall be transferred to the Supreme Court of Justice, in order to its being tried as the Law directs. 
XLV. It likewise belongs to the Senate to propose S Persons, of whom one is to be chosen as a Member of the Supreme Court, of the Higher Courts of Justice, or as an Archbishop or a Bishop, whenever such Offices or Dignities become vacant. It is also the duty of the Senate to confirm the Appointments of Persons proposed by the Executive for Generals in the Army. 
XLVI. The Senate shall be renewed by thirds every 2 years; the first and second thirds shall retire by lot ; and should a fraction remain, that shall also retire in the last biennial period. 
XLVII. The Senators cannot be re-elected until 2 years shall have elapsed from the time of the renovation of the Chamber.

CHAPTER IV.
<title> Of the Formation of the Laws.
XLVIII. The Government may present to the Chambers the Projects of any Laws that it may consider necessary, excepting those which have for object the reform of the Constitution.
XLIX. The Ministers of State may be present at the Sittings, in order to discuss the Laws, and other subjects which do not involve Constitutional Questions : but they cannot vote in the divisions.
L. Either of the Chambers may originate Laws, relating to subjects which are not expressly assigned to them by this Constitution. 
LI. When a Project of Law has been agreed to in the Chamber in which it originated, it shall be carried to the other, in order that, being there discussed, it may either be approved of or rejected in the course of the same Session. 
LII. No Project of Law which shall have been rejected by one of the Chambers, can be again brought on during the Session of the same year. 
LIII. The Projects of Law approved of by both Chambers, shall be passed to the Executive. 
LIV. Should the Executive Power affix his Signature to them, or not return them, together with his objections, within the space of 10 days, they shall have the force of Law. 
LV. If the Government consider a Project of Law not to be expedient, it must return it, accompanied by the necessary observations, to the respective Chamber, within the period of 10 days. 
LVI. The Two Chambers, united, shall reconsider a Project of Laws returned by the Executive, conformably to the preceding Article, and 2-thirds of the Votes shall give the final sanction. 
LVII. In the case mentioned in the preceding Article, the suffrages of both Chambers shall be given verbally, aye or no; and the observations of the Executive, and the names and reasons of the Voters, shall be immediately made public by means of the press. 
LVIII. If the Project of Law returned by the Executive should not obtain the 2-thirds of the Votes, but should afterwards be approved of, on the first renewal of the Chambers, by an absolute majority of their Members present, it shall then have tie force of L.aw, and shall be put into execution without further delay. 
LIX. The Projects of Law which shall be sent up to the Government during the last 10 days of the Session of the Chambers, may be retained until the Session next ensuing, when they must be returned by the Executive, together with his observations. 
LX. The Chamber in which the Law shall have been first proposed, shall transmit to the President of the Republic, 2 Copies thereof, signed by its President and Secretary, in the following form: The Chamber of ................... with the approbation of that of the ................... transmits to the Executive Power the Law upon ....................... in order to its promulgation. 
LXI. The Laws shall be promulgated with this formula :-N. N. President of the Bolivian Republic. We make known to all Bolivians, that the Congress has decreed, and that we publish the following Law: [Here the Law is inserted.] We therefore command and enjoin all the Authorities of the Republic to observe the same, and to cause it to be observed. 
LXII. The Minister shall cause the Law to be printed, published, and circulated, upon its being duly signed by the President and the respective Minister of State. 
LXIII. The Decrees issued by the Legislative Body, shall have for formula-" Let it be executed." 

TITLE V.
<title> Of the Executive Power.
CHAPTER 1.
LXIV. The Executive Power resides in the President of the State and 3 Secretaries of State. 

CHAPTER II.
<title> Of the President. 
LXV. The requisite qualifications for the President of the Republic are the following: 
<list>
1. The having been born within the Territory of Bolivia, and being in the full exercise of the rights of Citizenship. 
2. The having completed 35 years of age. 
3. The having rendered important services to the Republic. 
4. The being possessed of acknowledged talents for the government of the State. 
5. The never having been condemned by a Court of Justice to a corporal or degrading punishment. 
</list>
LXVI. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the Electoral Parochial Juntas. Should no Candidate obtain 2-thirds of the suffrages of those who vote in the Juntas, the Congress, whose duty it is to act upon this occasion, shall select the 3 Candidates who have obtained the greatest number of votes, and shall elect one of them for President of tile Republic. 
LXVII. This election shall be made during one Sitting, and by secret votes. If, upon a scrutiny, no Candidate shall have obtained 2-thirds of the votes of the Members, the voting shall then be restricted to the 2 Candidates who shall obtain the greatest number of suffrages ; and, if neither of them then obtain the required majority, the voting shall be continued until it be obtained by one or the other of them. 
LXVIII. The first election of President shall be made by the General Assembly during one Sitting, after the Constitution shall have been confirmed, and by viva voce votes, three-fourths of the suffrages being necessary to decide the election. 
LXIX. The President being constitutionally elected, shall, before he enters upon the discharge o4 his Office, take, in the presence of the united Chambers, at the hands of the President of the Senate, (the first time in the presence of the General Assembly,) the following Oath: "I, N. N., swear by Almighty God, and these Holy Gospels, that I will faithfully discharge the Office of President, with which the Nation has entrusted me: that I will protect the Religion of the State : preserve the integrity and independence of the Nation . observe faithfully, and cause to be faithfully observed, the Constitution and the Laws. If I do so, may God help me; and if I do not, may the Nation call me to account according to the Law." 
LXX. The President's term of Office is 4 years, and he may be re-elected, conformably to Articles LXVI and LXVII. 
LXXI. The President of the Republic is the head of the Administration of the State, and is responsible for all acts done in his official capacity, agreeably to this Constitution. 
LXXII. The duties of the President of the Republic are: 
<list>
1. To open the Sessions of the Chambers, and to address a Message to them descriptive of the state of the Republic. 
2. To order the publication and circulation of the Laws, and to cause them to be executed. 
3. To issue such special Decrees and Regulations as are necessary for the fulfillment of the Laws. 
4. To execute, and cause to be executed, the Sentences pronounced by the Courts of Justice. 
5. To return to the Chambers, within the space of 10 days, the Laws which he may consider necessary to be reconsidered, together with his own observations thereon. 
6. To retain the Laws transmitted to him during the 10 days immediately preceding the last Sitting of the Chambers, for the purpose of presenting them, together with his observations thereon, to the next ensuing Congress. 
7. To order the promulgation of Laws which, after due discussion, have been authorized agreeably to Articles LVI and LVIII. 
8. To appoint and remove by his sole authority, the Ministers of State. 
9. To require from the Legislative Body the prorogation of its Ordinary Sittings, for 30 days. 
10. To convoke the Legislative Body for Extraordinary Sittings, should it be necessary so to do. 
11. To dispose of the Sea and Land Forces, for the external defence and internal security of the Republic. 
12. To command the Armies of the Republic, and in person when considered expedient; in which case the Vice President shall be entrusted with the Supreme Government of the State. 
13. To appoint the Officers of the Army up to the rank of Colonel inclusive ; and to propose Persons to the Senate, for the higher grades, giving at the same time a statement of their services. The President may, on the field of battle, himself confer the higher ranks, in the name of the Nation. 
14. To grant leave of absence and discharges to military men, and also pensions either to them or to their families, agreeably to the Laws. 
15. To declare War, in consequence of a previous Decree of the Legislative Body. 
16. To grant Letters of Marque. 
17. To dispose of the National Guard for internal security, within the limits of its respective Department, and beyond them with the con. sent of the Legislative Body. 
18. To establish Military Schools. 
19. To appoint the Diplomatic Ministers, Consuls, and other Employs belonging to the Department of Foreign Affairs. 
20. To direct the Diplomatic Negotiations, and to conclude Treaties of Peace, Friendship, Federation, Alliance, Truce, Neutrality, Commerce, and any others, the previous approval of the Legislative Body having been obtained. 
21. To conclude Concordats, agreeably to the Instructions given by the Congress. 
22. To receive Foreign Ambassadors and Ministers. 
23. To exercise the patronage in general, with respect to Churches, Benefices, and Ecclesiastical Persons, conformably to the Laws. 
24. To appoint Archbishops and Bishops, selecting them from the ternary Lists transmitted by the Senate. 
25. To select the Ecclesiastics from amongst those proposed by the Council of State, as Dignitaries, Canons, or Prebendaries. 
26. To confirm, or suspend, Counciliary Decrees, Bulls, Briefs, and Papal Rescripts, with the consent of the Senate. 
27. To fill up all the Appointments of the Republic, which are not reserved by this Constitution for another Power. 
28. To select from the ternary List transmitted by the Senate, the Ministers of the Supreme and Higher Courts of Justice. 
29. To determine the retiring Pensions of Persons employed in the service of the State, according to the Laws. 
30. To superintend the collection and application of the Public Revenue, conformably to the Laws. 
31. To require from the Heads of all Branches and Departments of the Administration, every information he may deem necessary. 
32. To suspend, to the extent of 3 months, from their Employments, the Persons in the service of the Republic, who shall be guilty of negligence, omission, or an imperfect discharge of their respective duties. Should the offence require a legal investigation, preparatory to deprivation of Office or other measures, it shall be passed to the competent Tribunal.
33. To confirm the Sentences pronounced by the Councils of War, in conformity with the Military Laws. 
34. To commute the capital punishments pronounced by the Tribunals, into transportation for 10 years. 
35. To have under his supreme inspection every thing connected with the Police, and the Public Establishments, of every description, subject to the Laws and Ordinances by which they are regulated. 
36. To grant the Letters of Naturalization and Citizenship which may be decreed by the Chamber of Representatives. 
37. To assign in the name of tile Republic, titles and appellations, to the Magistrates, Judges, and other Public Officers. 
38. To dissolve, with the concurrence of the Council of State and the Supreme Court of Justice, the Constitutional Chambers, when it is indubitably evident, that they transgress the limits prescribed by this Constitution. 
</list>
LXXIII. The Chambers being dissolved in virtue of the above power, the President shall convoke others for the next constitutional period. The Members of the dissolved Chambers may be reelected for this period. 
LXXIV. The following are the restrictions to which the President of the Republic is subjected: 
<list>
1. The President can neither deprive any Bolivian of his liberty, nor inflict any punishment or penalty upon him of his own authority, except in the case of the punishment of Persons employed in the Government service. 
2. When the safety of the Republic requires the arrest of one or more Individuals, he cannot order him or them to be detained more than 48 hours, without being brought before the competent Court or Judge. 
3. He cannot deprive any Individual of his property, except when the public good urgently requires it, in which case the Proprietor must previously receive a just compensation. 
4. He cannot hinder the Elections, nor interfere with any of the functions which belong to the other Powers of the State according to the Laws. 
5. The President cannot quit the Seat of Government, without taking with him one, at least, of the Secretaries of State, in the capacity of General Minister. 
</list>
LXXV. None of these restrictions shall have effect, in the case either of sudden invasion or internal commotion. When such events occur, he shall, with the consent of the Council of State, be invested with extraordinary powers. 
LXXVI. He cannot, without the permission of the Legislative Body, absent himself from the Territory of the Republic, during the period of his Administration, nor for one year afterwards.
LXXVII. The Impeachments to which, according to this Constitution, the President is liable, cannot be brought against him, except during the exercise of his duties, or within one year afterwards: no accusation can be brought against him after that period. 
LXXVIII. If the President be deposed by a Revolution, or a Military Force, he shall be tried conformably to the Constitution and the Laws; and the Chambers cannot proceed to elect another, unless he shall have been constitutionally deprived of his Office.

CHAPTER III.
<title> Of the Vice President.
LXXIX. There shall be a Vice President of the Republic, elected in the same manner as the President. 
LXXX. In the case of the death, mental or physical incapacity, or suspension of the President, the Vice President shall discharge his duties. 
LXXXI. The same qualifications are required for the Vice President as for the President. 
LXXXII. The Vice President of the Republic may take upon himself the office of either of the Secretaries of State, as the President may judge fit. 
LXXXIII. The Vice President is responsible to the Laws for the acts of his Administration, whether as Chief of the State, or Secretary of State. 
LXXXIV. He cannot absent himself from the Territory of the Republic, nor from the Capital, without the permission of the President, granted with the consent of the Council of State.

CHAPTER IV.
<title> Of the Secretaries of State.
LXXXV. There shall be 3 Secretaries of State. 1 for the Home and Foreign Affairs, 1 for Finance, and 1 for War. 
LXXXVI. The 3 Secretaries shall act under the immediate orders of the President. 
LXXXVII. No Tribunal, nor any Public Officer, shall execute the President's Orders unless signed by himself, and countersigned by the Secretary of State for the respective Department. 
LXXXVIII. The Secretaries of State shall be responsible for any Orders, which, authorized by them, shall violate the Constitution, Lams, Decrees, and Public Treaties. A Special Law shall regulate the responsibility of the President ,Vice President, Secretaries, and Councillors of State. 
LXXXIX. The Secretaries of State shall prepare, and lay before the respective Chambers, the Annual Estimates of the Expenses for their respective Departments ; and shall render an Account of the expenses incurred in the preceding year.
XC. In default of the President, and of the Vice President of the Republic, the 3 Secretaries of State shall assume the Government, pro tempore, under the presidency of the Secretary for Home and Foreign Affairs. 
XCI. In this case, and before the expiration of 10 days, the Council of Ministers shall convoke an Extraordinary Session of the Legislative Body, excepting when the absence of the President and Vice President is occasioned by their both being absent with the Army in the field. 
XCII. The same qualifications are requisite for a Secretary of State as for a Senator.

TITLE VI.
<title> Of the Council of State.
XCIII. There shall be a Council of State, composed of 7 Individuals, appointed by Congress, by an absolute majority of votes, conformably to § 3 of Article XIX. 
XCIV. There shall be one Councillor of State for each Department, and one for the Province of Tarija, and that of the Sea Coast. 
XCV. The same Electors who nominate the Representatives and Senators, shall forward to the Constitutional Congress a List of Candidates, not exceeding 10, and not less than 5, in number. 
XCVI. The President and Vice.President of the Republic, who have Constitutionally filled the Office, shall be Councillors of State by right, in addition to the 7 Individuals, mentioned in Article XCIII. 
XCVII. The same qualifications are necessary for a Councillor of State as for a Senator. 
XCVIII. The duties of the Council of State are: 
<list>
1. To give their candid opinion to the Executive Power, upon every subject submitted to their consideration. 
2. To convoke, if the Executive do not, the Legislative Chambers at the time fixed by the Constitution and the Laws, as well as to assemble the Electoral Juntas, in the cases provided by the Laws. 
3. To watch over the due observance of the Constitution, and to notify, in writing, to the Legislative Body, any infraction or violation of the same. 
4. To propose to the Government, Persons for the Appointments of Dignities, Canonries, and Prebends. 
</list>
XCIX. The President of the Republic shall hear the opinion which the Council may.have to give upon any grave and important matter, reserving to himself the entire liberty of acting, as he may judge most advisable thereupon. 
C. The Councillors of State are responsible, not only for the opinions which they may give to the Executive Power, but for all their acts in the exercise of their peculiar powers. 
CI. The Councillors of State cannot be suspended from their Office, except in the same form in which the Deputies are suspended. 
CII. In default of the President, Vice-President, and Council of Ministers, the President of the Council of State shall take upon himself the Government of the Republic; in which case the Legislative Body shall be extraordinarily convoked, to assemble within 10 days, for the dispatch of business. 
CIII. The Members of the Council of State shall continue in Office for 4 years, but cannot be re-elected until 4 years afterwards. A Special Law shall regulate the exercise of the functions assigned to this Body. 

TITLE VII.
<title> Of the Judicial Power.
CHAPTER I.
<title> Of the Duties of this Power. 
CIV. The power of trying Causes and Persons belongs exclusively to the Courts by Law established. 
CV. Magistrates and Judges cannot be suspended from their Employments, except in the cases determined by the organic Laws. 
CVI. Any Magistrate or Judge who shall neglect the due discharge of his official duties, is liable to an Action at law; which may either be undertaken within the space of one year by the House of Representatives, or immediately by any Bolivian whatever, comformably to the Laws. 
CVII. Magistrates and Judges are personally responsible. A Special Law shall determine the mode of enforcing this responsibility. 
CVIII. Neither the Government nor the Courts of Law can, in any case, alter or dispense with the proceedings and formulas prescribed by the Laws, with respect to the various classes of Judgments. 
CIX. No Bolivian can be sued either in a civil or criminal Action, except before a Court previously appointed by the Law. 
CX. Justice shAll be administered in the name of the Nation; and the Decrees and Regulations issued by the Courts shall have a preamble to that effect. 

CHAPTER II.
<title> Of the Supreme Court.
CXI. The Chief Judicial Magistracy of the Republic shall reside in the Supreme Court of Justice; which shall be composed of a President, 6 Puisne Judges, and 1 Fiscal, who shall be appropriately divided among the Courts. 
CXII. The qualifications for a Member of the Supreme Court of Justice are: 
<list>
1. To be a Citizen in the full enjoyment of the rights of Citizenship. 
2. To be 35 years of age.
3. To have been a Member of one of the District Courts of Justice. 
4. To have never been condemned either to a corporal or degrading punishment. 
</list>
CXIII. The duties of the Supreme Court of Justice are: 
<list>
1. To try all Criminal Actions brought against the President and Vice President of the Republic, the Secretaries and Councillors of State, and the Members of the Chambers, in consequence of a Decree of the Legislative Body. 
2. To try all Civil Actions brought against the President and Vice President of the Republic, when required so to do. 
3. To try all Causes arising out of the Contracts or Negotiations of the Executive Power. 
4. To take cognizance of all Litigations concerning the National patronage. 
5. To take cognizance of all Litigations between Plenipotentiaries, Consuls, and every class of Diplomatic Agents. 
6. To take cognizance of all Criminal Causes in which the Diplomatic Agents of the Republic are Defendants. 
7. To take cognizance of all Causes brought for the purpose of removing the Magistrates of the Judicial Districts and the Departmental Prefects. 
8. To settle any disputes which may arise among the District Courts, as well as such as may occur between the latter and the other Authorities. 
9. To take cognizance of every class of common Law Suits, of the third instance. 
10. To hear all doubts of the other Courts concerning the construction to be put upon any Law, and to consult the Executive, in order to have the decision of the Chambers upon the same. 
11. To take cognizance of Appeals of Nullity, from the sentences pronounced in the last instance by the District Courts, or Ecclesiastical Tribunals. 
12. To examine the state and progress of the Civil and Criminal Causes pending in the District Courts, and in Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, by the means provided by the Law.
</list>

CHAPTER III.
<title> Of the Judicial District Courts. 
CXIV. Judicial District Courts shall be established in those Departments in which the Legislative Power may consider. them to be necessary. 
CXV. In order to be a Puisne Judge of these Courts, it is required: 
<list>
1. To be a Citizen in the full enjoyment of Citizenship. 
2. To be 30 years of age. 
3. To have never been condemned to a corporal or degrading punishment.
4. To have been a Reporter, a Fiscal Agent, a Law Judge, an Auditor of the Army, or an Advocate, in one or other of which Offices he must have served for 4 years, or have exercised, with credit, the profession of an Advocate for 8 years. 
</list>
CXVI. The attributes of the Judicial District Courts are: 
<list>
1. To take cognizance, in the second instance, of all Causes, civil and criminal, according to the Laws. 
2. To decide the questions of competency which may arise between the inferior Judges within their Judicial District. 
3. To decide upon all Appeals from the Ecclesiastical Tribunals and Authorities, upon the ground of injustice on.the part of a Judge, within their jurisdiction. 
4. To decide upon all Appeals of nullity against the sentences pronounced by the Judges of the First Instance. 
5. To take cognizance of all the Causes of separation of the Judges and other Law Officers, designated by the Law.
</list>

CHAPTER IV.
<title> Of the Judicial Districts.
CXVII. Judicial Districts, of proportionate extent, shall be established in the Provinces; and in each Capital of a District there shall be a Law Judge, with a Court constituted according to Law. 
CXVIII. The powers of the Law Judges shall be limited to litigations, and they can decide, without appeal, to the amount of 200 dollars. 
CXIX. The qualifications for a Law Judge are: 
<list>
1. To be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 
2. To be 25 years of age. 
3. To be an admitted Advocate of one of the Courts of the Republic. 
4. To have creditably exercised his profession for 4 complete years. 
5. To have been free from condemnation to any corporal or degrading punishment.
</list>

CHAPTER V.
<title> Of the Administration of Justice.
CXX. There shall be Justices of the Peace in the Capitals and Cantons of the Republic, for the settlement of complaints, by conciliation, and by verbal decisions. 
CXXI. The Justices of the Peace shall be selected by the Prefects of Departments, from the Ternary Lists presented to them by the respective Law Judges. 
CXXII. The Office of Justice of the Peace is municipal; and no Citizen, without a just cause, can be exempted from discharging it. 
CXXIII. The Justices of the Peace shall be renewed every year; and 2 years must elapse before they can be re-elected.
CXXIV. Three Instances only are permitted in Law Suits. Ap.peals on the ground of notorious injustice are abolished. 
CXXV. No Bolivian can be arrested, without a previous statement of his offence before a Magistrate, and a Warrant signed by the competent Judge. 
CXXVI. The declaration of the party arrested must be given in immediately, if possible, but without being sworn to, and it must in no case be deferred beyond 48 hours. 
CXXVII. Every Delinquent in the open commission of crime, may be arrested by any person whatever, and be brought before the Judge. 
CXXVIII. In criminal Cases the Trial shall be public, after the confession of the Accused shall have been taken. 
CXXIX. The torture shall not be used, nor shall rewards of any kind be offered, in order to force or induce confession. 
CXXX. Prisons alone shall be used for the proper security of Criminals. Every measure which, under the pretext of precaution, tends to increase unnecessarily the sufferings of prisoners, is a violation of personal security, and shall be punished according to the Laws. 
CXXXI. All confiscation of property, and every punishment involving excessive cruelty or degradation, are abolished. 
CXXXII. If, under extraordinary circumstances, the security of the Republic requires the suspension of any of the formalities prescribed by this Constitution, and the Laws, the Chambers may decree the same. If the Chambers be not assembled, the Executive may, with the consent of the Council of State, perform the same duty, as a provisional measure, subject to his reporting the same to the Chambers, and being responsible for the abuses which may be committed.

TITLE VIII.
<title> Of the Internal Administration.
CXXXIII. The chief administration of each Department resides in a Prefect; that of each Province in a Governor; and that of each Canton in a Corregidor. 
CXXXIV. In the Villages there shall be Alcaldes. 
CXXXV. The requisite qualifications for a Prefect or Governor are:
<list>
1. To be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 
2. To be 30 years of age. 
3. To have been free from condemnation to any corporal or degrading punishment. 
</list>
CXXXVI. The Prefects and Governors shall continue in the discharge of their functions for the period of 4 years; but they may be re-elected. 
CXXXVII. The Offices of Corregidor and Alcalde are a service to the Country; and no Citizen can, without a just cause, be exempted from performing them. 
CXXXVIII. The Corregidors and Alcaldes shall remain in Office so long as the Prefects and Governors shall approve of their services. 
CXXXIX. The powers of the Prefects, Governors, Corregidors, and Alcaldes, shall be determined by a Law. 
CXL. Prefects, Governors, and Corregidors, are prohibited from all judicial cognizance: should, however, the public tranquillity require the apprehension of any Individual, and circumstances not admit of his being brought before the respective Judge, they can order the arrest to be made forthwith, reporting the same to the competent Judge, within 48 hours. Any infringement which may be committed by these Authorities upon personal security, or upon that of domicile, subjects the party offending to a public prosecution.

TITLE IX.
<title> Of the Forces. 
CXLI. A permanent Armed Force shall be maintained in the Republic, composed of a regular Army and a Fleet. 
CXLII. There shall also be a National and a Military Guard, the organization and duties of which shall be determined by a Law. 
CXLIII. The Armed Force is essentially obedient; it can in no case deliberate. 

TITLE X.
<title> Of the Reform of the Constitution. 
CXLIV. Should it be considered that one or more Article or Articles of this Constitution require reform, it shall be proposed in writing, signed by one half, at least, of the Members present, belonging to either of the Chambers. 
CXLV. The proposition shall be read at 3 different times, with an interval of 6 days between each reading; and, after the third, the Chamber shall decide whether the proposition shall or shall not be admitted for discussion. 
CXLVI. After having been admitted for discussion by 2-thirds of the Votes, and the Chamber having decided upon the necessity of reforming the Constitution, the Regulations herein provided for the passing of other Laws shall be duly observed. In this case, the Chambers shall unite, conformably to Article XXIX, § 4, in order to fix the bases upon which the reform is to be established; for which 2-thirds of the Votes of both Chambers will be necessary. 
CXLVII. In the first Session of the Legislature, after its renewal, the matter shall be proposed and discussed; and if the Chambers united shall resolve to that effect, the reform shall be adopted. 
CXLVIII. Before this resolution shall be taken, however, the Council of State, and the Executive Power, shall be consulted by the Chambers, with respect to the expediency or necessity of the reform.

TITLE THE LAST.
<title> Of Guarantees.
CXLIX. The Constitution guarantees to all Bolivians their civil liberty, personal security, and property; and equality, in the eye of the Law, either for reward or punishment. 
CL. All are at liberty to make known their thoughts, either verbally or by writing, and to publish them by means of the press, without any previous censorship, subject always to the responsibility determined by the Laws. 
CLI. Every Bolivian is at liberty to remain in the Republic, at his pleasure or convenience, and to depart therefrom, together with his property, provided the regulations of the Police be duly observed, and no third person's rights be thereby injured. 
CLII. Every Bolivian's abode is an inviolable asylum. No forcible entry can be made therein, unless under such circumstances, and in such a manner, as the Law shall determine. 
CLIII. All hereditary employments and privileges are abolished, and all landed property may be alienated, although it ,belong to charitable, religious, and other institutions. 
CLIV. No kind of work or industry shall be prohibited, unless it be opposed to the habits,, safety, or health, of the public. 
CLV. Every inventor shall be guaranteed the property of his discoveries and inventions. The Law shall grant such persons an exclusive temporary privilege, or compensation for the loss they may sustain, should such discovery or invention be made public. 
CLVI. No one has been born a Slave in Bolivia since the 6th August, 1825. The prohibition against the introduction of Slaves into its Territory remains in force. 
CLVII. No Bolivian is required to do that which the Law does not command, or is prevented from doing that which it does not prohibit. 
CLVIII. Private actions which in no manner affect the public order established by the Laws, or injure a third party, are reserved for God alone, and are exempted from all authority. 
CLIX. All the Inhabitants of the Republic have a right to prefer complaints, and to be heard by all the Authorities. 
CLX. The secrecy of Letters is inviolable; the Employés of the Post Office shall be responsible for the violation of this guarantee, except in such cases as the Laws shall provide. 
CLXI. Arbitrary requisitions are prohibited, as well as the unjust seizure of the Papers and Correspondence belonging to any Bolivian. The Law shall determine in what cases, and under what circumstances, they can be taken possession of. 
CLXII. No Individual, or assembly of Individuals, can, without authority being given them so to do, prefer Petitions in the name of the people ; still less arrogate to themselves the title of the Sovereign People. The infraction of this Article is a crime of sedition.
CLXIII. The Constitutional Powers cannot suspend the Constitution and the rights which belong to Bolivians, except in the cases and under the circumstances expressed in the Constitution; and it is indispensable that the time during which such suspension is to last shall be declared. 
CLXIV. All Laws and Decrees in opposition to this Constitution are hereby annulled. 
CLXV. Whoever shall make any criminal attempts against this Constitution, or against the Chief of the Administration of the Republic, is declared to be a traitor, an infamous person, and to be civilly defunct. 