Chapter I: The People's Republic of Bulgaria<title>
Art. 1. Bulgaria is a People's Republic with a representative government established and consolidated as a result of the heroic struggle of the Bulgarian people against the monarcho-fascist dictatorship, and of the victorious national uprising of September 9, 1944. 
Art. 2. In the People's Republic of Bulgaria all power emanates from the people and belongs to the people. 
This power is exercised through freely elected representative organs and through referenda. 
All representative organs of the state power are elected by the citizens, by a general, direct, and secret ballot. 
Art. 3. All citizens of the People's Republic who are above eighteen years of age, irrespective of sex, national origin, race, religion, education, profession, social status, or material situation, with the exception of those under judicial disability or deprived of their civil and political rights, are eligible to vote and to be elected. 
All persons serving in the ranks of the Bulgarian people's army can vote and can be elected on the same basis as all other Bulgarian citizens. 
Art. 4. The 'people's representatives in all representative organs are responsible to their electors. They may be recalled before the expiry of the term for which they have been elected. 
The manner in which elections are held and the rules for recalling people's representatives are determined by law. 
Art. 5. The People's Republic of Bulgaria is governed in exact accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the country. 
Chapter II: Public Economic Organization<title>
Art. 6. The means of production of the People's Republic of Bulgaria belong to the State (national property), to co-operatives, or to private individuals or juridical persons. 
Art. 7. All mineral and other underground natural resources, forests, waters, including mineral and curative springs, sources of natural power, railway and air communications, posts, telegraphs, telephones and radio broadcasting are state, i.e., national property. A special law shall regulate the utilization of forests by the population.
Art. 8. National economy is the basis of the country's economic development and enjoys special protection. 
The State can itself manage or give under concession its own means of production. 
Art. 9. The State aids and fosters co-operative enterprise. 
Art. 10. Private property and its inheritance, together with private enterprise in economy, are recognized and protected by law. 
Private property acquired by labor and thrift and the right to inherit it enjoy special protection. 
No one can exercise his right of ownership to the detriment of the public interest. 
Private monopolistic agreements and associations such as cartels, trusts, etc. are prohibited.
Private property may be subject to compulsory restrictions or expropriation only for state or public use and against fair indemnity.
The State can nationalize fully or in part industrial, trade, transport, or credit enterprises or branches thereof. The indemnity is determined by the law for nationalization. 
Art. 11. The land belongs to those who cultivate it. 
The law determines how much land private persons may own and the cases in which non-agriculturists may own cultivable land. Private ownership of large landed estates is not permitted. 
Co-operative-labor farms are fostered and aided by the State and enjoy its special protection. 
The State may organize state farms. 
Art. 12. All state, co-operative, and private economic activity is directed by the State by means of a general economic plan with a view to the most rational development of the country's national economy and the promotion of the public welfare. 
In preparing and implementing the national economic plan, the State avails itself of the active collaboration of professional, economic, and public organizations and institutes. 
Art. 13. Foreign and domestic trade are directed and controlled by the State. 
The State may reserve to itself the exclusive right to produce or trade in any goods which are of essential importance to the national economy and the needs of the people. 
Art. 14. Labor is recognized as a basic public and economic factor and is the object of the State's care in every aspect. 
The State directly aids those who work-workers, peasants, craftsmen, and intellectuals-by means of its general economic and social policy, tax system, cheap credits, and co-operative organization. 
With a view to improving the standard of living of the working classes, the State encourages their constructive initiative and enterprise. 
Chapter III: Supreme Organs of the State Power<title> 
Art. 15. The National Assembly is the supreme organ of the state power. 
Within the framework of the Constitution it is the repository of all state power in so far as certain particular functions do not fall within the competence of other and subordinate organs of the state power and of the state administration by virtue of the Constitution. 
Art. 16. The National Assembly is the only legislative organ of the People's Republic of Bulgaria. 
Art. 17. The National Assembly 
<list>
(1) Elects the presidium of the National Assembly; 
(2) Appoints the government of the People's Republic; 
(3) Amends the Constitution; 
(4) Decides on the establishment of new ministries and the abolition, fusion, or re-naming of existing ministries; 
(5) Decides questions of the cession, exchange, or increase of the territory of the People's Republic; 
(6) Approves the state economic plan; 
(7) Approves the state budget and the laws for the application of the budget, and determines taxes and the method of their collection; 
(8) Decides on the nationalization of economic enterprises and the introduction of state monopolies; 
(9) Decides questions of war and peace; 
(10) Decides on the holding of referenda; 
(11) Grants amnesties. 
</list>
Art. 18. The National Assembly is elected for a term of four years. It consists of deputies elected by the people, one for every thirty thousand inhabitants. 
Art. 19. The National Assembly is summoned for ordinary sessions by an order of the National Assembly twice a year-on November 1 and on February 1. If the presidium fails to summon the Assembly on these dates, the latter can meet on its own initiative. 
The National Assembly may be summoned for an extraordinary session by a decision of the presidium of the National Assembly or on the demand of at least one third of the deputies. 
Art. 20. At its opening sitting, under the chairmanship of the oldest deputy, the National Assembly elects from its number a bureau consisting of a president and three vice-presidents.
 The president (or in his absence one of the vice-presidents) conducts the proceedings in the National Assembly in accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the National Assembly. 
The National Assembly also elects the necessary number of secretaries and disciplinary officers in accordance with the rules of procedure. 
Art. 21. The deputies take the following oath: 
I swear in the name of the people and of the People's Republic that I will serve them devotedly and selflessly, that I will observe and hold sacred and inviolable the Constitution, that in my activity as a representative of the people I will keep in view only the interests of the Nation and the State and will spare no effort in defense of the freedom and independence of my country. I have sworn. 
Art. 22. Immediately after it has been constituted, the National Assembly elects a commission for verifying the elections and within a period of not more than three months submits a report confirming or annulling the election of each deputy individually. 
Art. 23. Legislative initiative belongs to the government and to the deputies.
Deputies can introduce bills if they are signed by at least one fifth of the total number of deputies. 
Art. 24. After being passed by the National Assembly, each law is signed by the president and secretary of the presidium of the National Assembly and is published in the state gazette. 
The law comes into effect three days after its publication, unless a different term is set by the law itself. 
Art. 25. The National Assembly has the sole right to decide whether all the requirements of the Constitution have been observed for making a law and whether it is contradictory to the provisions of the Constitution. 
Art. 26. The National Assembly can hold a sitting if more than half of the total number of deputies are present. Decisions are then taken by a simple majority except in cases for which the Constitution has made special provision. 
Art. 27. The National Assembly's sittings are public, unless it decides that important state interests demand that they be held in camera. 
Art. 28. The National Assembly can make investigations and inquiries into any question through special commissions. 
All organs of the State and private persons are obliged to supply the information and documents-required by these commissions. 
Art. 29. Deputies cannot be detained or prosecuted except for grave offenses and with the consent of the National Assembly or, if it is not in session, with the consent of its presidium. Such permission is not necessary if a deputy has been apprehended in the commission of a grave criminal offense, in which case it is sufficient to notify the presidium of the National Assembly forthwith. 
Deputies are immune from penal proceedings for their opinions expressed in the Assembly or for their votes. 
Art. 30. The National Assembly is dissolved on the expiry of its mandate, or earlier, if it so decides. 
In the event of war or other exceptional circumstances, the National Assembly can prolong its mandate for their duration. 
The dissolved National Assembly can be recalled by its presidium and its mandate prolonged in the event of war or other exceptional circumstances. 
Art. 31. A new National Assembly is elected at the latest three months after the dissolution of the previous Assembly. 
Art. 32. Deputies receive remuneration determined by the National Assembly. 
Art. 33. The National Assembly by a majority of more than half of the total number of deputies elects the presidium of the National Assembly consisting of a president, two vice presidents, a secretary, and fifteen members. 
Art. 34. The presidium of the National Assembly is responsible to the Assembly for all its activity. 
The National Assembly may at any time change the presidium or its individual members. 
Art. 35. The presidium of the National Assembly has the following functions: 
<list>
(1) Summons the National Assembly; 
(2) Fixes the date of elections for the National Assembly; 
(3) Publishes the laws passed by the National Assembly;
(4) Interprets the laws, which are binding on all; 
(5) Issues edicts; 
(6) Exercises the right of pardon and amnesty; 
(7) Institutes orders and decorations and awards them; 
(8) Represents the People's Republic in its international relations; appoints and recalls diplomatic and consular representatives of the country abroad on the recommendation of the government; and receives foreign representatives accredited to it; 
(9) Ratifies and denounces international treaties concluded by the government; 
(10) When the National Assembly is not in session the presidium can, on the recommendation of the government, declare a state of war in the event of an armed aggression against the People's Republic, or in the event of an urgent necessity of fulfilling international obligations relating to common defense against aggression; in such a case the presidium immediately summons the National Assembly to pronounce on the measure taken; 
(11) Proclaims, on the recommendation of the government, a general or partial mobilization and a state of siege; 
(12) When the National Assembly is not in session, the presidium may, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, relieve of duty and appoint individual members of the government; the presidium is obliged to submit this to the ratification of the National Assembly at its earliest session; 
(13) Repeals the decisions and directives of the government which do not conform to the Constitution or the laws of the country; 
(14) Fixes the date of a referendum on the decision of the National Assembly; 
(15) Appoints or discharges the staff of the high command of the armed forces of the People's Republic on the recommendation of the government; 
(16) Appoints and discharges the commander-in-chief of the armed forces on the recommendation of the government; 
(17) Remits uncollectable debts; 
(18) Decides questions with which the National Assembly has entrusted it; 
(19) Discharges all functions which have been assigned to it by law. 
</list>
Art. 36. Decrees issued by the presidium of the National Assembly are signed by the president and the secretary. 
Art. 37. After the expiry of the mandate of the National Assembly, or if it is dissolved before the expiry of its term, the presidium which the Assembly has elected continues to exercise its functions until the newly elected National Assembly elects a new presidium. 
Chapter IV: Organs of the State Executive<title> 
Art. 38. The government (council of ministers) is the supreme executive and administrative organ of the State in the People's Republic of Bulgaria. 
Art. 39. The Government consists of: 
<list>
President of the council of ministers, 
Vice-presidents of the council of ministers, 
President of the state planning commission, 
President of the commission for state control, 
Ministers, and 
President of the committee for science, arts, and culture.
</list> 
The President and Vice-presidents of the council of ministers can hold the office of a ministry, of the state planning commission, the commission for state control, or the committee for science, arts, and culture, or they can be ministers without portfolio. 
The ministers are: 
<list>
(1) Ministry of foreign affairs, 
(2) Ministry of the interior, 
(3) Ministry of national education, 
(4) Ministry of finance, 
(5) Ministry of justice, 
(6) Ministry of national defense, 
(7) Ministry of trade and supply, 
(8) Ministry of agriculture and forests, 
(9) Ministry of construction and roads, 
(10) Ministry of communal economy and works,
(11) Ministry of railway, road, and water communications, 
(12) Ministry of posts, telegraphs, and telephones, 
(13) Ministry of industry and handicrafts, 
(14) Ministry of electrification and improvements,
(15) Ministry of mines and mineral wealth, 
(16) Ministry of public health,
(17) Ministry of labor and social security.
</list>
The National Assembly may by a vote of more than half of the total number of deputies establish new ministries, or abolish, fuse, or re-name the existing ministries. 
The presidium of the National Assembly can, on the recommendation of the government, appoint assistant ministers to the various ministries. 
Art. 40. The National Assembly elects and relieves of their functions the government or individual members of the government. The government is responsible to the National Assembly and gives account of its activity to it. 
When the National Assembly is not in session, the government is responsible and gives account to the presidium of the National Assembly. 
Art. 41. The members of the government take the following oath before the National Assembly: I swear in the name of the people and of the People's Republic of Bulgaria that I will serve them devotedly and selflessly; that in my activity as a member of the government I will keep in view only the interests of the Nation and the State, that I will strictly observe the Constitution and the laws of the People's Republic and will spare no effort in defense of the freedom and independence of the People's Republic of Bulgaria. I have sworn. 
Art. 42. Members of the government may also be persons who are not deputies. 
Art. 43. The government directs the state administration by unifying and coordinating the work of the various ministries, the state planning commission, the commission for state control, and the committee for science, arts, and culture; takes measures for the implementation of the state economic plan and of the state budget; takes steps to ensure public order, to defend the interests of the State and the rights of the citizens; directs the general line of the foreign policy of the People's Republic of Bulgaria and of national defense, and also supervises the observance of the laws and of governmental measures.
The various members of the government direct their respective ministries within the framework and on the basis of the general policy and directives of the council of ministers. 
The council of ministers can take under its direct control certain branches of the administration by forming for the purpose commissions, committees, councils, general directorates, directorates, or services directly subordinate to it. 
Art. 44. Each deputy has the right to question and interpolate the government or its members. 
The latter are obliged to answer questions within the period laid down by the rules of procedure, and interpellations-when put on the agenda. 
Art. 45. The members of the government are penally responsible for any violation of the Constitution and the laws and for any criminal offense committed in the discharge of their functions. 
They bear civil responsibility for damage caused by them to the State or to private citizens by their unlawful acts. 
The responsibilities of the members of the government and the procedure for their prosecution are regulated in detail by a special law. 
Art. 46. Officials must take an oath of loyalty to the People's Republic. 
They bear disciplinary, penal, and civil responsibility for offenses committed in the discharge of their duties. 
Chapter V: Local Organs of the State Power<title>
Art. 47. The territory of the People's Republic is divided into municipalities and counties. Larger administrative units may be created by special laws. 
Art. 48. Organs of the State in the municipalities and counties are the municipal and county people's councils which are elected by the local population for a term of three years. 
Art. 49. The municipal and county people's councils direct the implementation of all economic, social, and cultural undertakings of local significance in conformity with the laws of the country. They prepare the economic plan and budget of the municipality and the county within the frame of the state economic plan and the state budget and direct their implementation; they supervise the correct administration of state property and the economic enterprises in their area; they supervise the preservation of public order, the observance of the laws, and the defense of the rights of the citizens; they direct the activity of their subordinate executive and administrative organs. 
Art. 50. Within the limits of their competence, local people's councils take decisions and issue orders in compliance with the laws and general directives of the superior organs of the state power. 
Art. 51. Executive and administrative organs of the municipal and county people's councils are the municipal and county executives consisting of a president, vice-presidents, secretary, and members. 
Municipal executives in smaller inhabited localities may consist only of a president and secretary. 
Art. 52. In the execution of their tasks, municipal and county people's councils rely on the initiative and mass participation of the people and of their political, professional, and other organizations.
At least once a year, in the manner regulated by law, municipal and county people's councils give an account of their past activity to the electors. 
Art. 53. The sessions of the municipal and county people's councils are regular or extraordinary. Municipal people's councils meet for a regular session every month and county people's councils every other month. 
The municipal and county executives may summon the councils to an extraordinary session on their own initiative, on the demand of one third of the councilors or on the order of the corresponding superior state organ. 
Art. 54. Municipal and county executives are subordinate both to the people's councils which have elected them and to the superior organs of the State administration. 
Art. 55. Departments for the various branches of administration may be formed at the municipal and county people's councils; they are to be directed by the executives of the councils. In their work these departments are subordinate both to the executive of the people's council to which they are attached and to the corresponding department at the superior people's council and to the corresponding ministry or government service of the People's Republic. 
Chapter VI: Courts and Prosecution<title> 
Art. 56. The courts apply the law strictly and equally to all citizens. 
Judges are independent; in giving their decisions they act only according to the dictates of the law. They pronounce their decisions and sentences in the name of the people. 
Art. 57. Assessors also take part in the administration of justice. 
The occasions and procedure for their participation are determined by law. 
Art. 58. Judges of all ranks and assessors are elected, except in the cases explicitly laid down by law. 
The law determines which judges and assessors are elected by the citizens in accordance with the rules and regulations of the general, equal, direct, and secret ballot, and which by the local people's councils, or by the National Assembly, and the term for which they shall be elected. 
Art. 59. Special courts for specific lawsuits and crimes may only be created by a special law. 
Art. 60. The constitution of courts, their procedure, the conditions of eligibility of court officials, and the procedure for electing and recalling judges and assessors, as well as the grading of courts, are determined by law. 
Art. 61. Supreme judicial control over every kind and grade of court is exercised by the Supreme Court of the People's Republic the members of which are elected by the National Assembly for a term of five years. 
Art. 62. Supreme control over the correct observance of the law by different government organs and officials and by the citizens is exercised by the attorney general of the People's Republic. 
It is the particular duty of the attorney general of the Republic to attend to the prosecution and punishment of crimes which affect the state, national, and economic interests of the People's Republic, and crimes and actions detrimental to the independence and state sovereignty of the country. 
Art. 63. The attorney general of the People's Republic is elected by the National Assembly for a term of five years and is subordinate to it alone. 
Art. 64. All other prosecutors at courts of every grade are appointed and discharged by the Attorney General of the People's Republic, and in the exercise of their duty are subordinate only to prosecutors directly over them, while all prosecutors are subordinate to the attorney general. 
Chapter VII: Relations between the Organs of the State Power and the Organs of the State Administration<title> 
Art. 65. The presidium of the National Assembly has the right to repeal all decisions and directives of the council of ministers which do not conform with the Constitution and the laws of the country. 
The council of ministers has the right to repeal all decisions and orders of any of its members which do not conform with the Constitution, the laws, or the decisions and directives of the government. 
Art. 66. The presidium of the National Assembly and the superior local people's councils have the right to repeal unlawful or irregular acts of the inferior people's councils. 
Art. 67. The government and each of its individual members have the right, within the limits of their competence, to repeal the unlawful or irregular acts of municipal and county executives. 
The executives of superior people's councils have the same right with regard to the executives of inferior councils. 
Art. 68. Each municipal or county people's council can repeal unlawful and irregular acts of its executives. 
Art. 69. The government or its individual members, within the limits of their competence, and similarly the executive of a superior local people's council, may suspend the execution of the unlawful and irregular acts of an inferior local people's council and refer the question of repeal to the presidium of the National Assembly, or to the people's council of the same rank. 
Art. 70. A superior people's council as well as the presidium of the National Assembly may dissolve an inferior people's council in its area and hold elections for a new people's council. 
Superior people's councils as well as the presidium of the National Assembly may discharge the executive of an inferior people's council in its area and hold elections for a new executive. 
Chapter VIII: Basic Rights and Obligations of Citizens<title> 
Art. 71. All citizens of the People's Republic of Bulgaria are equal before the law. 
No privileges based on nationality, origin, religion, and material situation are recognized. 
Every preaching of racial, national, or religious hatred is punishable by law. 
Art. 72. Women have equal rights with men in all spheres of the state, private, economic, public, cultural, and political life.
This equality is realized by guaranteeing to women on an equality with men the right to labor, equal pay for equal work, the right to rest, to social insurance, to pension and education. 
Mothers enjoy special protection in respect to work. The State takes special care of mothers and their children by establishing maternity homes, crèches, kindergartens, and dispensaries; it guarantees paid leave to mothers before and after childbirth, and free midwifery and medical aid. 
Art. 73. Citizens have a right to work. 
The State guarantees this right to all citizens by planned economy, by systematically and continually developing the productive forces of the country, and creating public works. 
Labor is paid according to the amount and quality of the work done. 
Labor is a duty and a point of honor for every able-bodied citizen. It is the duty of every citizen to engage in socially useful labor and to work according to his powers and ability. 
Citizens' labor service obligations are determined by a special law. 
Art. 74. Citizens have a right to rest. This right is guaranteed by limited working hours, by holiday with pay once a year, and by the establishment of a large system of rest-homes, clubs, etc. 
Art. 75. Citizens have a right to pension, aid and compensation in the case of disease, accident, disablement, unemployment, and old age. 
This right is put into practical effect through social insurance and accessible medical aid and guaranteed by the State.
 Art. 76. Marriage and the family are under state protection. 
Only civil marriage performed by the competent organs is legally valid. 
Children born out of wedlock have equal rights with the issue of lawful marriage. 
Art. 77. The State takes special care of the social, cultural, labor, physical, and health education of the youth. 
Art. 78. Citizens are guaranteed freedom of conscience and religion, and of performing religious rites. 
The Church is separate from the State. 
A special law regulates the legal status, the questions of material support, and the right to self-government and organization of the various religious communities. 
It is prohibited to misuse the Church and religion for political ends or to form political organizations with a religious basis. 
Art. 79. Citizens have a right to education. Education is secular, with a democratic and progressive spirit. National minorities have a right to be educated in their vernacular, and to develop their national culture, while the study of Bulgarian is obligatory. 
Elementary education is compulsory and free of charge. 
Schools are run by the State. The establishment of private schools may be allowed only by a special law, in which case the school in question is under state supervision. 
The right to education is guaranteed by schools, educational institutes, and universities as well as by scholarships, student hostels, material and other aid, and special encouragement for gifted students. 
Art. 80. The State cares for the development of science and art by establishing research, institutions, publishing houses, libraries, theaters, museums, public reading clubs, art galleries, film studios, cinemas, etc., and by aiding persons who have shown ability in a given sphere.
Art. 81. The State takes care of national health by organizing and directing health services and institutes, propagates health education among the people and pays special attention to the physical culture of the people. 
Art. 82. The freedom and inviolability of the individual are guaranteed. 
No one may be detained for more than forty-eight hours without a decision of the judicial authorities or the prosecutor.
Punishment can be inflicted only on the basis of the existing laws. 
Punishment is personal and corresponds to the crime committed. 
Punishment for crimes can only be inflicted by the established courts. 
The accused has a right to defense. 
Art. 83. All Bulgarian citizens abroad enjoy the protection of the People's Republic of Bulgaria. 
Art. 84. In the People's Republic of Bulgaria, foreigners enjoy the right of sanctuary when they are prosecuted for defending democratic principles, for struggling for their national liberation, for the rights of the workers, or for the freedom of scientific and cultural activity. 
Art. 85. Homes are inviolable. Without the consent of the householder, no one may enter his home or premises and conduct a search there unless conditions required by law are observed. 
Art. 86. The secrecy of correspondence is inviolable except in the event of mobilization, state of siege, or when special permission is given by the judicial authorities or the prosecutor. 
Art. 87. Bulgarian citizens have the right to form societies, associations, and organizations provided they are not contrary to the State and the public order established by the present Constitution. 
The law forbids and punishes the formation of and participation in organizations the aim of which is to deprive the Bulgarian people of the rights and liberties gained with the national uprising of September 9, 1944, and guaranteed by the present Constitution, or to encroach on these rights and liberties, or to imperil the national independence and state sovereignty of the country; or organizations which openly or secretly propagate fascist and anti-democratic ideology or facilitate imperialist aggression. 
Art. 88. The citizens of the People's Republic are guaranteed freedom of the press, of speech, of assembly, of meetings and demonstrations. 
Art. 89. Citizens have the right to make requests, complaints, and petitions. 
Every citizen has the right to demand court proceedings against officials for offenses committed in the discharge of their duties. 
Citizens have a right to compensation from officials for damage caused them by the latter owing to unlawful or irregular execution of their duties. 
Art. 90. The defense of the country is a supreme duty and a point of honor for every citizen. 
Treason to the motherland is the gravest crime against the people and is punished with the full severity of the law. 
Art. 91. Military service is obligatory for all citizens in accordance with the special laws. 
Art. 92. Citizens are bound to observe the Constitution and the laws of the country strictly and conscientiously.
Art. 93. Citizens are bound to preserve national property and by all their actions to further the economic, cultural, and defensive power of the country and the welfare of the people. 
Art. 94. The citizens' burden of taxation is distributed in accordance with their paying ability. These obligations and exemption from them are established only by law. 
Chapter IX: Coat of Arms, State Seal, Flag, Capital<title>
Art. 95. The coat of arms of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is round; with a lion rampant in the center, ears of corn on either side of it, a five-pointed red star over its head and "9.IX.1944" in gold below.
Art. 96. The state seal bears the state coat of arms. 
Art. 97. The flag of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is tricolored--white, red, and green, placed horizontally. The upper left-hand corner of the white stripe bears the coat of arms of the People's Republic. 
Art. 98. The capital of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is Sofia. 
Chapter X: Amendment of the Constitution<title> 
Art. 99. The Constitution may be amended on the proposal of the government, or of at least one quarter of the deputies. 
The Constitution amendment bill is put on the agenda of the National Assembly within a week from its introduction in the Assembly. 
It may be passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total number of deputies. The law for the amendment of the Constitution comes into effect on the day of its publication in the state gazette. 
Chapter XI: Temporary Provisions<title> 
Art. 100. After the present Constitution comes into effect, the Grand National Assembly, elected on October 27, 1946, elects a presidium of the Grand National Assembly in accordance with Article 33; the presidium immediately assumes the functions provided for by the Constitution. This terminates the functions of the presidium of the Grand National Assembly, elected in accordance with Article 2 of the rules of procedure of the Grand National Assembly. The deputies elect, in accordance with Article 20 of the present Constitution, a president and vice-president for conducting the proceedings in the Grand National Assembly. 
Art. 101. The presidium of the Grand National Assembly appoints provisional municipal and county executives with the prerogatives of people's councils until municipal and county people's councils, provided for by the Constitution, are elected.
