<preamble>
By approving the present Constitution, the people of Burundi: 
<list>
. assert their desire to pursue the work of renovation undertaken since the Revolution of 28 November 1986, in order to establish a republican and democratic state, endowed with modern institutions, and to uphold the political and moral unity of the Nation; 
. proclaim their determination to guarantee the fundamental rights of man, to promote the economic, social and cultural progress of Burundi and of each of its inhabitants and to secure the triumph of liberty, equality and fraternity; 
. affirm their adherence to the Charter of the United Nations and to the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man; 
. express their decision to contribute to the maintenance of peace in the world, to defend the right of peoples to govern themselves and to prepare the way for African Unity through the prosperity and friendship of peoples.
</list>
</preamble>
TITLE ONE: THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY<title>
Art. 1: 
Burundi is a single, indivisible, secular and democratic Republic. Its principle shall be: Government of the People, for the People and by the People. Its motto shalt be: Unity, Work, Progress. 
Art. 2: 
The tricolor flag of Burundi shalt be green, white and red, in the center of which shall be a white disc bearing three red stars. Its anthem shall be "BURUNDI BWACU". The emblem of the Republic shall be a shield embossed with a lion's head and three spears, encircled by the national motto. The seal of the Republic of Burundi shall be determined by law. 
Art. 3: 
The official languages of Burundi shall be Kirundi and French.
TITLE TWO: PUBLIC LIBERTIES AND LIBERTIES OF THE HUMAN PERSON<title>
Art. 4: 
All Barundi shall have equal rights and duties without distinction as to sex, origin, race, religion or beliefs. The State shall guarantee to each citizen equal opportunities to realize the complete development of his talents and personality. 
Art. 5: 
Within the rights and duties of Barundi, no law or administrative decision shall have the power to institute distinctions based on race. All propaganda of an ethnic character and any demonstration of racial discrimination shall be punished by law. No group of any kind shall be permitted to be established with the purpose of defending the interests of any race, nor shall any group be allowed to restrict the nomination of its leaders or the recruitment of its members to any specific race. 
Art. 6: 
The status of Murundi shall be acquired, retained and lost in accordance with conditions established by law. 
Art. 7: 
The Republic of Burundi recognizes and guarantees the inviolable and inalienable rights of man. Each person shall have the right to the free development of his personality within the limits of respect for the rights of others and for the public order. No person shall be charged with or sentenced for a crime except by virtue of an applicable law in force at the time of the offense. The right of defense shall be inviolable at all stages of the judicial process. 
Art. 8: 
All citizens of, the Republic shalt have the right to move and to settle freely throughout the territory of the Republic subject to restrictions imposed by law. 
Art. 9: 
Freedom of belief and of religious worship shall be guaranteed to all. Within the limits and conditions established by law, the State shall protect the free exercise of religion, without intervening in this exercise. 
Art. 10: 
Each person shall have the right to express his opinions in word and in the press within the limits of the law and regulations. The domicile shall be inviolable. No house search can be ordered except in accordance with the conditions established by law. The secrecy of correspondence and of postal and telephonic communications shall be guaranteed. No restriction thereof can be ordered except in accordance with the law. 
Art. 11: 
The family, the rational foundation of society, shall be protected by the State. Marriage shall be organized by law. 
Art. 12: 
Parents have the natural right and duty to raise their children. They shall be supported in this task by the State and public bodies. The protection of youth against exploitation and moral, intellectual and physical neglect shall be an obligation of the State and the public bodies. The State shall guarantee the equal access of every citizen to education and culture. Every child shall have the right to instruction and education. Private schools may be opened with the authorization and under the control of the State. 
Art. 13: 
Property, an individual right, through the use made thereof, contributes to the general prosperity of the country. The right to property shall be guaranteed to all, Barundi and foreigners, subject to the legal and customary law restrictions on the ownership of land. No person may be deprived of his property except for reasons of public utility in the circumstances and manner instituted by law and after just and prior compensation. 
Art. 14: 
Work shall be a right and a duty for every person. Every worker shall have the right to an equitable compensation for his labor, which shall assure him and his family of an existence in accordance with human dignity. Unremunerated work may be requested only by a public body and within the conditions and limits set by the Central Committee of the Party. It cannot be prescribed by force. 
Art. 15: 
The rights recognized by the preceding articles shall be exercised within the conditions set by the laws established for their enforcement. They shall be subject only to those restrictions which are necessary to ensure the respect for the rights of others and to satisfy the legitimate requirements of morality, public order and the perpetuity of the State. No person may overstep the limits of the rights recognized by the Constitution and by law in order to jeopardize the territorial integrity or the independence of Burundi, to impair the republican system of government or to violate the present Constitution. 
Art. 16: 
The State, being responsible for the economic and social development of the country and its inhabitants, shall have the right to intervene in all economic sectors and to take any measures therein in order to ensure this development. 
Art. 17: 
National sovereignty shall belong to the people. The people shall exercise it freely and democratically within the conditions set forth in the present Constitution and within the single party "National Unity and Progress" (UPRONA).
TITLE THREE: THE PARTY<title>
Art. 18: 
The Republic of Burundi has adopted the system of a single party to be named UPRONA. 
Art. 19: 
The Party shall describe the general political orientation of the Nation and shall inspire the action of the State. It shall control the activities of the government and of the judiciary.
Art. 20: 
The Party shall reflect the profound aspirations of the people. It shall educate and guide them towards the realization of their aspirations.
Art. 21: 
The Secretary General shall be the Head of the UPRONA Party. He shall be elected by an absolute majority by the National Congress, upon the recommendation of the Central Committee of the Party. The election shall take place upon the convocation by presidential decree of the National Congress of the Party, no less than twenty and no mare than fifty days before the expiration of the term of office of the Secretary General currently in office. To be a candidate for Secretary General of the Party, one must be MURUNIJI and enjoy full civil and political rights.
TITLE FOUR: THE PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC AND THE GOVERNMENT<title>
Art. 22: 
The Secretary General of the UPRONA Party, elected by the National Congress in accordance with the provisions of Article 21, shall become President of the Republic, Chief of State and Head of the Government. He shall embody National Unity and ensure the continuity of the State. He shall represent the State in all acts of public life. Caretaker of the Constitution, he shall be ultimately responsible for safeguarding national independence and territorial integrity and for upholding treaties and international agreements. He shall be the ultimate protector of all Barundi and of their rights and liberties. He shall determine and conduct the general policies of the nation. 
Art. 23: 
The term of office for the Secretary General of the Party, President of the Republic, Chief of State and Head of the Government shall be for seven years and shall be renewable. 
Art. 24: 
Before entering upon his duties, the elected Secretary General shall take the following oath, before the high authorities of the Party and the State: "Loyal to the principles of our Republic, I solemnly swear before the people, sole possessor of national sovereignty, to fulfill the high duties entrusted to me, to respect the rules and principles of the Constitution, to be guided only by the general welfare and to devote all my energy to the safeguard of the ultimate interests of the nation, the integrity and independence of the Republic of Burundi. 
Art. 25: 
In the case of the vacancy of the Presidency for any cause whatsoever, the duties of the Secretary General of the Party, the President of the Republic and Head of the Government, shall be temporarily performed by an interim authority designated to attend to current business by the Central Committee of the Party, which shall be immediately convened for this purpose. The ballot for the election of the new Secretary General of the Party shall take place in the manner prescribed in Article 21 of the present Constitution. 
Art. 26: 
In the case of the temporary absence of the Secretary General of the Party, President of the Republic and Head of the Government, his duties shall be temporarily performed by an authority designated by himself, or, in the absence thereof, by the authority designated by the Central Committee of the Party immediately convened for this purpose. 
Art. 27: 
The President of the Republic shall have the power of pardon. 
Art. 28: 
The President of the Republic shall appoint the ministers and shall terminate their functions. 
Art. 29: 
The President of the Republic shall lay down by decree the powers of the ministers and determine the nature, composition and jurisdiction of the services placed under the authority of each of them. 
Art. 30: 
Members of the Government must be Murundi and enjoy full civil and political rights. 
Art. 31: 
The President of the Republic shall convene and preside over the Council of Ministers, for which he shall decide the agenda. He may delegate the chairmanship of a session of the Council to a minister. 
Art. 32: 
The President of the Republic may submit to the National Congress any text of a law which he deems requires the direct consultation of the people. 
Art. 33: 
In the case of a grave and immediate danger to the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the nation, the integrity of the territory or the execution of its international agreements, the President of the Republic shall take, by decree-law, the exceptional measures required; he shall inform the Nation of these measures by a message. 
Art. 34: 
The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements.
Art. 35: 
Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties or agreements relative to international organization, those that commit the finances of the State, those that modify provisions of a legislative nature, those relative to the status of persons, and those that call for cession, exchange or addition of territory shall not enter into effect until after this ratification.
Art. 36: 
Ratified treaties or agreements shall have, as of their application, an authority superior to that of the laws, subject, for each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party. 
Art. 37: 
The President of the Republic shall have the right to issue money in conformance with the law. 
Art. 38: 
He shall have the right to bestow national decorations, both civil and military, in accordance with the law. 
Art. 39: 
The President of the Republic, assisted by ministers, shall exercise the power to issue decrees: 
<list>
. he shall prepare bills 
. he shall provide for the enforcement of decree-laws
. he may, when circumstances so demand, proclaim a state of emergency and a state of siege. 
</list>
Art. 40: 
The acts of the President of the Republic shall have the title of "decrees". They shall be countersigned by the ministers responsible for their execution. The acts of ministers shall have the title of "ordinances". 
Art. 41: 
The President of the Republic may temporarily delegate some of his power to the ministers. 
Art. 42: 
Consultative councils or committees may be created to help the President and the government in the exercise of their powers. Their creation shall be decided by the President of the Republic. 
Art. 43: 
The President of the Republic shall be the Supreme Head of the Army. He shall make appointments to all civilian and military positions of the State, except those for whom he shall have delegated the power of appointment to be exercised in his name. 
Art. 44: 
The President of the Republic shall be responsible for the national defense. He may declare war upon consultation with the political bureau of the Party. 
Art. 45: 
Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers shall be accredited to the President of the Republic. Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to the President of the Republic. 
Art. 46: 
In the exercise of their functions, the members of government shall be politically responsible to the President of the Republic. 
Art. 47: 
They shall be, moreover, subject to penalty for any criminal offenses. In this case, they shall be judged by the Supreme Court. The Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors and by the determination of penalties as established by criminal laws in force at the time the infractions were committed.
TITLE FIVE: THE LEGISLATIVE POWER<title>
Art. 48: 
The legislative power shall be vested in the President of the Republic, Chief of State and Head of the Government. 
Art. 49: 
Laws shall be drawn up by the ministers concerned, discussed and adopted in the Council of Ministers and promulgated by the President of the Republic. 
Art. 50: 
The following matters shall be within the sphere of the law: 
<list_1>
1. The fundamental guarantees and obligations of the citizen: 
<list_2>
a. protection of individual freedom; 
b. system of public liberties; 
c. labor and trade-union legislation; 
d. duties and obligations of the citizen in respect of national defense. 
</list_2>
2. The status of persons and property: 
<list_3>
. nationality, status and legal capacity of persons; 
. marriage contracts, inheritance and gifts;
. system of civil and commercial obligations. 
</list_3>
3. The political, administrative and judicial organization regarding: 
<list_4>
. the general organization of national defense; 
. the general regulations for public office; 
. the creation of public establishments; 
. the determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the punishments therefore, civil procedure, amnesty and the creation of new orders of jurisdiction. 
</list_4>
4. The following financial and property matters: 
<list_5>
. the system of issuing money; 
. the basis, rate and methods of collecting taxes of all types;
. the management of State domain, the nationalization of enterprises. 
</list_5>
5. The system of education. Those matters not within the sphere of the law shall have a regulatory character. Legislative texts concerning these matters may be modified by decree.
</list_1>
TITLE SIX: THE JUDICIAL POWER<title>
Art. 51: 
Justice shall be rendered throughout the territory of the Republic in the name of the Murundi people. Judges, in the exercise of their functions, shall be subject to the authority of the law, the options of the Party and the revolutionary conception of the law. They shall have jurisdiction aver all disputes dealing with civil rights which fall exclusively within the competence of the ordinary courts. Disputes dealing with political rights shall be within the competence of the courts except for those exceptions established by the Constitution and specific laws. 
Art. 52: 
Trials shall be public unless publicity would endanger public order or morality, in which case, the court must formally so decide. All verdicts must be accompanied by the reasons therefore and shall be pronounced in open court. 
Art. 53: 
Unless abrogated by law, there shall be in the Republic: 
<list>
. Peace tribunals 
. Police courts 
. Courts of first instance 
. three Courts of Appeal 
. one Supreme Court. 
</list>
Art. 54: 
The composition, organization and functioning of jurisdictions shall be stipulated by law. 
Art. 55: 
The High Council of the Judiciary shall sit as a disciplinary council for judges; it shall be, moreover, consulted regarding the appointment of judges to the Bench. 
Art. 56: 
Judges shall be amenable to the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, except those of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the public prosecutor's office, who shall be summoned before the Supreme Court. The categories of high government officials benefiting from the privilege of jurisdiction shall be stipulated by law.
TITLE SEVEN: THE SUPREME COURT<title>
Art. 57: 
The Supreme Court shall be the highest court of the Republic. It shall comprise: 
<list>
. a Judicial Chamber which shall rescind decisions; 
. an Accounts Chamber which shall judge budgetary and financial disputes and have jurisdiction over crimes, misdemeanors and misappropriations committed in financial affairs to the detriment of the National Treasury; 
. a Constitutional Chamber. 
</list>
The Supreme Court shall have original and final jurisdiction over any infractions committed by ministers. 
Art. 58: 
The composition, attributes and functioning of the Supreme Court shall be determined by law. 
Art. 59: 
The decisions of the Supreme Court may not be appealed and shall be binding, except in the case of pardon.
TITLE EIGHT: NATIONAL DEFENSE<title>
Art. 60: 
A National Defense Council, presided over by the President of the Republic, shall be established. The purpose of the National Defense Council shall be to examine questions dealing with the means of ensuring both the internal and external security of the Republic of Burundi. The Chief of State shall decide by presidential decree the composition, organization and functioning of the National Defense Council. 
Art. 61: 
The State alone shall have the power to raise Armed Farces; no group or organism shall have the right to set up any military or paramilitary formations. However, the State may organize the military training of youth according to the terms agreed upon by the National Defense Council. 
Art. 62: 
No foreign troops may be permitted to serve the State, to occupy or cross the national territory unless by virtue of a decision of the National Defense Council.
TITLE NINE: AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION<title>
Art. 63: 
Constitutional amendments shall be initiated by the President of the Republic. The proposal of amendment shall be drawn up and agreed upon according to the conditions stipulated in Articles 48 and 49 of the present Constitution. The republican form of the State cannot be the subject of amendment.
TITLE TEN: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS<title>
Art. 64: 
<list>
a) The present Constitution grants His Excellency Lieutenant-General Michel Micombero all prerogatives of Chief of State and Head of the Government until the official inauguration of the new President of the Republic elected by the people in accordance with the provisions of Articles 21, 22 and 23 of the present Constitution. 
b) Legislative and statutory texts applicable to Burundi at the time the present Constitution takes effect, shall remain in force to the extent that they do not contradict the provisions of the Constitution.
</list>