We, the Burundian People, Conscious of our responsibilities and of our duties before history and future generations; Reaffirming our faith in the ideal of national unity pursuant to the Charter of National Unity of February 5, 1991; Considering the necessity to institute a democratic pluralistic order and legal status; Proclaiming our commitment to the respect of fundamental human rights in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of December 10, 1948, the International Human Rights Pacts of December 16, 1966, the African Charter of Rights of Man and People of June 18, 1981 and the Charter of National Unity; Considering our commitment to peace and social justice; Conscious of the urgent necessity of promoting the economic and social development of our country and of assuring the protection of our national culture; Reaffirming our determination to defend the political and economic sovereignty and independence of our country; Affirming the importance in international relations of the right of peoples to self-determination; Considering that relations between peoples must be characterized by peace, friendship and cooperation in accordance with the United Nations Charter of June 26, 1945; Reaffirming our commitment to the cause of African unity in accordance with the Charter of Organization of African Unity of May 25, 1963; We solemnly adopt this Constitution which shall be the fundamental law of the State. 
TITLE I The State and the Sovereignty of the People<title> 
Article 1 
Burundi shall be a unitary Republic, independent and sovereign, secular and democratic.Its principle shall be the government of the people, by the people and for the people. 
Its democratic system must be in accord with the fundamental values of society, which are national unity, social peace, social justice, development, national independence and sovereignty.
Article 2
National sovereignty shall belong to the people, who shall exercise it either through their representatives or directly by referendum. 
No segment of the population nor any individual may arrogate to himself the exercise of sovereignty.
Article 3
Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret. It may be direct or indirect as provided by the Constitution or by law. 
As provided by law, all Burundians eighteen years of age enjoying their civil and political rights shall be eligible to vote.
Article 4
The Republic of Burundi shall be subdivided into provinces and communes. 
Their organization and operation, as well as that of other administrative districts, shall be determined by law. 
The law may modify the limits and the number of administrative districts. The national territory shall be inalienable and indivisible subject to the provisions of Title XI of this Constitution.
Article 5
The capital of Burundi shall be established at Bujumbura. The capital may by law be transferred to any other location in the Republic.
Article 6
The flag of Burundi shall be tricolored: green, white and red. It shall have the form of a rectangle divided by two crossed diagonals comporting in its center a white disc with a stamp representing three, red six-pointed stars forming a fictional equilateral triangle within a circle having the same center as the disc and whose base is parallel to the length of the flag. 
The law shall specify the dimensions and other details of the flag.Article 7 
The motto of Burundi shalt be "Unity, Labor, Progress." 
The emblem of the Republic shall be a shield stamped with a lion's head and three lances, the whole thing surrounded by the national slogan. 
The national anthem shall be "Burundi Bwacu." The seal of the Republic shall be determined by law. 
Article 8 
The national language shall be Kirundi. The official languages shall be Kirundi and such other languages as may be determined by law. 
Article 9 
The quality as Burundian shall be acquired, preserved and lost in accordance with the law. 
TITLE II Human Rights, Duties of The Individual and The Citizen<title> 
Article 10
The rights and duties proclaimed and guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Pacts relative to Human Rights, the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and the Charter of National Unity shall be an integral part of this Constitution. 
1. Human Rights<title> 
Article 11 
The human person is sacred and inviolable. The State shall have the absolute obligation to respect and protect the human person. 
Article 12 
Everyone shall have the right to the development and full realization of his person in the respect of this Constitution, public order, good morals and the rights of others. 
Article 13 
Everyone shall have the right to life, personal security and physical integrity.Article 14 
The liberty of the person is inviolable. 
No restrictions may be placed on these rights except in virtue of law. 
Anyone deprived of his liberty shall be treated with humanity and the respect inherent to human dignity. 
Article 15 
All men are equal in dignity, in rights and duties without distinction as to sex, origin, ethnicity, religion or opinion. 
All men shall be equal before the law and shall have the right to equal protection of the law without distinction. 
Article 16 
No one may be indicted, arrested or detained except in cases determined by the law promulgated before the acts for which he is accused. 
The right to defense oneself shall be guaranteed before every jurisdiction. 
No one may be separated against his will from the judge assigned to him by law. 
Article 17 
Every person accused of an unlawful act shall be presumed innocent until his guilt has been legally established in the course of a public process, during which he shall be assured every guarantee necessary to his free defense. 
Article 18 
No one may be convicted for actions or omissions which, at the time they were committed, did not constitute a crime. 
In the same way, no greater punishment than that applicable at the time a crime was committed may be inflicted. 
Article 19 
No one may be subjected to security measures except in such cases and forms as may be provided by law, notably for reasons of public order or the security of the State.Article 20 
No one may be subjected to torture, mental cruelty, inhuman or degrading treatments. 
Article 21 
No one may be subjected to arbitrary interference with his private life, his family, his domicile or his correspondence, nor to attacks on his honor and reputation. 
House searches or visits of domicile may not be ordered except as provided by law. 
Privacy of correspondence and communication shall be guaranteed in accordance with the law. 
Article 22 
All Burundians shall have the freedom of movement and the right to settle freely in the national territory as well as to leave it and come back. 
The exercise of this right may be limited by law only for reasons of public order or security of the State in order to guard against collective dangers or to protect persons in danger. 
Article 23 
No citizen may be forced into exile. 
Article 24 
The right of asylum shall be recognized under conditions defined by law. 
Extradition shall be authorized only within the limits provided by law. 
No Burundian may be extradited to a foreign land. 
Article 25 
Every person shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion, worship, in accordance with public order and the law. The exercise of worship and the expression of beliefs shall be carried out in accordance with the principle of secularity of the State. 
Article 26 
Every person shall have the freedom of opinion and expression in respect of the public order and the law.The freedom of press shall be recognized and guaranteed by the State. 
The National Council of Communication shall see to the freedom of audiovisual and written communication in respect of the law, public order and good morals. 
The Council has namely the power to make sure that the liberty of press is respected as well as the free access of political parties to the State medias. 
This Council plays too a consulting role with the government in communication matters. 
Article 27 
Every person shall have the right to property. 
No one may be deprived of his property except for reason of public utility, in cases as provided by the law and in return for a fair and preliminary indemnity or as a result of a judiciary decision. 
Article 28 
Freedom of assembly and peaceful association shall be guaranteed as provided by law. 
Article 29 
Every Burundian shall have the right, either directly or indirectly through representatives, to participate in the direction and management of the affairs of State, subject to legal conditions such as age and capacity. 
Every Burundian shall have too a right of access to the public offices of his country. 
Article 30 
The family shall be the fundamental natural unit of society. Marriage shall be its legitimate support. The family and marriage shall be afforded special protection by the State. 
Parents have the natural right and the duty to educate and raise their children. They shall be supported in this task by the State and public institutions. 
Every child has the right to special protective measures by his family, society and the State that are required by his status as a minor. 
Article 31 
Every person shall be granted satisfaction of economic, social and cultural rights which are indispensable to his dignity and to the free development of his person, thanks to the national effort and according to the resources of the country. 
Article 32 
Everyone shall have the right of equal access to instruction, education and culture. 
The State shall have the duty to organize public education. 
However, the right to found private schools shall be guaranteed as provided by law. 
Article 33 
The State shall recognize the right of all citizens to work and shall do its best to create conditions enabling effective enjoyment of this right. The State shall recognize the right of every person to enjoy fair and satisfying labor conditions and shall guarantee that the worker receives fair retribution for his services or his production. 
Article 34 
Every person with equal qualification shall have the right to equal pay for equal work without any discrimination. 
Article 35 
Every worker may defend his rights and interests individually, collectively or in trade unions in accordance with the law. The right to strike shall be exercised as provided by law. 
Article 36 
Each person shall have the right to protection of the moral and material interests ensued from every scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author. 
Article 37 
Every foreigner in the territory of the Republic shall enjoy the protection accorded to persons and property in accordance with this Constitution. 
Article 38 
In the exercise of their rights and the enjoyment of their liberties, every person is subject only to those limitations established by law that are exclusively intended to assure the recognition and respect of the rights and liberties of others and to satisfy the just demands of public policy, public order and general well-being in a democratic society.Article 39 
The power of the judiciary, guardian of public rights and liberties, shall ensure respect for these rights in accordance with the law. 
Article 40 
No one may abuse the rights recognized by this Constitution or by law in order to compromise national unity, territorial integrity or the independence of Burundi, to attack the republican system or the secularity of the State or to violate in any other way this Constitution.
Part 2: Duties of the Individual and the Citizen<title>
Article 41 
Every citizen shall have duties to the family, society, the State and other public institutions. 
Article 42 
Every Burundian shall have the duty to preserve and reinforce national unity in accordance with the Charter of National Unity.
Article 43 
Everyone shall respect the laws and the institutions of the Republic. 
Article 44 
Every Burundian shall have the duty to preserve the harmonious development of the family and work towards the cohesion and respect of that family, to respect at all times his parents, and to support and assist them in case of need. 
Article 45 
Every individual shall have the duty to respect and value his fellow man without any discrimination and to maintain with him relations promoting, safeguarding and reinforcing mutual respect and tolerance. 
Article 46 
Every Burundian must look, in his relations with society, to the preservation and reinforcement of Burundian cultural values and contribute to the establishment of a morally healthy society.Article 47 
Public property is sacred and inviolable. Every person shall respect it scrupulously and protect it. Every Burundian shall have the duty to defend the national property. 
Every act of sabotage, vandalism, corruption, embezzlement or waste, or any other act that may cause injury to public property, shall be punished in accordance with the law. 
Article 48 
All citizens shall be expected to fulfill their civic obligations. 
Every person shall have the duty to work for the common good and to fulfill his professional obligations. 
Everyone shall bear public responsibilities equally. No one may be discharged from such except as may be established by law. 
The State may proclaim that all citizens commonly bear the responsibilities that result from national and natural disasters. 
Article 49 
Every Burundian entrusted with a public office or elected to a political function shall have the duty to fulfill it with conscience, integrity, devotion and loyalty in the general interest. 
Article 50 
Every Burundian shall have the duty to defend the national independence and the integrity of the territory. 
Every citizen shall have the sacred duty to ensure and participate in the defense of his country. 
Every Burundian, as well as every foreigner who lives in the territory of the Republic, shall have the duty not to compromise the security of the State. 
Article 51 
Every individual shall have the duty to bring his contribution for the safeguard of peace, democracy and social justice.
Article 52 
Every Burundian shall have the duty to contribute by his work to the construction and prosperity of the country.TITLE III The System of Political Parties<title> 
Article 53 
Multipartism shall be recognized in the Republic of Burundi. 
Article 54 
The political party shall be a non-profit association endowed with civil personality involving citizens in a project of democratic society founded upon national unity and having a political program with specific objectives, dictated by the concern of realizing the general interest and the development of all. 
Political parties shall cooperate in exercising the vote and shall participate in political life through peaceful means. 
Article 55 
Political parties will be recognized in accordance with the Constitution and the law. 
To be recognized, they shall be required notably to subscribe to the Charter of National Unity and to adhere to the following fundamental principles: to respect, protect and consolidate national unity; to protect and promote the fundamental rights of the human person; to promote rule of law founded upon the respect and defense of democracy; to defend territorial integrity and national sovereignty; to prohibit intolerance, ethnicism, regionalism, xenophobia, and recourse to violence in any form. 
Political parties shall conform to the Charter of National Unity and to the principles enunciated above in carrying out their functions. 
Article 56 
In consenting to the above, political parties shall pledge that their organization and their governing bodies will adhere to democratic principles and to the ideal of national unity, taking into consideration the diverse components of the Burundian population. 
Article 57 
Political parties shall be forbidden to identify themselves in form, action or any other manner, notably with a particular ethnic group, region, religion, sect or gender. 
Article 58 
The members of the armed forces, police corps as well as magistrates, in active service, are not authorized to adhere to political parties. Article 59 
Outside financing of political parties shall be forbidden, except in case of derogation as permitted by law. 
In the same way, all other financing of a nature intended to conflict with national independence and sovereignty shall be forbidden. 
The law shall fix and organize the sources of financing for political parties. 
Article 60 
The conditions under which political parties are formed and shall exercise and cease their activities are in accordance with the law. 
TITLE IV Executive Power<title> 
Part 1: The President of the Republic<title> 
Article 61 
The President of the Republic shall be elected by universal, direct suffrage for a term of five years, and his term can be renewable once more. 
No one may serve more than two presidential terms. 
Article 62 
The election of the President of the Republic shall be held with single candidate ballots (scrutin uninominal) with two rounds of voting. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected by the absolute majority of votes cast. If an absolute majority is not obtained on the first ballot, there shall be a second ballot within fifteen days. 
Only the two candidates who received the greatest number of votes in the first round may participate in the second round of voting. Should, one of these candidates decide not to participate in the second round, his place shall be taken by the next candidates, in the order they came after the first ballot. 
The candidate having received the relative majority of votes cast shall be declared elected in the second round. 
Article 63 
The term of the President of the Republic shall commence on the day he takes the oath of office and shall end when his successor take up his duties. 
The election of the President of the Republic shall take place at least one month and at most two months before, the expiration of the term of the President of the Republic.Article 64 
If the incumbent President of the Republic declares his candidacy, the National Assembly may not be dissolved. 
Besides from the official announcement of his candidacy until the election, the President of the Republic may not exercise his power to govern by decree, as set forth in Article 129. 
If necessary, the National Assembly shall be convened in extraordinary session. 
Article 65 
The candidate for the position of President of the Republic must be a citizen of Burundi by birth, be thirty-five years old at the date of his filing of candidacy and be residing in the country at the time he announces his candidacy. 
Moreover, he may not have been convicted for a crime or offense to a penalty determined by the electoral law. 
Electoral law provides too the time limit after which a convicted person per the previous paragraph may recover his eligibility, since the execution of his sentence. 
Article 66 
Candidates may be nominated by political parties or may nominate themselves as independents. 
A candidate who, at the time of his candidacy does not belong to any political party for at least a year, shall be considered as independent. 
Article 67 
Each candidacy for a presidential election must be presented by a group of two hundred persons formed in the spirit of national unity and taking into consideration the diverse components of the Burundian population. 
The members of the sponsorship group must themselves meet the basic conditions required for eligibility to presidential elections. 
The candidates must subscribe to the Charter of National Unity and express their allegiance to the fundamental principles enumerated in Article 55, paragraph 2. 
The candidates shall present too a political program. 
The electoral law shall establish an organ responsible for verifying the admissibility of candidacies.Article 68 
At the time he takes office, the President of the Republic shall solemnly swear the following oath to the Constitutional Court before the National Assembly: "Before the Burundian people, sole holder of national sovereignty, I swear fidelity to the Charter of National Unity, to the Constitution and to the law, and I promise to dedicate all my efforts to defending the best interests of the nation, to assuring national unity, social peace, social justice and the development of the country, to promoting and defending human rights and to safeguarding the integrity and the independence of the Republic of Burundi." 
Article 69
At the time he takes office and at the end of his term, the President of the Republic, the members of the Government and the National Assembly shall be expected to declare on their honor their assets and property to the competent authority. 
Article 70 
The President of the Republic, Head of State, shall embody national unity, ensure respect for the Charter of National Unity and the Constitution and guarantee through his intercession the continuity of the State and the regular operation of powers. The President shall be the guarantor of national independence, of territorial integrity and of respect for international treaties and accords. 
Article 71 
The President of the Republic shall exercise the power to issue regulations and shall ensure the enforcement of the laws. He shall share these powers with the Prime Minister. 
The President of the Republic shall exercise these powers by decree countersigned by the Prime Minister and, should circumstances so required, also by the ministers concerned. 
The countersignature shall not intervene in the acts of the President of the Republic as provided in Articles 72 paragraph 1, 74, 77, 79, 130, 131, 132, 135 paragraph 1, 176 and 181. 
The President of the Republic may delegate his powers to the Prime Minister, except those enumerated in the preceding paragraph.Article 72 
The President of the Republic shall appoint the Prime Minister and put an end to his term. Upon proposal by the Prime Minister, the President shall appoint the other members of the Government and put an end to their terms. 
Article 73 
The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers. 
Article 74 
The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Armed Forces. He shall declare war and sign armistice after consultation with the Government, President of the National Assembly and with the National Security Council. 
Article 75 
The President of the Republic shall make appointments to high civil and military posts. 
An organic law shall determine the categories of jobs envisioned in the preceding paragraph. 
Article 76 
The President of the Republic shall appoint and recall ambassadors and extraordinary envoys to foreign States and shall receive the credentials and. letters of recall of ambassadors and extraordinary envoys of foreign States. 
Article 77 
The President of the Republic shall have the right to pardon. 
Article 78 
The President of the Republic shall confer national orders and decorations of the Republic. 
Article 79 
When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the nation, the integrity of the territory or the performance of its international obligations is threatened in a grave and immediate manner and the regular operation of public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic may proclaim by decree a state of emergency and may take all measures required by the circumstances, after official consultation with the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly, the National Security Council and the Constitutional Court.The President shall inform the nation by a message. 
These measures must be inspired by the willingness to ensure that the public constitutional powers will have the means to accomplish their mission in the shortest possible time. 
The Constitutional Court shall be consulted in this matter. 
The National Assembly may not be dissolved during the exercise of emergency powers.
Article 80
The functions as President of the Republic shall be incompatible with the exercise of any other public elective office, of any public employment and of any professional activity. The functions of the President of the Republic are equally incompatible with the function of leading a political party.
Article 81
The President of the Republic shall not be responsible in criminal affairs for acts accomplished in the exercise of his duties, except in case of high treason. 
There shall be high treason when, in violation of the Charter of National Unity, of the Constitution or of the law, the President of the Republic deliberately commits an act contrary to the interests of the nation which gravely compromises national unity, social peace, social justice, the development of the country, or which poses serious threat to human rights, to the integrity of the territory or national independence and sovereignty. 
The crimes of high treason which may be reproached to the President of the Republic as well as their applicable sentences shall be determined by law. 
The President of the Republic may only be indicted by the ruling National Assembly, by show of hands, with a majority of two third of its members. 
The judicial inquiry may only be directed by a team of at least three magistrates from the general office of the prosecutor of the Republic. 
Article 82 
When the process of indictment of the President of the Republic for high treason is initiated by the National Assembly, the President of the Republic may not dissolve the Assembly until the outcome of the judicial proceedings.Article 83 
Except for acts that relate to his discretionary authority, the administrative acts of the President of the Republic may be attacked before the competent authorities. 
Article 84 
At the expiration of his term of office, the President of the Republic shall, except in case of conviction for high treason, have the right to a pension and to all other privileges and facilities as may be determined by law. 
Article 85 
In the absence or temporary impediment of the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister shall manage the affairs of State. 
In case of vacancy by reason of resignation, death or any other cause terminating definitively the functions of the President, the remainder of the term of office shall be exercised by the President of the National Assembly or by the Government, if the President of the National Assembly is in turn impeded from exercising his duties. 
The vacancy shall be confirmed by the Constitutional Court upon notification by the Government. 
The interim authority may not form a new Government. 
The Government shall be deemed resigned, and it may only ensure the expedition of current affairs until the formation of a new Government. 
The balloting for the election of the new President of the Republic shall take place, except in case of force majeure confirmed by the Constitutional Court, within not less than one month and not more than three months of the confirmation of the vacancy.
Part 2: The Government<title>
Article 86 
The Government shall include the Prime Minister, the Ministers and, should the occasion arise, the Secretaries of State. 
It shall be composed in a spirit of national unity, taking into account the diverse components of the Burundian population. 
Article 87
The Government shall determine and conduct the national policy of the nation in accordance with the decisions taken in the Council of Ministers.Article 88 
The Council of Ministers shall be required to deliberate on the general policy of the State; drafts of treaties and international accords; bills; drafts of presidential decrees, orders of the Prime Minister, and ordinances of the Ministers having a general regulatory character. 
Article 89 
The Government shall be responsible to the President of the Republic and to the National Assembly under the conditions and procedures provided by this Constitution. 
Article 90 
The members of the Government shall be politically interdependent. The resignation or the cessation of the functions of the Prime Minister for whatever reason shall entail the resignation of the Government. 
In case of resignation, the Government shall continue to manage the affairs of State until the formation of a new government. 
Article 91 
The Prime Minister shall direct the action of the Government in accordance with the decisions taken in Council of Ministers. 
He shall order all measures necessary for executing presidential decrees. 
The Ministers charged with their execution shall countersign the orders of the Prime Minister. 
The Prime Minister shall preside over the Council of Ministers upon the express delegation of the President of the Republic and for a determined agenda. 
The Prime Minister may delegate certain powers to the Ministers. 
The Prime Minister shall make appointments to civil and military positions of State, other than those positions reserved for the President of the Republic according to Article 75. 
Article 92 
Ministers shall head the ministerial departments that are entrusted to them. 
The Ministers shall take all measures by decrees to apply the orders of the Prime Minister.Article 93 
The Secretaries of State shall assist the Ministers heading their departments. 
The Secretaries shall have a right to participate in the deliberations of the Council of Ministers. 
Article 94 
The members of the Government shall be criminally responsible for those acts performed in the exercise of their duties and that are qualified as crimes or misdemeanors at the time they were committed. 
Article 95 
The office of member of Government shall be incompatible with the exercise of every other professional activity, notably the exercise of a parliamentary mandate. 
TITLE V Legislative Power<title> 
Article 96 
Legislative power shall be exercised by a single assembly named the "National Assembly," whose members shall carry the title of "Representative." 
Article 97 
Representatives shall be elected by universal suffrage directly for a term of five years, with possibility of reelection. 
The number of Representatives shall be fixed by law in proportion to the population. 
The law shall also designate the system of allowances and benefits of the representatives and establish ineligibility and incompatibility. 
Article 98 
The candidate for legislative elections must be of Burundian nationality, at least twenty-five years old, reside in the country at the time of presentation of the petitions for candidacy and enjoy all civil and political rights. 
Moreover, he must not have been convicted for crimes or misdemeanors to a penalty determined by the electoral law. 
The electoral law provides too the time after which a person may be re-eligible after the execution of the sentence as mentioned in the previous paragraph.Article 99 
Candidates for legislative elections may be presented by political parties or may present themselves as independents. 
Article 100 
All candidates must subscribe to the Charter of National Unity and express their adherence to the fundamental principles enumerated in Article 55, paragraph 2. 
Candidates must also present a political program. 
Article 101 
Each independent candidate for legislative elections must be nominated by a group of 100 people, formed in the spirit of national unity, who are residents in the district in which the candidate intends to serve. 
Members of the nominating group must themselves meet the basic conditions required for eligibility for legislative elections. 
The nominating process shall not apply to candidates nominated by political parties. 
Article 102 
The Electoral Law shall designate the authority competent to verify the admissibility of candidacies. 
Article 103 
Elections shall be held by list voting according to proportional representation. 
The closed list must be composed in a spirit of national unity taking into account the diverse components of the Burundian population. 
Article 104 
Candidates presented by political parties may not be considered as elected and may sit in the National Assembly only if their party receives a total of at least 5% or more of the votes cast at the national level. 
Independent candidates may not be considered as elected and may sit in the National Assembly only if they have obtained at least 40% of the votes cast in the district in which they registered.Article 105 
The law shall designate the conditions under which Representatives shall be replaced should their seats become vacant. 
Article 106 
The representatives' mandate shall be of national character. Every imperative mandate shall be null and void. The representatives' vote shall be personal. 
The by-laws of the National Assembly may in exceptional cases authorize delegation of votes. In such cases, no one may be delegated more than one mandate.
Article 107 
Representatives may not be pursued, searched, arrested, detained or judged for opinions or votes issued in the exercise of their duties. 
During sessions, representatives may be pursued only with the authorization of the office of the National Assembly, except in case of flagrant offense. 
When not in session, representatives may be arrested only with the authorization of the office of the National Assembly, except in case of flagrant offense, of pursuit already authorized or final conviction. 
Article 108 
The mandate as Representative shall be incompatible with all other office of public character. 
The law may exempt certain categories of local office or state agents from the system of incompatibility with the mandate of Representative. 
Article 109 
A Representative appointed to the Government or any other public office incompatible with the parliamentary mandate shall cease immediately to sit in the National Assembly and shall be replaced. He may resume his functions once the reasons of incompatibility have ceased and as long as the mandate for which he was elected is still valid. 
Article 110 
The National Assembly shall enact the law and control the action of the Government.Article 111 
The following are the domain of the law: 
<list_1>
1) Fundamental guarantees and obligations of the citizen: 
<list_2>
- Safeguarding of individual liberty; 
- Protection of public liberties; 
- Restrictions imposed in the interest of national defense and public security upon the person and goods of the citizens. 
</list_2>
2) The status of persons and of property: 
<list_3>
- Nationality, status and capacity of persons; 
- Matrimonial systems, inheritances and donations; 
- The system of property, real rights and civil and commercial obligations.
</list_3>
3) Political, administrative and judicial organization: 
<list_4>
- General organization of the administration; 
- Territorial organization, creation and modification of administrative and electoral districts; 
- System of voting; 
- General rules of organization for the national defense; 
- Statutes for military personnel and for public and other security forces; 
- General principles of public office; 
- Status of public office; 
- State of emergency;
- Creation and termination of establishments and public autonomous services; 
- Organization of tribunals of all orders and of the procedures to be followed before them, creation of new orders of tribunals, enactment of statutes of magistrateship, ministerial offices and auxiliaries of justice; 
- Determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties applicable to them; 
- Organization of the bar; 
- The penitentiary system; 
- Amnesty.
</list_4>
4) The protection of the environment and conservation of natural resources. 
5) Financial and inheritance matters: 
<list_5>
- The system of issuing currency; 
- The State Budget; 
- The definition of the assessment and the rate of taxes, 
- Conveyance and management of the property of the State. 
</list_5>
6) The nationalization and denationalization of enterprises and the transfer of entrepreneurial property from the public sector to the private sector. 
7) The system of education and scientific research. 
8) The objectives of economic and social action by the State. 
9) Legislation on employment, social security and trade unions, including the conditions for exercising the right to strike.
</list_1>Article 112 
Matters other than those pertaining to the law shall have a regulatory character. 
Article 113 
Texts of a legislative nature intervening with these matters may be modified upon the entry into force of this Constitution by presidential decree taken upon the recommendation of the Constitutional Court. 
Article 114 
Texts of a regulatory nature intervening in matters related to the law may be modified upon the entry into force of this Constitution by legislative enactment upon recommendation of the Constitutional Court. 
Article 115 
A fiscal law shall determine, each year the resources and the expenses of the State. 
Article 116 
The National Assembly shall concern itself with the draft of the fiscal law upon the opening of the October session. 
Article 117 
The National Assembly shall enact the budget. If the National Assembly has not decided on a new budget by the 31st of December, the preceding year's budget shall continue in force on a monthly basis. 
Upon demand of the Prime Minister, the National Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session within 15 days to reexamine the draft fiscal law. 
If the Assembly has not enacted the budget by the end of that session, the budget shall be established definitively by decree of the Council of Ministers. 
Article 118 
The National Assembly shall elect at its first session a Board composed of the, President, Vice-President and as many other members as may be needed. 
The President and other members of the Board of the National Assembly shall be elected for the duration of the legislative period as provided in the by-laws of the Assembly.However, their terms of office may be abbreviated during the legislative period in accordance with the by-laws. 
The first session of the legislature shall convene on the, first workday following the fifteenth day after its election. Its agenda shall include exclusively the election of its President and Board. The session shall be presided over by the oldest representative. 
Article 119 
The mandate of Representative shall end with the death, resignation, permanent incapacity or unjustified absence for more than one-quarter of the meetings of a session or when the Representative fulfills one of the criteria for ineligibility provided in the Electoral Law. 
Article 120 
The National Assembly shall meet each year in two ordinary, sessions. The first session shall begin the first Monday of the month of April, and the second session on the first Monday of the month of October. The total duration of each session may not exceed two months. 
Some extraordinary sessions, lasting no longer than fifteen days, may be convened at the request of the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, or at the request of an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly, on a predetermined agenda. 
Extraordinary sessions shall be opened and closed by decree of the President of the Republic. 
Article 121 
A quorum of two thirds of the Representatives shall be necessary to constitute a valid meeting of the National Assembly. Laws shall be enacted by an absolute majority of the Representatives present. 
Organic laws shall be enacted by a two-thirds majority of the Representatives present and voting, as long as this majority is not inferior to the absolute majority of the members composing the Assembly.
Article 122 
Except should unforeseeable circumstances intervene verified by the Constitutional Court, the meetings of the National Assembly shall not be valid unless they are held at the ordinary place of its sessions. 
The meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. However, the Assembly may meet in closed session when necessary. 
An account of the debates of the National Assembly shall be published in the Parliamentary Journal.Article 123 
The formation of parliamentary groups with a division tendency within the National Assembly shall be prohibited. 
Article 124 
The National Assembly shall adopt by-laws fixing the other rules of its organization and operation. 
Article 125 
An accounting authority charged with the examination, liquidation and balancing of the accounts of all public services shall be created and organized by law. 
This authority shall verify at the end of each financial year that the fiscal law was executed properly by the Government and shall render an account to the National Assembly. 
TITLE VI Relations Between the Executive and the Legislature<title>
Article 126 
The agenda of the National Assembly shall include, by priority and in the order determined by the Government, the discussion of bills submitted by the Government and bills submitted by the members of the National Assembly. 
Article 127 
The power to initiate bills shall belong concurrently to the National Assembly, the President of the Republic and the Government. 
Article 128 
The Government shall have the right to propose amendments to bills submitted by the members of the National Assembly. 
Representatives shall have the right to propose amendments to bills submitted by the Government. 
In any case, bills and amendments formulated by members of the National Assembly shall not be admissible when their adoption would result in a significant diminution of pubic resources or the creation or exacerbation of significant public debt, unless such bills or amendments provide for compensatory revenues. 
When the Assembly has delegated the examination of a bill to a parliamentary commission, the Government may, after the opening of debates, oppose the examination of any amendment which was not previously submitted to that commission. 
If the Government so requests, the Assembly shall decide by a single vote on all or part of a bill keeping only those amendments it has proposed or accepted. 
Article 129 
The Government may, in order to execute its program, request from the National Assembly the authorization for a limited time to adopt by decree measures which are normally of the domain of the law. 
Such decrees must be ratified by the National Assembly in the course of the, following session. 
In the absence of a law of ratification, such decrees shall be rendered null and void. 
Article 130 
Laws adopted by the National Assembly shall be promulgated by the President of the Republic within thirty days from their emission unless he requests a second reading or informs the Constitution Court of their unconstitutionality. 
The request for a new reading may concern all or part of the law. 
After a second reading, the same law may not be promulgated unless it has been adopted by a majority of two thirds of the Representatives for ordinary laws, and by a majority of three quarters of the Representatives for organic laws. 
Article 131 
The President of the Republic may, after consultation with the Prime Minister and with the President of the National Assembly, submit for referendum any bill of a constitutional nature, legislative or otherwise, capable of having a profound repercussion on the life and the future of the nation or on the nature on the operation of the institutions of the Republic. 
Article 132 
The President of the Republic shall communicate with the National Assembly by way of message to be read by the Prime Minister or some other member of Government. 
These messages shall not give rise to any debate.Article 133 
Members of Government may attend the meetings of the National Assembly. They shall be heard when they so request. They may be assisted by experts. 
Article 134 
The Prime Minister may, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, pose before the National Assembly the question of confidence in the Government, be this on a declaration of general, policy or on the vote of a bill. 
Debate on a question of confidence may take place only during the three full days after the question has been posed. Confidence may be denied only by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly. 
When the Assembly issues a vote of no confidence, the Prime Minister must hand in the resignation of the Government to the President of the Republic. 
Article 135 
The President of the Republic may, after consultation with the Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly, pronounce the dissolution of the National Assembly. 
Legislative elections shall take place during the three months that follow such dissolution. 
A new dissolution may not take place during the year following these elections. 
Article 136 
Representatives have the right to debate the action and policies of the Government. 
Article 137 
The National Assembly may keep itself informed of the activities of the Government by means of oral or written questions addressed to members of the Government. 
During legislative sessions, one meeting per week shall be reserved by priority for the questions of the Representatives and the responses of the Government. 
The Government shall be required to furnish the Assembly with all requested explanations regarding its administration and its acts.Article 138
The National Assembly shall have the right to convene parliamentary commissions charged with the investigation of specific matters of governmental action.
Article 139
The National Assembly may implicate the responsibility of the Government by vote on a motion of censure. Such motion shall not be admissible unless it is signed by at least one quarter of the members of the National Assembly. 
The vote may take place only seventy-two hours after its submission. 
Only votes in favor of the motion shall be counted, it may only be adopted by a three-fifths majority of the members composing the Assembly. If the motion of censure is rejected, the signatories may not propose a new motion of censure in the course of the same session. 
When the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure, the Prime Minister shall hand in the resignation of the Government to the President of the Republic. 
TITLE VII Judicial Power<title>
Article 140 
Justice shall be rendered by the courts and tribunals in all the territory of the Republic in the name of the Burundian people. 
The role and attributes of the Public Minister shall be filled by the magistrates of the Office of the Public Prosecutor. 
Judicial organization and competence shall be fixed by law.
Article 141
Hearings shall be public except in case of private sessions by judicial decision, when publicity may be dangerous to public order or public policy.
Article 142
All judicial decisions shall be 'substantiated; it shall be recited in public hearing.
Article 143
The judiciary shall be independent of the legislature and the executive. 
In the exercise of his duties, the judge shall be subject only to the Constitution and to the law.Article 144 
The President of the Republic, Head of State, shall guarantee the independence of the magistrates. He shall be assisted in this task by the Superior Council of Magistrates, whose composition, organization and operation shall be determined by law. 
Part 1: The Supreme Court<title> 
Article 145 
The Supreme Court shall be the highest ordinary jurisdiction of the Republic. It shall guarantee the application of the law by the courts and tribunals. The Supreme Court shall consist of: 
<list>
- A Chamber of Cassation, which shall decide on appeals from decisions rendered in last resort by jurisdictions other than those envisioned in Article 146, first paragraph; 
- An Administrative Chamber, which shall rule on appeals from decisions rendered by the administrative jurisdictions and on other appeals as provided by law; 
- A Judicial Chamber, which shall decide on infractions committed by political or public agents under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in first or last resort. 
</list>
Article 146 
Decisions of the Administrative Chamber and the Judicial Chamber of the Supreme Court, as well as decisions of jurisdictions of the same rank as the Chambers of the Supreme Court, shall be susceptible to appeal before the plenum of the Supreme Court. 
The decisions of the Chamber of Cassation and of the plenum of the Supreme Court shall not be susceptible to any appeal, unless for pardon or for revision. 
Article 147 
Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President of the Republic. 
Article 148 
The composition and organization of the Supreme Court shall be determined by law. Its rules of operation and applicable procedure before each of the Chambers shall be determined by law.Part 2: The Constitutional Court<title>
Article 149 
The jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court shall be actions of the State in constitutional matters. It shall be judge of the constitutionality of laws and shall interpret the Constitution. 
Article 150 
The Constitutional Court shall be composed of an odd number of at least five members appointed by the President of the Republic for a term of six years, with possibility of reappointment. 
Members of the Constitutional Court must be jurists of high standing, having at least eight years of professional experience. 
They shall be chosen from among personalities recognized for their moral integrity, impartiality and independence. 
Half the members of the Constitutional Court shall be career magistrates.
Article 151 
The Constitutional Court shall be competent to: 
<list>
- Decide on the constitutionality of laws and regulatory acts adopted in matters other than those related to the domain of the law at the request of the President of the Republic, Prime Minister, President of the National Assembly, of one quarter of the Representatives or of the persons as in Article 153; 
- Interpret the Constitution at the request of the President of the Republic, of the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly or one quarter of the Representatives; 
- Decide on the propriety of presidential and legislative elections and of referenda and to proclaim its results; 
- Accept the oath of the President of the Republic before his entry into office; 
- Verify the vacancy of the office of President of the Republic. 
</list>
Organic laws before their promulgation, internal regulations of the National Assembly before their application, are necessarily liable to control of constitutionality. 
Article 152 
The Constitutional Court shall also be competent to decide on the cases provided by Articles 79, paragraphs 6, 113, 141, 122 and 176.Article 153 
Every physical or moral person interested, as well as the Public Prosecutor, may request the Constitutional Court to rule on the constitutionality of laws, either directly by means of an action or by an exceptional procedure for claiming unconstitutionality raised in a matter which concerns that person before an authority. Such authority shall suspend judgment until a decision is reached by the Constitutional Court, which must rule within thirty days. 
Article 154 
An act declared unconstitutional may not be promulgated or put into application. The decisions of the Constitutional Court may not be appealed. 
Article 155 
An organic law shall determine the organization and operation of the Constitutional Court, as well as the procedure to be followed before it.
3. The High Court of Justice<title>
Article 156 
The High Court of Justice shall be composed jointly of the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court. It shall be presided over by the President of the Supreme Court. 
Article 157 
The High Court of Justice shall be competent to hear cases involving high treason by the President of the Republic and crimes and offenses committed by the Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly in the course of their mandate. 
The investigation and the judgment shall take, place without delay. 
Decisions of the High Court of Justice may not be appealed, except for pardon or revision. 
Article 158 
The President of the Republic, in case of indictment by the National Assembly, the Prime Minister or the President of the National Assembly, in case of indictment before the High Court of Justice, shall be suspended from their duties. 
In case of conviction, they shall be removed from office.Article 159 
The rules of operation of the High Court of Justice and the procedure applicable before it shall be fixed by law.
TITLE VIII The Council of National Unity<title>
Article 160
The Council of National Unity which is a consultative organ shall be charged with: 
<list>
- regularly and attentively following the evolution of Burundian society, regarding the question of national unity; 
- periodically producing a report on the state of national unity and bringing it to the attention of the nation; 
- issuing propositions in order to improve the satiation of national unity in the country. 
</list>
The Council of National Unity shall give its advice on every other question related with national unity to, any authority that so requests it. 
Article 161 
The Council of National Unity shall be composed of personalities recognized for their moral integrity and the interest that they show to the life of the nation and, more particularly, to its unity. 
The members of the Council of the National Unity shall be appointed by the President of the Republic.
Article 162 
The members of the Council of National Unity must swear to defend national unity. 
Article 163 
An organic law shall define the composition, and establish the organization and operation of the Council of National Unity.
TITLE IX The Economic and Social Council<title>
Article 164 
The Economic and Social Council is a consultative organ competent in all aspects of economic and social development of the country.It shall be consulted on every draft developmental plan, as well as on every project of regional or sub-regional integration. 
The Economic and Social Council may on its own initiative, in the form of a recommendation, draw the attention of the National Assembly or the Government to economic and social reforms that appear to it to be in accordance with or contrary to the general interest. 
It shall also give its opinion on all questions brought to its attention by the President of the Republic, the Government, the National Assembly or by some other public institution. 
Article 165 
The Economic and Social Council shall be composed of members chosen for their competence in the various socio-professional sectors of the country. 
The members of the Economic and Social Council shall be appointed by the President of the Republic. 
Article 166 
An organic law shall determine in detailed manner the composition, organization and operation of the Economic and Social Council.
TITLE X The National Security Council<title>
Article 167 
The National Security Council shall be a consultative organ charged with assisting the President of the Republic and the Government in the elaboration of security policy, in following the situation of the country in matters of security, and in the elaboration of strategies of defense in case of crisis. 
The Council may be consulted on any other question in relation to the security of the country. 
Article 168 
The members of the National Security Council shall be appointed by the President of the Republic. 
Article 169 
An organic law shall determine in detailed manner the composition, organization and operation of the National Security Council.TITLE XI International Treaties and Accords<title> 
Article 170 
The President of the Republic shall head all international negotiations. He shall sign and ratify international treaties and accords. 
Article 171 
Peace treaties and commercial treaties, treaties relative to international organization, treaties that engage the finances of the State, those that modify legislative dispositions as well as those that are relative to the status of persons may be ratified only by virtue of a law. 
Article 172 
The Republic of Burundi may create with other States international organizations of common management or coordination and of free cooperation. The Republic may conclude accords of association or community with other States. 
Article 173 
Treaties shall take effect only after having been regularly ratified and, for bilateral treaties, upon their application by the other party or, for multilateral treaties, upon realization of the conditions necessary for their entry into force. 
Article 174 
Accords dealing with the installation of foreign military bases on national territory, as well as accords authorizing the storing of toxic wastes or other matters capable of seriously harming the environment, shall be prohibited. 
Article 175 
Any cession, exchange, or adjunction of territory shall not be valid without the consent of the Burundian people as expressed by referendum. 
Article 176 
When the Constitutional Court, upon request by the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly or a quarter of the representatives, declares that an international obligation contravenes the Constitution, such accord may only be ratified after amendment of the Constitution.TITLE XII Territorial Collectives<title>
Article 177
The commune, as well as other territorial entities of the Republic, shall be created by law. 
The law shall determine the fundamental principles of their status, organization, competencies and resources.
Article 178
The commune shall be administered by the Communal Assembly, the Communal Council and the Communal Administrator elected by the Communal Assembly. 
These institutions shall be elected in accordance with the law. 
The election of these organs shall be based on the institution of "Ubushingantahe." which shall be outside of the competition of political parties.
Article 179
The State shall ensure the harmonious and balanced development of all communes on the basis of national solidarity. 
TITLE XIII Amendment of the Constitution<title>
Article 180
The power to initiate an amendment to the Constitution shall reside concurrently with the President of the Republic, after consultation with the Government, and the National Assembly, which shall so decide by an absolute majority of its members. 
The bill to amend the Constitution shall be adopted by a four-fifth majority of the members of the National Assembly.
Article 181
The President of the Republic may submit to referendum a proposed amendment to the Constitution.
Article 182
No proposed amendment shall be considered if it would cause injury to national unity, the republican form, and the secularity of the State as well as the integrity of the territory of the Republic.No procedure for amendment may be engaged or pursued when the integrity of the State is under attack or in case of serious internal troubles.
TITLE XIV Transitional and Final Dispositions<title>
Article 183 
To the extent that they are not contrary to this Constitution, legislative; arid regulatory acts anterior to its entry into force shall remain in application until modified of abrogated. 
Article 184 
Until the election and swearing-in of the President of the Republic in accordance with this Constitution, the acting President of the Republic shall exercise executive and regulatory power by way of decrees countersigned by the Prime Minister and the Ministers concerned. 
Decrees having a general regulatory character shall be adopted upon the report of the concerned Ministers and after recommended compliance by the Council of Ministers. 
Article 185 
Until the election of the National Assembly in accordance with this Constitution, the acting President of the Republic shall exercise legislative power by way of decrees countersigned by the Prime Minister and the Ministers concerned. 
These decrees shall be adopted upon the report of the concerned Ministers and after recommended compliance by the Council of Ministers. 
Article 186 
As soon as this Constitution comes into effect, the acting President of the Republic shall institute the Constitutional Court in accordance with Articles 149 to 155. 
Article 187 
In the event of the absence of or an impediment of the President of the Republic, or should the presidency become vacant, the duties of the President of the Republic shall in the interim be exercised by the Government. 
Article 188 
At the end of the primary presidential and legislative elections, the candidate who, at the time of the presentation of candidacies does not belong to any party for at least 9 months, shall be considered independent.Article 189 
This Constitution shall have prospective and not retrospective application. 
The Constitution of the Republic of Burundi adopted November 18, 1981 and promulgated November 20, 1981 shall be abrogated. 
This Constitution, adopted by the referendum of March 9, 1992, shall enter into force the day of its promulgation.