We, the Khmer people, Belonging to one of the greatest and most ancient civilizations of the world, that of the Mon-Khmers, Aware of the frequently grievous vicissitudes of our history from the fall of the dynasty of Angkor to the events of March 18, 1970, Are determined: To promote the renaissance and renewed advancement of our national culture; To solemnly proclaim our steadfast devotion to the fundamental principles stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; To promote both political and social democracy in which all exploitation of man by man, oppression, and intolerance shall be forbidden for the happiness and prosperity of all Khmers; To defend our republican system against any attempt to restore the monarchy and against any establishment of personal power; To preserve the national territorial integrity, independence, and unity. We, the Khmer people, always faithful to our ideals of peace, do hereby reaffirm: Our aspirations for a lasting peace in the world; and Our determination to cooperate actively with all nations, without distinction as to race, religion, or political system, for the purpose of progress and peace. In witness thereof, we proclaim this Constitution, whose text is as follows:Chapter I Fundamental Provisions<title>
Article 1. 
Cambodia is an independent, democratic, and social Republic. It is indivisible. It takes the name of "Khmer Republic". 
Its motto is "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, Progress, and Happiness". 
Its principle is: government of the people, by the people, and for the people. 
The national flag, the national anthem, and the coat of arms of the Khmer Republic shall be determined by law. 
Article 2. 
Buddhism is the State religion. 
Freedom of conscience and worship shall be absolute and shall be restricted only if the maintenance of law and order so requires. 
The State shall ensure the equality of all citizens before the law without distinction as to their racial origin, sex, political opinions, philosophical or religious beliefs, or their social or other conditions. 
The official language shall be Khmer. 
Article 3. 
All powers shall be derived from the people. 
The executive, legislative, and judicial powers shall be exercised in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution. 
Article 4. 
Political parties may be freely organized. 
However, the State shall encourage every effort to reduce the number of political parties in order to achieve a two-party system.Chapter II Rights and Duties of Citizens<title> 
Article 5. 
The exercise of individual liberties must not infringe upon the rights of others. It shall take place within the terms of the law. 
Article 6. 
The State shall ensure the inviolability of the individual. 
It shall protect the honor, dignity, and privacy of citizens. 
No prosecution, arrest, or detention shall be permitted unless authorized by law. 
Any coercion, brutality, or treatment which goes beyond the penalty imposed on imprisoned persons who have been deprived of their liberty is forbidden. The authors, accessories, and accomplices of such offenses shall be punished by law. 
A confession obtained by physical or moral force shall not be admissible evidence of guilt. 
The accused shall be given the benefit of the doubt. 
The accused shall be considered innocent until his sentence becomes final. 
The State shall guarantee all citizens the right to seek justice under law. 
Capital punishment is abolished except when the nation is proclaimed to be in danger. Summary execution shall not be permitted in any case whatsoever. 
Article 7. 
Every citizen is free to express his thoughts by the spoken or written word or by other means. However, he must avoid abusing that right and disturbing law and order. 
The exercise of freedom of the press must not infringe upon personal honor, national security, or morality.The press shall be regulated by law. 
Article 8. 
The freedoms of association and assembly are acknowledged for all citizens. The exercise thereof shall not be restricted unless it is established that such exercise infringes upon the freedoms guaranteed by this Constitution.
Article 9. 
The State shall ensure all citizens free exercise of their political rights, including those of protest and public opposition, provided that those rights are exercised without violence and in a legal manner. 
Article 10. 
All citizens of both sexes who have attained the age of 18 years shall be eligible to vote. 
All restrictions shall be provided in the electoral law. 
Article 11. 
The home shall be inviolable except in cases specifically provided for by law. 
Article 12.
Freedom and secrecy of correspondence and all other forms of communication shall be inviolable unless the law temporarily provides otherwise in the higher interest of the country. 
Article 13. 
Banishment of a citizen and forfeiture of Khmer citizenship for political reasons shall be forbidden. 
Article 14. 
The State shall recognize and guarantee the right of private property. It shall encourage citizens to acquire property. 
Any violation of the right to hold property shall be forbidden except in cases of public necessity as established by law. In such cases the owner shall be entitled to a just and equitable indemnity beforehand. 
Article 15. 
The State shall seek to improve the condition of the less favored social and occupational groups in order to ensure them a standard of living compatible with human dignity.Every citizen declared unfit for work and deprived of means of subsistence shall be entitled to welfare assistance. 
Article 16. 
The State shall protect the freedom of enterprise in the artisan trades, agriculture, commerce, and industry. 
It has a duty to regulate that freedom with a view to coordinating the national economy for social ends and preventing monopolies or any attempt at monopoly in commerce and industry. 
Article 17. 
The State shall seek to create employment for all citizens. 
All citizens shall have free access to all employment. They shall suffer no restrictions other than their merit and competence. 
They shall have a right to social insurance benefits and other social benefits provided by law. 
Freedom of trade-union action shall be regulated by law. 
Article 18. 
The State shall seek to combat usury in all its forms. 
Article 19. 
The State shall ensure all citizens the Tight of education. Basic education shall be compulsory and free. 
The State shall encourage literature, science, arts, and technology. 
Article 20. 
The State shall recognize the citizen's right to protect his family. 
Article 21. 
It shall be the duty of every citizen to respect the law, defend the fatherland and come to the aid of the State. 
Every citizen must perform compulsory military service as prescribed by law. 
Article 22. 
The exercise of the rights and freedoms guaranteed by Articles 7, 8, 11, and 12 of this Constitution may be suspended in a state of emergency or martial law or if the nation is proclaimed to be in danger or at war. 
Physical brutality and acts of such a nature as to be arbitrarily prejudicial to the material or moral rights of others shall not be allowed. Those who commit such abuses shall be punished in accordance with the law. 
In no case shall the provision for suspension of the rights and freedoms stipulated in the first paragraph hereof be enforced for a period of more than six months, renewable under the same conditions. 
At the end of the period of suspension every person who has been unjustly injured may submit the matter to the competent court to obtain reparation for the injury sustained. 
Chapter III The President of the Republic<title> 
Article 23. 
The President of the Republic shall exercise the executive power entrusted to him by the people. 
Article 24. 
The President of the Republic shall be supported by a Vice President during his term of office. He shall have at his disposal an executive staff and a Security Council whose organization and functions shall be determined by an organic law. 
The President and Vice President of the Republic shall be elected from the same list for a period of five years by universal, direct, and secret suffrage. 
Their functions shall be incompatible with the exercise of any industrial or commercial occupation or any other public or ministerial office. 
The President of the Republic shall be eligible for reelection only once.Article 25. 
In order to be a candidate for the Presidency or Vice Presidency of the Republic, any citizen of either sex must meet the following conditions: 
<list>
a. Be a Khmer national by birth; 
b. Be born of parents who are Khmer nationals; 
c. If married, have a spouse who is a Khmer national by birth; 
d. Be at least 40 years old by the date of the election; 
e. Be eligible to vote and have met the other conditions stipulated by an organic law.
</list>
Article 26. 
The candidates on the list receiving the absolute majority of the votes cast shall be declared to have been elected President and Vice President. 
In case an absolute majority is not obtained, a second ballot shall be cast on the seventh day after the date of the first balloting. 
Only those candidates on the two lists receiving the greatest number of votes on the first ballot shall be eligible for the second ballot. 
The candidates on the list receiving the greatest number of votes on the second ballot shall be elected. In case of a tie, the two Chambers, meeting in joint session, shall elect the President and Vice President of the Republic from one of the two lists within a period of seven days by plurality vote. 
Article 27. 
The elections for President and Vice President of the Republic shall take place at least 20 days and not more than 40 days before the expiration of the incumbent President's term. 
In case it is impossible to hold an election because of war or a serious emergency, the term of the President and Vice President of the Republic may be extended for the period of one year. Verification of the impossibility of holding an election as well as the decision extending the term shall be the subject of an absolute majority vote of the members of the two Chambers meeting in joint session after prior consultation with the Constitutional Court. 
Article 28. 
An organic law shall establish the procedure for electing the President and Vice President of the Republic. 
Article 29. 
The President and Vice President shall enter upon their duties the day they take the oath of office. They shall complete their term of office at midday on March 18 five consecutive years after their election. 
Before taking office, the President of the Republic shall take the following oath in public, in the presence of the public authorities: 
"I solemnly swear before the people to defend the fatherland, faithfully discharge the duties of the President of the Khmer Republic, respect the Constitution, and devote myself entirely to the good of the people and the nation." 
Article 30. 
If the President of the Republic is temporarily unable to serve, his functions, except those stipulated in Articles 36, 37, 38, 41, and 42, shall be discharged by the Vice President of the Republic. 
Article 31. 
If the office of President of the Republic becomes permanently vacant for any reason whatsoever, or if an absolute majority of the members of the Constitutional Court rules that the President is permanently unable to serve, the Vice President shall replace the President, assuming all the powers of the latter's office. 
However, if that situation occurs more than 12 months before the normal expiration of the term of office, elections for President and Vice President for a new term shall be held within a period of not less than two months and not more than three months. Article 32. 
If the Vice President is unable to discharge the functions of the President of the Republic for the same reasons stated in the first paragraph of Article 31, those functions shall devolve upon the President of the Senate. The latter shall order presidential elections within a period of not less than two months and not more than three months. 
During that period the Cabinet may not be dismissed or changed, nor may the National Assembly be dissolved. 
If it is impossible to hold an election because of war or a serious emergency, as stipulated in the second paragraph of Article 27, the two chambers of Parliament and the Armed Forces Council shall meet at the seat of the National Assembly on the day after the expiration of the three-month period stipulated in the first paragraph of this Article to elect a President of the Republic to serve out the remainder of the elected President's term. 
Article 33. 
The President of the Republic shall appoint the Prime Minister and, upon the latter's recommendation, the members of the Cabinet. 
He shall terminate their functions, either collectively or individually. 
Article 34. 
The President of the Republic shall preside over the Cabinet. In case he is unable to do so the Vice President or, in the President's absence, the Prime Minister, shall preside in his place. 
Article 35. 
The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws and sign the Krets. 
Laws passed by Parliament shall be promulgated within 15 days of their transmission to the President of the Republic who may, before the expiration of that period, request Parliament to reconsider a law or certain of its articles. Such reconsideration shall take place within a period of not more than 20 days.Article 36. 
The President of the Republic shall make appointments to the civil and military services. 
The following appointments shall be made at a Cabinet meeting: 
<list>
Ambassadors and envoys extraordinary; 
Members of the Council of State; 
Provincial governors; 
General officers; 
University rectors; 
Directors of central government agencies; and Members of the Armed Forces Council. 
</list>
Other appointments which must be made in a Cabinet meeting as well as the conditions by which the appointive power of the President of the Republic may be exercised in his name shall be established by an organic law.
Article 37. 
The President of the Republic shall accredit ambassadors and envoys extraordinary to foreign powers and the ambassadors and envoys extraordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to him. 
Article 38. 
The President of the Republic shall sign treaties and international conventions and shall ratify them pursuant to parliamentary vote. 
Article 39. 
The President of the Republic may proclaim, after consultation with the Presidents of the two chambers, a state of emergency or martial law in case of grave and immediate danger to the institutions of the Republic, national independence or territorial integrity. He shall so inform the nation by message. 
Within seven days following his proclamation, Parliament shall meet in joint session to approve or amend the measures decreed or to rescind them.The National Assembly may not be dissolved during that exceptional period. 
Article 40. 
The President of the Republic shall be the Commander-in-Chief of the Khmer Armed Forces. 
Upon the proposal of the Cabinet and after approval of the two chambers meeting in joint session, he shall declare war or a state of national danger. 
Article 41. 
The President of the Republic shall communicate with the chambers by messages which shall not be subject to debate. If Parliament is not in session, it shall meet especially for that purpose. 
Article 42. 
The President of the Republic shall confer the national decorations. 
He shall have the right to grant pardon and to commute sentences. 
Chapter IV The Cabinet<title> 
Article 43. 
The Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet shall be responsible to the President of the Republic for execution of national policy. 
The Prime Minister shall direct the Cabinet and the national organizations. 
Article 44. 
The functions of Cabinet members shall be incompatible with the exercise of any commercial or industrial occupation or any other public office. 
Article 45. 
The members of the Cabinet may attend the sessions of the National Assembly and Senate and the committees thereof. They must be heard when they so request except during sessions for a vote on a question of confidence concerning part or all of the Cabinet.Chapter V The Parliament<title> 
Article 46. 
The Parliament shall be composed of the National Assembly and the Senate.
Article 47. 
The National Assembly shall consist of at least 80 members. 
The deputies shall be elected every four years by universal, direct, and secret suffrage and by uninominal voting. They may be reelected. 
Electors of both sexes who are at least 25 years of age on the date of the election shall be eligible to vote. 
Article 48. 
The Senate shall consist of 28 to 40 members. It shall represent the various regions of the Republic and the major government bodies. 
Three-fifths of the senators shall be elected by the various regions, one-fifth by the civil service, and one-fifth by the Armed Forces Council. 
The senators shall be elected for a period of six years by universal, indirect, and secret suffrage and by the uninominal system, with voting by electors of both sexes who are at least 40 years of age on the date of the election. They shall be eligible for reelection. 
One-half the Senate shall be renewed every three years. Before the end of the third year of the first legislative term, there shall be a drawing to determine which of the first senators must be replaced. 
Article 49. 
During a period of war or grave danger, the members of Parliament may be elected by universal, direct, secret suffrage, using the list system. 
In case elections prove impossible, the President of the Republic shall extend the term of the members of Parliament for the period of one year.In both the above cases, the Constitutional Court must be previously consulted. 
Article 50. 
Office as a member of Parliament shall be incompatible with the exercise of any other public office in a position of active employment. 
No one shall be both a member of Parliament and a member of any other institution of the Republic established by the Constitution except the High Court of Justice. 
Article 51. 
The electoral law shall establish the procedure for election of deputies and senators. 
Article 52. 
The powers of each chamber of Parliament shall cease on the date the members of the new chamber take office. 
In case of the death, resignation, or removal from office of a member of Parliament more than six months before the end of the legislative term, a replacement shall be provided. 
Article 53. 
Before it begins work each chamber shall validate the credentials of its members whose election has not been challenged. 
Before taking office the members of each chamber of Parliament whose credentials have been validated shall take the following oath before the President of the Republic and in the presence of the Constitutional Court: 
"I solemnly swear to uphold the Constitution and to bend every effort to work for the good of the people and the nation." 
Article 54. 
No member of Parliament may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained, or tried for his opinions or votes in the exercise of his functions. 
A member of Parliament may be prosecuted or arrested for a crime or offense only with the authorization of the chamber to which he belongs, except in case of flagrante delicto.In every case, detention or prosecution of a member of Parliament shall be suspended if the chamber to which he belongs so requires by a three-fourths majority vote of its members. 
Article 55. 
Any imperative mandate is invalid. The right of members of Parliament to vote is a personal right. 
Article 56. 
Any legislator who, during his term of office, is sentenced to a penalty involving disqualification for election shall forfeit his status as a member of Parliament. 
The forfeiture shall be pronounced by the chamber of which the legislator is a member. 
Article 57. 
Parliament shall regularly assemble in ordinary session twice a year. Each session shall last a minimum of three months. 
Parliament shall be convoked by the President of the Republic in extraordinary session at the request of the Prime Minister or the majority of members of the National Assembly or Senate. 
The agenda shall be decided and published at the same time as the date of assembly. 
Parliamentary sessions shall be held in the capital of the Khmer Republic in a special hall prepared for each chamber unless decided otherwise in the notice of assembly because of circumstances. 
Except in the cases provided for in the preceding paragraphs and at the dates and places set in the assembly notice, any meeting of either chamber of Parliament is automatically unlawful and invalid. 
Article 58. 
The President of the National Assembly shall be elected for a period of two years. The President of the Senate shall be elected after each partial renewal. The officers of each chamber shall be elected at the same time as the President of the chamber. 
Article 59. 
When the chambers are convoked to meet in joint session, the President of the National Assembly shall preside. 
If the President of the National Assembly is unable to preside, the President of the Senate shall preside. 
Article 60. 
The deliberations of each chamber shall be valid only when two-thirds of the members are present. 
The deliberations of the two chambers assembled in joint session shall be valid only when two-thirds of the deputies and two-thirds of the senators are present. 
In case there is not a quorum at the first meeting, the chamber or the joint session shall be convoked a second time and its deliberations shall be valid whatever the number of members present. The meeting held as a result of the second summons shall not take place for a minimum period of 24 hours after the first meeting. 
Article 61. 
The Parliament shall establish its rules of procedure. 
Article 62. 
The meetings of the two chambers shall be public. 
Each chamber may meet in secret session at the request of its President, one-tenth of its members, or the Prime Minister. 
A complete account of the proceedings of the public sessions shall be published in the official government journal. 
Article 63. 
The National Assembly or the Senate may, at the request of one-tenth of the members, invite a distinguished person to furnish it information on a matter of special importance. 
Article 64. 
Parliament shall make the laws. 
It shall vote the budget and the amounts lent and borrowed by the State. It shall approve, on the recommendation of the Council of State, the administrative accounts. 
It shall pass the amnesty law. 
It shall pass the law proclaiming the nation to be in danger or at war. 
Chapter VI Relations between Parliament and the Executive<title> 
Article 65. 
The law shall be the expression of the nation= will. Its domain shall be established by an organic law. 
Article 66. 
The right to initiate legislation shall belong equally to the Executive and to members of Parliament. 
However, the initiation of personnel expenditures shall rest solely with the Executive. 
Article 67. 
Bills shall be discussed in Cabinet meetings after consultation with the Council of State. 
Bills may be introduced in either chamber of Parliament, except for finance bills which must be introduced first in the National Assembly. 
Article 68. 
No proposal or amendment may be introduced by a member of Parliament if its adoption would result in a decrease in public revenue or the creation or increase of a public expenditure. 
Article 69. 
All proposed legislation must be considered successively in the two chambers of Parliament.
If the two chambers are not in accord, the bill or proposed law shall be submitted 10 days later to a final vote by the two chambers meeting in joint session, where a majority vote shall decide the disputed point or points. In urgent cases the time may be reduced to five days. 
Article 70. 
Any finance bill must be introduced in the National Assembly at least 100 days before the end of the fiscal year in progress.If Parliament has not come to a final decision before the beginning of the fiscal year for which the bill is intended, the Executive shall urgently request Parliament for authorization to collect taxes pursuant to the laws in force. At the same time the President of the Republic shall issue Krets to release appropriations in monthly installments amounting to one-twelfth of the budget for the preceding fiscal year until there is a decisive vote on the finance bill. 
Article 71. 
The text of a bill amended or adopted by one chamber must be sent to the other chamber within 10 clear days. 
The text of a law passed by Parliament must be transmitted to the President of the Republic within 10 clear days. 
In urgent cases the time period established in the previous paragraphs shall be reduced to 5 free days. 
Article 72. 
Laws shall not be retroactive except for special provisions which are expressly stipulated therein. 
Article 73. 
Laws shall be binding at Phnom Penh one clear day after their insertion in the official government journal and binding elsewhere in the country 5 clear days after the arrival at the Salasrok (district hall) of the official journal containing them. 
However, a law declared as an emergency measure shall be binding at Phnom Penh as soon as it is posted at the City Hall and in each Srok (district) as soon as it is posted at the district hall. 
Every law shall be publicized as widely as possible. The Executive must publish without delay all laws promulgated. 
The methods of publicizing laws, regulations, and international agreements shall be established by law. 
Article 74. 
After the Cabinet is formed, the Prime Minister and other ministers shall appear before a joint session of the two chambers to explain the program the administration intends to put into effect. 
This explanation shall not be the occasion for any debate.
Article 75. 
If at least one-fifth of the members of the National Assembly request it, Cabinet members must appear before the chamber to report on the administration of their office. 
The National Assembly debates following that report may result in a vote on a recommendation as provided for in Articles 76, 77, and 78. 
Article 76. 
The National Assembly may express its lack of confidence in one or more ministers or in the entire Cabinet by passing a resolution stating the grounds for the action. 
A proposed resolution shall be admissible only when made by at least one-fifth of the members of the National Assembly. 
The vote on the resolution shall not take place until 48 hours after its introduction and shall be by roll call. 
The resolution shall be valid only if adopted by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly. 
Article 77. 
On penalty of nullification, the resolution of the National Assembly shall be transmitted within 3 clear days to the President of the Republic for decision. 
The President of the Republic shall inform the National Assembly of his decision, stating the grounds therefore, within 5 clear days from the date the resolution was received. Failure to reply shall indicate approval and result in the automatic dismissal of the member or members of the Cabinet who are concerned, or of the entire Cabinet, as applicable.Article 78. 
If the President of the Republic maintains in office the member or members of the Cabinet, or the entire Cabinet, concerned in a vote of no-confidence, the resolution may be considered a second time by the National Assembly within 5 clear days upon the request of at least one-fifth of its members. 
The resolution shall be valid only if it is adopted by two-thirds of the members of the National Assembly. 
In that case the resolution shall automatically result in the dismissal of the member or members of the Cabinet who are concerned, or of the entire Cabinet, as applicable. 
Article 79. 
If there are two ministerial crises within a period of 18 months, the President of the Republic may, after consultation with the President of the Senate, dissolve the National Assembly. 
A crisis, as provided for in the preceding paragraph, shall be considered any dismissal of the Cabinet following a resolution of the National Assembly opposing the entire Cabinet. 
In case the National Assembly is dissolved new elections must be held within a maximum period of two months. 
Chapter VII The Judicial Authority<title> 
Article 80. 
Justice shall be administered in the name of the people according to a procedure fixed by law. 
Article 81. 
The judicial branch shall be independent. It shall be the guardian of impartiality. It shall protect the rights and freedoms of the citizens. It shall be vested in the Supreme Court and the lower courts. 
Article 82. 
An organic law shall establish the organization and functions of the judicial branch.I. Judges and Public Prosecutors<title>
Article 83. 
The Bench and the Parquet shall have separate regulations. 
Article 84. 
The judges shall exercise their jurisdictional functions under the control of the Supreme Court. 
They may be dismissed only for a criminal conviction.
Article 85. 
The public prosecutors shall be responsible for enforcement of the laws under the control of the Minister of Justice.
Disciplinary measures taken by the Minister of Justice against the public prosecutors may be appealed to the Cabinet. 
II. The Supreme Court<title> 
Article 86. 
The Supreme Court shall consist of nine members, a Chief Justice and eight justices. The Chief Justice and the justices shall be elected for a period of four years by a joint session of the Parliament from a list of twenty judges chosen by their colleagues. Four alternate judges, elected in the same manner, shall replace members of the Supreme Court in cases of absence or inability to serve. 
Article 87. 
The justices of the Supreme Court must have at least 12 years' seniority on the Bench. 
Article 88. 
In addition to its role of supreme jurisdiction in judicial matters, the Supreme Court may initiate legislation on all matters regarding the organization and functioning of the judicial branch. By a two-thirds majority of its members it shall declare the dissolution of political parties whose activities are harmful to the republican system of government. 
III. Supreme Judicial Council<title> 
Article 89. 
The Supreme Judicial Council shall be composed of five regular members and two substitute members, elected from the Bench in the same manner as the members of the Supreme Court. 
Article 90. 
The Supreme Judicial Council shall be presided over by the President of the Republic or, in case he is unable to serve, by the Vice-President of the Republic. 
If disciplinary measures against members of the Bench are under consideration, the Council shall be presided over by the President of the Supreme Court. 
Article 91. 
The Supreme Judicial Council shall ensure the independence and discipline of the Bench. It shall have the power to: 
<list>
Propose nominations, advancements, and transfers of the judges; 
Authorize judicial proceedings against judges except in the case of a crime or a flagrant violation of the law; 
Take disciplinary measures against judges; and 
Advise on any bill or proposed legislation concerning the organization and functioning of the judicial branch. 
</list>
Article 92. 
The functions of the members of the Supreme Judicial Council shall be incompatible with any other judicial office. 
Chapter VIII Other Institutions of the Republic<title> 
I. The Constitutional Court<title> 
Article 93. 
The Constitutional Court shall be composed of six members whose term of office shall be for six years. One-half the Court shall be renewable every three years. There shall be a drawing of lots before the end of the third year of the first term to decide which of the original members must be replaced. 
The members of the Constitutional Court shall be chosen from among distinguished Khmer individuals known for their wide knowledge of judicial, economic or administrative matters or for their experience in affairs of state. Priority shall be given to the candidate who has not belonged to any political party. 
The members of the Court shall be appointed in the following manner: two by the President of the Republic at a Cabinet meeting, two by the National Assembly, and two by the Senate; the Parliament shall appoint persons other than members of the two chambers. 
The Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court shall be elected from among the members of that Court. His election shall take place at each renewal of one-half the members. He shall cast the deciding vote in case of a tie. 
Article 94. 
The functions of a member of the Constitutional Court are incompatible with those of the President or Vice-President of the Republic, a member of the Cabinet, Parliament, or the High Court of Justice. 
Article 95. 
The Constitutional Court shall rule upon the regularity of the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic and shall proclaim the results thereof. 
It shall decide in cases of contested elections of members of Parliament. 
It shall make the final interpretation of constitutional provisions. 
The laws voted by Parliament shall be transmitted by the President of the Republic before their promulgation to the Constitutional Court, which shall decide upon their constitutionality within 10 days. 
Such referral to the Court shall suspend the promulgation period. 
A law declared unconstitutional by the Court may not be promulgated or enforced. 
Article 96. 
An organic law shall determine the regulations for the organization and functioning of the Constitutional Court.II. The High Court of Justice<title> 
Article 97. 
The High Court of Justice shall have the power to judge the President of the Republic, the Vice President of the Republic, members of the Cabinet, members of Parliament, members of the Constitutional Court, and members of the Supreme Court for crimes and offenses committed in the exercise of their functions. 
Article 98. 
The High Court of Justice shall be composed of: 
<list>
Four members appointed by the President of the Republic from among the government's legal experts and advisers; 
Four members elected by the National Assembly from among its members; 
Two members elected by the Senate from among its members; and 
Two members elected by the Supreme Court from among its members. 
</list>
Article 99. 
For each case the members of the High Court of Justice shall elect their Chief Justice from among their members. 
Article 100. 
A case shall be referred to the High Court of Justice by the National Assembly and Senate meeting in joint session. 
Such referral must be proposed by at least half the members of each chamber. It shall be adopted when approved by at least three-fourths of the members of Parliament, in cases concerning the President or Vice President, or two-thirds of the members in other cases. 
Article 101. 
When the referral is approved by Parliament, the accused shall be suspended from office until judgment is pronounced. 
Article 102. 
The decisions of the High Court of Justice shall be reached by a two-thirds majority vote of its members. Article 103. 
An organic law shall establish the manner in which the High Court of Justice functions and the procedure applicable before the Court. 
III. The Council of State<title> 
Article 104. 
The Council of State shall participate in the preparation of laws. 
It shall be the final judge in administrative matters. 
It shall rule upon whether the accounts of receipts and expenditures rendered by public accounts are in order. 
Article 105. 
An organic law shall determine the rules for the composition, organization, and functioning of the Council of State. 
IV. National Council on Education and Culture<title> 
Article 106. 
The National Council on Education and Culture shall be composed of members one-third of whom shall be appointed by the President of the Republic meeting with the Cabinet and two-thirds by the cultural and educational organizations. 
Their term of office shall be for four years. 
The Council shall elect its President from among its members. 
Article 107. 
When so requested by the Executive, the National Council on Education and Culture shall advise on all matters regarding the development of education and culture. 
Article 108. 
An organic law shall determine the regulations concerning the method of appointing Council members as well as the Council's organization and functioning. 
V. The Armed Forces Council<title>
Article 109. 
The Armed Forces Council shall advise the President of the Republic on military problems, including those concerning promotions, transfers, and discipline. 
An organic law shall establish the organization and functioning of the Armed Forces Council. 
VI. The Economic and Social Council<title> 
Article 110. 
The Economic and Social Council shall advise the Executive on all problems related to economic and social development. 
An organic law shall determine the regulations for the method of appointing the members of the Economic and Social Council as well as for the Council's organization and functioning. 
VII. The Government Comptroller's Office<title> 
Article 111. 
The Government Comptroller's Office shall be directed by a Comptroller General, assisted by comptrollers, who shall be appointed by the President of the Republic on the recommendation of Parliament. 
It shall have the power to examine and investigate personnel of public and private organizations implicated in cases of extortion, bribery, abuse of power, contraband, illegal stockpiling of goods, illegal increase of prices, unfair competition, and usury. 
Article 112. 
The organization and functioning of the Government Comptroller's Office shall be determined by an organic law. 
VIII. General Mobilization Office<title> 
Article 113. 
The General Mobilization Office is a national institution, with its own treasury, established in accordance with the motto: "The government furnishes aid, the technicians assist, and the people bring the plan into being". 
Its organization and functioning shall be determined by an organic law.Chapter IX The Territorial Administrative Divisions<title> 
Article 114. 
The territorial administrative divisions of the Republic shall be the communes, the provinces, and the municipalities. 
These divisions shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of an organic law. 
Chapter X Revision and Amendment<title> 
Article 115. 
The initiative for revision or amendment of the Constitution shall belong to the Executive or to at least one-half of the members of one of the two chambers of Parliament. 
Revision or amendment shall be the subject of a law passed by roll-call vote. A three-fourths majority of the members of each of the two chambers of Parliament is required and an emergency may not be declared. 
Article 116. 
Any revision or amendment of the Constitution is forbidden during the period when the President of the Republic is temporarily unable to serve as stipulated in Article 30. 
Article 117. 
Any revision whose purpose is to modify the republican form of government is forbidden. 
Chapter XI Transitory Provisions<title> 
Article 118. 
During the transitory period and until such time as the institutions provided for in this Constitution are established, the government institutions presently in existence under previous constitutional provisions shall continue to function temporarily. 
Article 119. 
After the entry into force of this Constitution there shall be an election of the new President of the Khmer Republic on Sunday, June 4, 1972, by universal, direct, and secret suffrage, in accordance with the methods established by an electoral ordinance. 
During his term of office the new President of the Republic may designate a Vice President after consultation with the presidents of the two chambers of Parliament. 
Article 120. 
The President of the Republic shall immediately promulgate an electoral ordinance to establish the methods of electing the National Assembly and the Senate. 
The first National Assembly and the first Senate of the Republic may be elected either according to the provisions of Article 49, first paragraph, or by universal, indirect, and secret suffrage, using the uninominal system. 
The elections shall take place within three months from the date of the election of the President of the Republic. 
Article 121. 
Until the Constitutional Court is established the functions conferred upon it by Article 95 shall be temporarily exercised by a court composed of six members appointed by the President of the Republic. 
The members of the temporary Constitutional Court provided for in the previous paragraph may not be candidates in the presidential or parliamentary elections. 
Final Article Entry into Force of the Constitution<title> 
This Constitution shall be submitted to referendum on Sunday, April 30, 1972, and the results shall be announced 10 days later. 
It shall enter into force one clear day after announcement that it has been approved by the referendum.