On the basis of the sacred and fundamental desires of the people, workers, farmers and other laborers as well as those of the combatants and cadres of the Cambodian Revolutionary Army and; Given the significant role of the people, especially the workers, poor farmers, the middle-lower class farmers and other strata of laborers in the countryside and cities and account for more than 95 percent of the entire Cambodian nation, who assumed the heaviest responsibility for waging the war for the liberation of the nation and the people, made the greatest sacrifices in terms of life, property, and commitment, served in the frontline relentlessly, un-hesitantly sacrificed their children and husbands by the thousands for the fight at the frontline; Given the great sacrifices of the three categories of the Cambodian Revolutionary Army who fought valiantly, day and night, in the dry and rainy season, underwent all sorts of hardship and misery, shortages of food, medicine, clothes, ammunition and other commodities in the great war for the liberation of the nation and the people; Given the desire of the entire Cambodian people and the entire Cambodian Revolutionary Army for an independent, unified, peaceful, neutral, nonaligned, sovereign Cambodia within its territorial integrity, a national society characterized by genuine happiness, equality, justice and democracy without rich or poor and without exploiters or the exploited, a society in which all live harmoniously in great national solidarity and join their strength to do manual work together and increase production for the construction and defense of the country; Given the resolution of the special national congress at its session of 25, 26 and 27 April 1975, which solemnly proclaimed recognition and respect for the above desires of the entire people and the entire Cambodian Revolutionary Army, the constitution of Cambodia says: 
Chapter I: The regime of the state<title> 
Article 1. 
The State of Cambodia is an independent, unified, peaceful, neutral, nonaligned, sovereign and democratic state with territorial integrity. The State of Cambodia is a state of the people, workers, farmers and all other Cambodian laborers. The official name of the State of Cambodia is Democratic Cambodia. 
Chapter II: Economic regime<title> 
Article 2. 
The important general means of production are the collective property of the people's state and the common property of the people's collectivity. As for properties for every day use, they remain in private hands. 
Chapter III: Cultural regime<title> 
Article 3. 
The culture of Democratic Cambodia is one of a national, popular, prosperous and clean character for serving the tasks of defending and building Cambodia into a great and prosperous country. This new culture absolutely opposes the corrupt, reactionary culture of various oppressive classes and that of colonialism and imperialism in Cambodia. 
Chapter IV: Regime of transport and labor<title> 
Article 4. Democratic Cambodia practices the system of collective transport and labor. 
Chapter V: Legislative power<title> 
Article 5. 
The legislative power is the power of the representative assembly of the people, workers, farmers and all other Cambodian laborers. This assembly is to be officially known as the Cambodian People's Representative Assembly. The Cambodian People's Representative Assembly is to be made up of 250 members, representing the people, workers, farmers all other Cambodian laborers and the Cambodian Revolutionary Army. Of these 250, 150 will represent the farmers, 50 will represent other workers and laborers, and 50 will represent the revolutionary army. 
Article 6. 
The members of the Cambodian People's Representative Assembly are to be elected by the people through direct and prompt general elections to be held throughout the country every 5 years. 
Article 7. 
The People's Representative Assembly is responsible for legislation and for defining the various internal and foreign policies of Democratic Cambodia. 
Chapter VI: Executive organizations<title> 
Article 8. 
The administration is an organization responsible for executing the laws and the political lines of the Cambodian People's Representative Assembly. The administration is elected by the Cambodian People's Representative Assembly and must be fully responsible to the Cambodian People's Representative Assembly for the performance of their work inside and outside the country. 
Chapter VII: Justice<title> 
Article 9. 
The tribunal is the tribunal of the people, representing the people's justice, defending the people's justice, defending the people's democratic rights and liberties and condemning all activities which are opposed to the people's state or which violate the laws of the people's state. Judges at all levels will be chosen and appointed by the People's Representative Assembly. 
Article 10. 
Categories of violations of the people's state laws are as follows: 
Activities regarded as dangerous and in opposition to and characterized by their systematic and dangerous attitude toward the people's state must be condemned to the highest degree. The violations apart from the above categories are subject to constructive education within the framework of the state's organizations or within the framework of the people's organizations. 
Chapter VIII: The State Presidium<title> 
Article 11. 
Democratic Cambodia has a State Presidium chosen and appointed by the Cambodian People's Representative Assembly once every 5 years. The State Presidium is responsible for representing the State of Democratic Cambodia inside and outside the country, within the framework of the constitution of Democratic Cambodia and in conformity with the laws and political lines of the Cambodian People's Representative Assembly. The composition of the State Presidium is as follows: a president, a first vice president, a second vice president. 
Chapter IX: Rights and duties of the individual Cambodian<title> 
Article 12. 
Every Cambodian enjoys full rights to a material spiritual and cultural life which has been changed and constantly improved. Every Cambodian is guaranteed a living; every worker is the proprietor of the factories; every farmer is the proprietor of the fields. Other laborers have the right to work. Unemployment is absolutely nonexistent in Democratic Cambodia. 
Article 13. 
There must be complete equality among all Cambodian people in an equal, just, democratic, harmonious and happy society within the great national solidarity for defending and building the country together. Men and women are fully equal in every respect. No one is allowed to have a polygamous relationship. 
Article 14. 
It is the duty of all to defend and build the country together in accordance with individual ability and potential. 
Chapter X: The state capital<title> 
Article 15. 
The capital city of Democratic Cambodia is Phnom Penh. 
Chapter XI: National flag<title> 
Article 16. 
The Cambodian national flag has the following appearance and significance: The flag is red with a yellow three-tower temple in the middle. The red symbolizes the revolutionary movement and the valiant struggle by the Cambodian people for the liberation, defense and construction of their country. The yellow temple is the symbol of the national traditions of the Cambodian people who are defending and building the country into a prosperous one. 
Chapter XII. The national coat of arms<title> 
Article 17. 
The national coat of arms consists of a network of field embankments and irrigation canals, which are the symbol of advanced agriculture, and factories, which are the symbol of industry. These are framed by an oval garland of rice ears and with the inscription "Democratic Cambodia" at the bottom. 
Chapter XIII. The national anthem<title> 
Article 18. 
The national anthem of Democratic Cambodia is the Dap Prampi Mesa Moha Chokchey (The Great Victorious April 17). 
Chapter XIV: The Cambodian Revolutionary Army<title> 
Article 19. The three categories of the Cambodian Revolutionary Army--regular, regional and guerrilla--are the people's armed forces made up of male and female combatants and cadres who are the children of the people, workers, farmers and other Cambodian laborers. 
They defend the state power of the Cambodian people and the independent, unified, peaceful, neutral, nonaligned, sovereign and democratic Cambodia within its territorial integrity, and at the same time contribute to the construction of the country into a prosperous one and to progressively improving and developing the people's living conditions. 
Chapter XV: Rights of worship and religion<title> 
Article 20. 
Every Cambodian has the right to worship any religion and the right not to worship any religion. Reactionary religion which is detrimental to Democratic Cambodia and the Cambodian people is absolutely forbidden. 
Chapter XVI: Foreign policy<title> 
Article 21. 
Democratic Cambodia fervently and earnestly desires close and friendly relations with all countries sharing borders with it, and with all those near and distant throughout the world in conformity with the principles of mutual and absolute respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity. Democratic Cambodia adheres constantly to a policy of independence, peace, neutrality and nonalignment, permitting absolutely no foreign country to have military bases on its territory and providing for absolute struggle against all forms of outside interference in its internal affairs, absolute struggle against all forms of subversion and aggression against Cambodia from outside--whether military, political, cultural, economic, social, diplomatic or humanitarian--in whatever manifestation. 
Democratic Cambodia will absolutely not interfere in any country's internal affairs. Democratic Cambodia absolutely respects the principle that each country must have sovereignty as well as the right and power to fully manage and determine its own affairs without outside interference. 
Democratic Cambodia remains absolutely within the great family of nonaligned nations. Democratic Cambodia strives to further develop friendship with the peoples of the Third World in Asia, Africa, and Latin America and with peace and justice-loving people in the world, and to contribute most actively to their mutual defense against imperialism, old and new colonialism, for genuine independence, peace, friendship, democracy, justice and progress in the world.