THE CENTRAL AFRICAN PEOPLE, 
Proud of its national, linguistic and cultural unity, which constitute the enrichment of its personality, 
Convinced of urgent necessity to preserve unity and peace, the most certain signs of economic and social progress, 
Animated by the wish of assuring to man his dignity with respect to the principle of "ZO KWE ZO" enunciated by the Founder of the Central African Republic Barthelemy BOGANDA, 
Conscious that only obstinate work and rigorous unconcealed management of public things are able to assure a harmonious and rational development. 
Convinced of the necessity of integration of African politics and economics according to a sub-regional and regional plan, 
Convinced that universal suffrage is the only source of legitimacy of political power, 
Resolved to construct a State of law founded on a true pluralist democracy, guaranteeing the security of persons and goods, the protection of the most feeble notably vulnerable people, minorities, and the full exercise of fundamental rights and liberties,Firmly desirous of tying the knots of friendship with all the people upon the basis of the principles of equality, solidarity of reciprocal interests and mutual respect of the national sovereignty as well as that of territorial integrity, 
Reaffirms its attachment to the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of December 10, 1948, to the International Pacts relative in part to the economic, social, and cultural rights and another part to civil and political rights of December 16, 1966, to the African Charter of the Rights of Man and Peoples of June 27, 1981, and to duly ratified International Conventions, 
Affirms its willingness to cooperate in peace and friendship with all States, to work for African Unity conforming to the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, to promote the peaceful settlement of differences between States with respect to Justice, Equality, Liberty, and the Sovereignty of Peoples, 
Firmly in opposition by any means to conquest of power by civil or military force and to any dictator force. 
Title I THE FUNDAMENTAL BASES OF SOCIETY<title> 
Art. 1 
The human person is sacred. Every agent of public power has the absolute obligation to respect it and to protect it. 
No one may be arbitrarily detained. Every accused is presumed innocent until his culpability is established at the end of a procedure which offers him the indispensable guaranties of his defense. 
The Republic recognizes the existence of the Rights of Man as a basis of every human community, of Peace and of Justice in the world. 
Art. 2 
The Republic proclaims the respect and the inviolable [intangible] guarantee of the development of his personality. 
Everyone has the right to the free development of his personality so long as he does not violate the rights of others, nor infringe the constitutional order. 
Art. 3 
Everyone has the right to life and to corporal integrity. Liberty of the person is inviolable. These rights may only be affected [porte atteinte] by application of a law.No one will be submitted neither to torture, nor to inhuman, cruel, degrading or humiliating brutalities or treatment. Every individual, every agent of the State which is found culpable of such acts will be punished conforming to the law. 
No one may be condemned if it is not by virtue of a law in force before the committed act. The rights of the defense freely exercise themselves before all the jurisdictions of the Republic. 
Every person being the object of a measure depriving liberty has the right to be examined and healed by a doctor of his choice if possible. 
Art. 4 
The liberties to go and come [aller et venir], of residence and establishment on all the extent of the territory are guaranteed to all within the conditions fixed by law. 
Art. 5 
All human beings are equal before the law without distinction of race, ethnic origin, region, sex, religion, political affiliation and social position. 
The law guarantees to man and woman equal rights in all the domains. 
There are not in the Central African Republic, neither subjects, nor privileges of place of birth, of person or of family. 
No one may be forced into exile. 
No one may be the object of assignment of residence or of deportation if it is not in virtue of a law. 
Art. 6 
Marriage and the family constitute the natural and moral basis of the human community. They are placed under the protection of the State. 
The State and the other public collectivities have together the duty to strive for the physical and moral health of the family and to socially encourage it by appropriate institutions. 
The protection of the youth against violence and insecurity, exploitation and moral, intellectual and physical abandonment is an obligation for the State and the other public collectivities. This protection is assured by appropriate measures and institutions of the State and the other public collectivities.Parents have the natural right and primordial duty to raise and educate their children with the end to develop in them good physical, intellectual and moral aptitudes. They are supported in this task by the State and the other public collectivities. 
Children born out of wedlock have the same rights to public assistance as legitimate children. 
Legally recognized natural children have the same rights as legitimate children. 
The State and the other public collectivities have the duty to create prerequisite conditions and public institutions which guarantee the education of children. 
Art. 7 
Everyone has the right to have access to sources of knowledge. The Republic guarantees to children and adults access to instruction, to culture, and to professional training. 
The education and instruction of the youth must be provided for by public establishments. The creation of these are incumbent upon the State and the other public collectivities. 
Private establishments, may be opened with the authorization of the State. This [celle-ci] is only accorded when these private establishments by their curriculum and their organization as well as the matter of the development of their instruction, fulfill sufficient conditions to dispense an instruction of a quality conforming with official programs or authorized within the conditions fixed by a specific law. They are placed under the control of the State. 
Art. 8 
The freedom of conscience, of assembly, the free exercise of worship [cultes] are guaranteed to all within the conditions fixed by law. 
Any form of religious integration and intolerance is forbidden. 
Art. 9 
The Republic guarantees to each citizen the right to work, to rest and to leisure with respect to the exigencies of national development. [The Republic] assures to them favorable conditions to its blossoming by an efficient employment policy. 
Every citizen is equal before employment. No one may be injured in his work or his employment by reason of his origins, his sex, his opinions or his beliefs. 
Every worker participates, by intermediary of his representatives in the determination of the conditions of work.Laws will fix the conditions of assistance and of protection accorded to workers, and more particularly to the young, the more aged, the handicapped as well as to those who have health problems due to the conditions of the work. 
Art. 10 
The right to syndicate is guaranteed and is freely exercised within the limits of the laws which regulate it. 
Every worker may adhere to the syndicate of his choice and defend his rights and interests by syndicated action. 
The right to strike is guaranteed and is exercised within the limits of the laws which regulate it and may not in any case undermine neither the freedom of work, nor the free exercise of the right of ownership. 
Art. 11 
The freedom of enterprise is guaranteed within the limits of the laws and regulations in force. 
Art. 12 
Every citizen has the right to freely constitute associations, groups, societies, and establishments of public utility under reservation of conformity to laws and regulations. 
The associations, groups, societies and establishments, of which the activities are contrary to public order as well and the unity and the cohesion of the Central African people are prohibited. 
Art. 13 
The freedom to inform, to express and diffuse opinions by speech, the pen and image, under reservation of respect of the rights of others is guaranteed. 
Privacy of correspondence as well as that of postal, electronic, telegraphic and telephonic communications are inviolable. 
Restrictions may only be prescribed for the above by application of a law. 
Freedom of the press is recognized and guaranteed. It is exercised within the conditions fixed by law. 
The exercise of this liberty and equal access for all to the medias of the State are assured by an independent organ the status of which is fixed by law.The freedom of intellectual, artistic, and cultural creation is recognized and guaranteed. It is exercised within the conditions fixed by the law.
Art. 14 
Every physical or moral person has the right to property. No one may be deprived of his property except for legally constituted public use and under the condition of a just and prior indemnification. 
The domicile is inviolable. It may only be affected [porte atteinte] by a judge and if there is danger in the dwelling [en la demeure] by the other authorities designated by the law, held to execute it within the forms prescribed herein [par celle-ci]. 
The measures affecting [portant atteinte] the inviolability of the domicile or the restriction [restreignant] will be taken to avoid a public danger or to protect persons in peril. These measures may be taken in application of the law in order to protect the public order against imminent dangers notably to fight against the risks of epidemic, fire or to protect persons in danger. 
Art. 15 
Every citizen is equal before public duties and notably before taxation that only the law may, within the conditions provided by the present Constitution, create and rescind. They support in all solidarity the duties resulting from natural calamities or endemic, epidemic or incurable illnesses. 
Art. 16 
The defense of the homeland is a duty for every citizen. 
Every person inhabiting the national territory has the duty to respect in all circumstances the Constitution, the laws and the regulations of the Republic. 
Title II THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY<title> 
Art. 17 
The form of the State is the Republic. 
The Central African State has the name: CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC. Its official languages are Sango and French.Its emblem is the flag of four equal sized horizontal bands of the colors blue, white, green and yellow, perpendicularly barred in their center by a red band of equal size and marked in the upper left corner by a yellow five pointed star. 
Its motto is UNITY - DIGNITY - WORK. 
Its anthem is RENAISSANCE. 
Its national holiday is fixed as the first of December, the date of the declaration of the Republic. 
Its capital is BANGUI. [The capital] may only be transferred by means of a law, when the high concerns of the Nation require it. 
Its money is defined by law. 
The Seals of the State and the Arms of the Republic are defined by the law. 
Art. 18 
The principle of the Republic is GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE BY THE PEOPLE AND FOR THE PEOPLE. 
The national sovereignty belongs to the people who exercise it directly by means of referendum or indirectly by their representatives. 
No faction of the people nor any individual may assume its exercise. 
The usurpation of the national sovereignty by coup d'etat or by other means constitutes an unmentionable [imprescriptible] crime against the Central African people. Any person or any third party who would accomplish such acts will have declared war on the Central African people. 
The right to vote is guaranteed to all adult citizens of either sex in possession of their civil and political rights. 
Art. 19 
Political parties or groups concur in the expression of suffrage, in the animation of political, economic and social life. 
They form and conduct freely their activities. They are held to respect the principle of democracy, unity, and the national sovereignty, the Rights of Man and the republican form of the State in conformity with laws and regulations.A law determines the conditions of their creation, their functioning, their financing and their dissolution. 
Title III EXECUTIVE POWER<title> 
Art. 20 
The Central African People elect by direct universal suffrage the PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC. 
The President of the Republic is the Chief Executive. He is assisted in the exercise of his functions by a GOVERNMENT. 
Chapter 1 PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title> 
Art. 21 
The President of the Republic is the Head of State. 
He incarnates and symbolizes the national unity; he strives for respect of the Constitution, assured, by his arbitration, the regular functioning of the public powers as well as the continuity and the perpetuity of the State. 
He is the guarantor of national independence, territorial integrity, respect of agreements and treaties. 
He fixes the main goals of the politics of the Nation. 
He names the Prime Minister, the Head of the Government and defines his functions. Upon the proposition of the Prime Minister, he names the other members of the Government and defines their functions. 
He is the Chief Executive; by this title he presides over the Council of Ministers. He fixes for them a prior agenda and has them record their decisions. He strives for the execution of the laws. 
He promulgates the laws, signs ordinances [ordonnances] and decrees. 
He is the High [supreme] Chief of the Armies. 
He convenes and presides over the High [superieur] Council of National Defense. 
He presides over the High [superieur] Council of the Judiciary [magistrature]; he strives for the execution of judicial decisions.He controls all the ministries [administrations] and names civil and military officials. 
He negotiates and ratifies international treaties and agreements. 
He accredits Ambassadors and Envoys to Foreign Heads of State. Ambassadors and Foreign Envoys are accredited to him. 
He has the right of pardon. 
He confers honorific distinctions of the Republic. 
Art. 22 
The functions of the President of the Republic are incompatible with the exercise of any other political function, of any elective mandate, of any salaried employment. 
Art. 23 
The President of the Republic is elected by universal suffrage, direct and secret for a mandate of six years, renewable one time. 
Voting is opened upon the convocation of the Government by decree taken in the Council of Ministers. 
Only men and women, of Central African origin, at least 35 years of age, having only Central African nationality, not having been the object of a sentence resulting in the loss of life or liberty may be candidates in presidential elections. 
The election of a new President takes place at least 45 days and at most 90 days before the termination of the mandate of the President in power. 
The methods of application of the present article are fixed by a law. 
Art. 24 
The President elect assumes power after investiture by the Constitutional Court 15 days after the proclamation of the results. In the case of death or invalidity within this period, the dispositions of Art. 32 hereunder are implemented. 
At the time of his assumption of power, standing, head uncovered, the left hand placed on the Constitution and the right hand raised, the President of the Republic takes the oath here-after before the Constitutional Court seated in official audience: 
"I swear to scrupulously uphold the Constitution, to guarantee the independence and the continuity of the Republic, to safeguard the integrity of the territory, to preserve the peace, to consolidate national unity, to assure the well-being of the Central African people, to conscientiously fulfill the duties of my charge without any consideration of an ethnic or regional nature, to never exercise the powers which are given to me by the Constitution for personal ends and to only be leader in the interests of the nation and the dignity of Central African mankind." 
Art. 25 
The President of the Republic has the initiative of laws. He promulgates them in the 15 days which follow the adoption of the final text by the National Assembly. This period is reduced to 5 days in the case of urgency declared by the National Assembly. 
He may nevertheless, before the expiration of this period, demand of the National Assembly a new deliberation of the law or certain of its provisions. This demand must be enacted and the new deliberation may not be refused. It obligatorily intervenes during the course of the same session. The adoption of a text in the form submitted to this new deliberation may only then intervene by a 2/3 qualified majority of the members who compose the National Assembly. 
The President of the Republic promulgates this law in the month which follows the closure of the parliamentary session. 
Art. 26 
When the circumstances arise, the President of the Republic may submit to referendum, after the advice of the Council of Ministers, that of the Office of the National Assembly and that of the President of the Constitutional Court, any project of law or, before its promulgation, any law already passed by the National Assembly. 
The text adopted by the people at the end of the referendum is promulgated within a period of 15 days. 
Art. 27 
In exceptional circumstances for a limited duration and for the execution of a specific plan the President of the Republic may ask the National Assembly for authorization to take by ordinances measures which are normally in the domain of the law. The ordinances are adopted in the Council of Ministers after the advice of the Constitutional Court. They enter into force upon their publication but become void if they have not been ratified by the expiration of the period fixed in the enabling law. 
At the expiration of this period, the ordinances, when they have been ratified, may no longer be modified except by law in the matters which are of the legislative domain. 
Art. 28When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the Nation, the territorial integrity, the execution of international engagements or the normal functioning of the public powers are threatened in a grave and immediate manner, the President of the Republic after the advice of the Council of Ministers, of the President of the National Assembly and of the President of the Constitutional Court, takes measures required [exigees] by the circumstances in view of reestablishing public order, territorial unity and the regular functioning of public powers. 
The Nation is informed by a message of the President of the Republic of his decision to put in place or discontinue the application of the present article. 
The National Assembly meets of plain right. 
During the exercise of exceptional powers by the President of the Republic, the National Assembly may not be dissolved and the Constitution may not be modified. 
The application of exceptional powers by the President of the Republic may not in any case compromise national sovereignty nor territorial integrity. 
Art. 29 
The President of the Republic may, when circumstances dictate, after the advice of the Council of Ministers, of the Office of the National Assembly and of the President of the Constitutional Court, proclaim a state of siege or alert for a period of fifteen days. This period may only be extended by the National Assembly convened in extraordinary session. 
Art. 30 
The President of the Republic communicates with the National Assembly, either directly, or by message which he has read. These communications give rise to no debate nor vote. 
Out of session, the National Assembly is specially convened in this manner. 
Art. 31 
The President of the Republic may, after consultation with the Council of Ministers, with the Office of the National Assembly and with the President of the Constitutional Court, pronounce the dissolution of the National Assembly. Legislative elections have thus take place [ont alors lien] forty-five days at least and ninety days at most after the dissolution. 
The National Assembly meets by plain right in the month which follows its election. 
He cannot proceed to a new dissolution within the twelve months which follow these elections.Art. 32 
The vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic only opens by death, resignation, conviction of the President or by his definitive incapacity to exercise his functions in conformity with the demands of his duties. 
Every case of definitive incapacity or illness, which places the President of the Republic in absolute impossibility of exercising his functions, must be established by a Special Committee presided over by the President of the Constitutional Court and consisting of the President of the National Assembly and the Prime Minister, Head of the Government. The Special Committee, seated by the Government decides by an absolute majority of its members, by decision taken after the distinct and active [motives] advice of three doctors, designated by the National Council of the Order of Doctors, Surgeons-Dentists and Pharmacists, and obligatorily including the personal Doctor of the President of the Republic. 
In the case of death, an official statement must be established by the Special Committee prescribed in paragraph 2 of the present article, by decision taken after the distinct and active advice of three doctors designated by the National Council of the Order of Doctors, Surgeons-Dentists and Pharmacists, and obligatorily including the personal Doctor of the President of the Republic. 
In the case of conviction, the decision which pronounces it is transmitted by the President of the jurisdiction concerned to the President of the Constitutional Court who informs the President of the National Assembly of this by letter and the Nation by message. 
In the case of resignation, the President of the Republic notifies of this [celle-ci] by letter to the President of the Constitutional Court and informs the Nation by message. 
The balloting for the election of the new President is convened forty-five days at least and ninety days at most after the opening or the declaration of the vacancy. 
During this duration, the functions of the President of the Republic are exercised under the title "Provisional" and with the exception of those provided in Art. 21 to 31, by the President of the National Assembly and if this one [celui-ci], in his turn, is incapacitated in the exercise of his functions, by the President of the Constitutional Court. In all cases, the one who provisionally exercises the functions of the President of the Republic organizes new elections in which he may not run. 
Art. 33 
In the case of absence or temporary incapacity of the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, Head of the Government, assures his deputization [suppleance]. 
In the case of absence or temporary incapacity of the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister, Head of the Government, the President of the Republic fixes by decree the attributes of or the Ministers charged with assuring his deputization by means of an express delegation. 
Art. 34 
The acts of the President of the Republic may be countersigned by the Prime Minister and in the case requiring by the Ministers charged with their execution, except the domains reserved for the Head of State. 
Art. 35 
A law fixes the advantages accorded to the President of the Republic and organizes the modalities granting a pension to past Presidents of the Republic, democratically elected, and possessing all their civic rights. This pension may not be cumulative with other emoluments coming from the State. 
Chapter 2 THE GOVERNMENT<title> 
Art. 36 
The Government is composed of the Prime Minister, Head of Government, and the Ministers. 
Art. 37 
The policy [politique] defined by the President of the Republic is put into place by the Prime Minister, Head of the Government. 
The Prime Minister, Head of the Government, conducts and coordinates the action of the Government. 
By delegation of the President of the Republic, he disposes of the Administrations and names certain civil employees. 
He assures the execution of the laws. 
Upon the authorization of the President of the Republic, Head of State, he presides over the Councils of the Cabinets and inter-ministerial Committees, acting upon a preset agenda approved by the President of the Republic. 
Regulatory acts of the Prime Minister, Head of the Government, are countersigned by the members of the Government charged with their execution. 
Art. 38The Prime Minister is responsible before the President of the Republic and before the National Assembly. 
He may be discharged at any moment from the functions of the Prime Minister by the President of the Republic or following a motion of censure adopted by an absolute majority of the members composing the National Assembly. 
Art. 39 
After the nomination of the members of the Government, the Prime Minister, Head of the Government, presents himself, within a maximum period of thirty days, before the National Assembly and presents [expose] his plan of action. 
This plan defines in general terms the action that the Government proposes to engage in the diverse sectors of national activity and notably in the domain of economic, scientific, technical, technological, social cultural policy, and foreign policy. 
Upon this occasion, the Prime Minister, Head of the Government, must demand a vote of confidence of the National Assembly. 
The Prime Minister, Head of the Government, may, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, engage the responsibility of the Government before the National Assembly on the vote of a text. In this case, this text is considered as adopted, except if a motion of censure, deposited within the twenty-four hours which follow, is passed under the conditions fixed in article 45. 
Art. 40 
The Prime Minister, Head of the Government, may delegate certain of his powers to the Ministers. 
The interim of the Prime Minister, Head of the Government, is assured by a member of the Government designated by a decree of the President of the Republic. 
Art. 41 
The functions of a Member of the Government are incompatible with those of a member of the National Assembly, of the Economic and Social Council, with any function of professional representation and with any salaried employment. 
A law fixes the conditions for the replacement of titleholders of such mandates, functions or occupations. 
Art. 42Within the domains touching their departments, the Ministers are heard by the National Assembly, on oral questions or written questions by the Deputies. 
Art. 43 
The Government examines in the Council of Ministers the projects and propositions of law before their deposit in the National Assembly. 
It is also previously convened for any decision: 
<list>
- of questions concerning general policy of the Republic; 
- of the draft of the plan [du projet du plan]; 
- of the draft of revision of the Constitution; 
- of the nominations to certain civil and military positions. 
</list>
Art. 44 
The National Assembly may, by the passage of a motion of censure, put in question [mettre en cause] the responsibility of the Government. 
The motion of censure is remitted signed to the President of the National Assembly who without delay notifies the Government of it. 
It obligatorily carries the title "MOTION OF CENSURE" and must be signed by a third of the members who compose the National Assembly. 
The vote upon the motion of censure takes place within the forty-eight hours that follow its delivery. 
Balloting will take place by raised hand. 
Art. 45 
When the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure or when it disapproves the plan or a declaration of general policy of the Government, the Prime Minister must remit without delay the resignation of the Government to the President of the Republic. 
Title IV LEGISLATIVE POWER<title> 
Art. 46The Central African people elect by direct universal suffrage the citizens who constitute the PARLIAMENT and who carry the title of DEPUTY. 
The Parliament of the Central African Republic is constituted in a Unique Assembly which carries the name NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 
Each Deputy is elected by the Nation. 
CHAPTER 1 DEPUTIES<title>
Art. 47 
The Deputies are elected by direct universal suffrage for a duration of five years. 
A law determines the number, the standards of eligibility, ineligibility and incompatibilities, the indemnity of the Deputies as well as the rules pertaining to the candidates for the elections to the National Assembly. It fixes the conditions of the their replacement in case of vacancies of seats. 
Art. 48 
The National Assembly elects its President for the duration of the legislature within the first eight days of its installation. 
The other members of the Bureau are elected each year. 
Art. 49 
The members of the National Assembly possess parliamentary immunity. In consequence, no Deputy may be pursued, investigated or arrested, detained or judged for reason of his opinions or votes emitted by him in the exercise of his functions. 
No Deputy may, out of session, be arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of the National Assembly, except in the case of flagrant act, for authorized investigations or final sentences. 
The investigation of a Deputy is suspended until the end of his mandate, except in the case of lifted parliamentary immunity, if the National Assembly requires it by an absolute majority vote. 
Art. 50 
The right to vote of the Deputies is personal. Any imperative mandate is void. The interior regulation of the National Assembly may, exceptionally, authorize the delegation of a vote in defined cases. No one may receive the delegation of more than one mandate.CHAPTER 2 SESSIONS AND MEETINGS<title> 
Art. 51 
The National Assembly meets of plain right in two ordinary sessions per year of ninety days at most each. 
The first session opens the first of March, the second session the first of October. 
Art. 52 
Upon the initiative of the President of the Republic or at the demand of an absolute majority of its members, the National Assembly meets in extraordinary session upon a determined agenda. 
The extraordinary sessions of the National Assembly are opened and closed by decree of the President of the Republic. 
When an extraordinary session is taken by demand of the members of the National Assembly, the decree of closure intervenes when the National Assembly has dispensed of the agenda for which it was convened and at the most fifteen days from the date of convening. 
Art. 53 
The agenda of the ordinary sessions of the National Assembly is fixed by the Conference of Presidents. 
A member of the Government is charged, for each draft [projet] of law, with presenting [exposer] the reasons for and conducting the discussion of it before the National Assembly. 
The members of the Government have access to the National Assembly and its Commissions, they are heard when they so demand; they may be assisted by colleagues designated by them. 
Art. 54 
The meetings of the National Assembly are public. The integral account of the debates must be published in the Official Journal of debates. 
At all times, the National Assembly may sit behind closed doors at the demand either of its President, or of an absolute majority of the members which compose it, or of the President of the Republic.CHAPTER 3 POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY<title> 
Art. 55 
The National Assembly passes legislation, imposes taxes and controls the actions of the Government within the conditions fixed by the Constitution. 
The National Assembly regulates the fiscal policy of the Nation. It is, to this effect, assisted by the Court of Accounts. 
The National Assembly may charge the Court of Accounts with all inquiries and studies which impact upon the execution of public receipts and expenses or upon the conduct of the national treasury and public funds. 
Art. 56 
The National Assembly is solely empowered [habilitee] to authorize the declaration of war. It meets in special session for this purpose. The President of the Republic informs the Nation of this by a message. 
Art. 57 
The National Assembly decides upon drafts of law deposited in its office by the President of the Republic or upon the propositions of law deposited by the members of the National Assembly. 
Art. 58 
Other matters which are expressly given to it by other articles of the present Constitution are in the domain of the law: 
<list_1>
1) regulations relative to the following matters: 
<list_2>
- civil rights and fundamental guarantees of citizens for the exercise of public liberties; 
- duties imposed upon Central Africans and upon Foreigners applicable to their person and to their goods in view of public utility and in view of national defense; 
- nationality, the state and capacity of persons, matrimonial regimes, inheritance [succession] and liberality [liberalites]; 
- status of Foreigners and of immigration; 
- organization of the civil State;- the determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as penalties which are applicable to them, penal procedure, civil procedure, commercial rights, social rights, amnesty, the creation of new orders of jurisdiction, the status of magistrates and the legal profession; 
- the organization of public and ministerial offices, the professions of public and ministerial officers and the liberal professions; 
- fundamental guarantees accorded to civil and military officials; 
- general administrative and financial organization; 
- the system of political parties and associations; 
- the electoral code; 
- the privatization of enterprises of the public sector and nationalization of enterprises; 
- the creation or the suppression of public establishments; 
- the regulations of editing and publication; 
- the plan of development of the Republic; 
- the plan of progressive and generalized development [amenagement] and taking root [implantation] of Sango; 
- the protection of the environment, the regimes of property [domanial], the land [foncier], forestry and mining; 
- the laws of finance; 
- the bases, the rates and the modalities of recoupment of taxes, impositions of any nature; 
- the system of issuance of money; 
- the state put on guard, state of urgency, state of alert, and state of siege; 
- legal holidays. 
</list_2>
2) The fundamental principles: 
<list_3> 
- the system of ownership [propriete], civil and commercial rights and obligations;- of instruction, of scientific, technical, technological research, and of professional formation; 
- of the right of assembly and to peaceably demonstrate; 
- of the right of petition; 
- of public health and hygiene; 
- of mutuality, of the cooperative, of savings and credit; 
- of the administration of the territorial collectivities; 
- of the general organization of the defense; 
- of the penitentiary regime; 
</list_3>
</list_1>
Art. 59 
The laws of finance determine the nature, the amount of and the affect of the resources and the obligations of the State for the purpose of rendering a budget of economic and financial equilibrium which they define. 
The laws of finance are obligatorily voted before the end of the current budget. In the alternative, the law of finance of the preceding budget is automatically effectuated and executed by month until the National Assembly has adopted the current fiscal budget. 
Deposited by the Government since the opening of the second ordinary session and at the latest October 15, the budget is ordered [arrete] by a law called law of finances, before the commencement of the new exercise. This law may only consist of dispositions of a strictly financial nature. 
If the law of finances fixing the resources and the charges of a budget has not been deposited in an appropriate time by the Government this demands out of urgency from the National Assembly the adoption of a monthly provisional law. 
If, at the end of the second session, the budget has not been passed and if this delay is attributable to the National Assembly, the President of the Republic establishes it by right and finally by ordinance not susceptible to confirmation. 
Any proposition of amendment to a draft of law of finance must be motivated and accompanied by the developments and methods which justify it. 
Amendments deposited by the Deputies when they have for effect the creation of a diminution of the resources not corresponding to the economies or an increase in the obligations of the State which are not covered by an equivalent increase in resources are not receivable. 
The President of the National Assembly, after consultation with the Office of the Assembly, declares this irreceivability. 
If the Government demands it, the National Assembly pronounces upon all or part of the draft of law of finances which only retains the amendments accepted by the Government. 
Art. 60 
Matters other than those which are in the domain of the law remain in the regulatory domain. 
Art. 61 
The National Assembly passes its Internal Regulations. This may only enter into force after having been recognized as in conformity with the Constitution by the Constitutional Court. 
Chapter 4 EXERCISE OF LEGISLATIVE POWER<title> 
Art. 62 
The initiation of laws belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic, the Government and to members of the National Assembly. 
Propositions of law which emanate form the Deputies are deposited with the Bureau of the National Assembly and transmitted for advice to the Government. 
The Government is required to give its advice at the latest at the session which follows the date of depositing. 
Art. 63 
One session per week is reserved by priority for questions of the Deputies and for responses of the Government. The Ministers are required to respond to this at the latest the following week. 
Art. 64 
If it appears during the course of the legislative procedure that a proposition or an amendment is not in the domain of the law or is contrary to a delegation of powers accorded to the Government, the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly or a third of the Deputies which compose the National Assembly may oppose its irreceivability. 
In the case of disagreement, the Constitutional Court, seated by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly or a third of the members which compose the National Assembly, decrees within a period of fifteen days. 
Art. 65 
Other than the motion of censure, the other means of control by the National Assembly on the Government are: 
<list>
- oral questioning with or without debate; 
- written questioning; 
- audience in committee [commission]; 
- committee of inquiry and of control; 
- questioning [interpellation]. 
</list>
The law determines the conditions of organization and of functioning of committees of inquiry. 
TITLE V INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS AND TREATIES<title> 
Art. 66 
The President of the Republic negotiates, signs and ratifies or denounces international treaties and agreements. 
The ratification or the denunciation may only intervene after authorization of Parliament notably in that which concerns peace treaties, defense treaties, commercial treaties, treaties relative to natural resources or agreements relative to an international organization, those which engage the finances of the State, those which modify dispositions of a legislative nature, those which are relative to the status of persons and to the Rights of Man, those which include cession, exchange or addition of territory. 
No cession, no exchange, no addition of territory is valid without the consent of the Central African people called to pronounce by means of referendum. 
The President of the Republic is informed of every negotiation leading towards the conclusion of an international agreement not submitted to ratification.Art. 67 
The Republic may, after referendum, conclude with any African State accords of association or of fusion including [comprenant] partial or total abandonment of sovereignty in view of realizing African unity. It may create with any State intergovernmental organisms with common functions, of coordination and of free cooperation. 
Art. 68 
If the Constitutional Court, seated by the President of the Republic, by the President of the National Assembly, or by a third of the Deputies, has declared that an international engagement includes a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify or to approve the international engagement in question may only intervene after revision of the Constitution. 
Art. 69 
Treaties or accords regularly ratified or approved have, from their publication, an authority superior to that of laws, with reservation, for each accord or treaty, of its application by the other party. 
Title VI THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT<title> 
Art. 70 
A Constitutional Court is instituted and charged with: 
<list>
- striving for the regularity of presidential, legislative, regional, municipal, elections, examining and proclaiming the results of balloting; 
- striving for the regularity of the operations of the referendum and proclaiming their results; 
- resolving any electoral contentions; 
- resolving conflicts of competence between the executive power, the legislative power, the territorial collectivities. 
</list>
Other than these attributes, and those which are conferred by Arts. 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 61, 64, and 68, the Constitutional Court interprets the Constitution, judges the constitutionality of ordinary and organic laws, promulgated or at the time of promulgation as well as the Internal Regulation of the National Assembly.Any person who considers himself wronged may seat the Constitutional Court on the constitutionality of the laws, either directly or by the procedure of the exception of unconstitutionality brought before a jurisdiction in an affair which concerns him, the Constitutional Court is required to decree within a period of one month. In the case of urgency, this period may be shortened to eight days. 
When the exception of unconstitutionality is raised by a party before a jurisdiction, such as it is, it is required to decree and to seat the Constitutional Court which must pronounce upon the constitutionality of the text in litigation within a period of one month which begins to run from the moment of its seating by the concerned jurisdiction.
Art. 71 
The Constitutional Court consists of 9 members who carry the title of counselors. 
The duration of the mandate of counselors is 9 years non-renewable. 
The members of the Constitutional Court are designated as follows: 
<list>
- 3 named by the President of the Republic of which at least two are jurists; 
- 3 named by the President of the National Assembly of which at least two are jurists; 
- 3 magistrates elected by their peers. 
</list>
The counselors are chosen to their title principally from among law professors, Advocates and Magistrates having at least 15 years of activity as well as personally qualified who have honored the service of the State. 
The President and the Vice-President are named by the President of the Republic upon the nomination of their peers. 
The nine members of the Constitutional Court are renewed concurrently [integralment]. 
Always, in the case of death, of resignation or of definitive incapacity of a member, his replacement is provided for by the authority of nomination. The new member completes the mandate already started. 
In addition to the Members provided for above, the former Presidents of the Republic are honorary members of the Constitutional Court with a consultative voice. 
At the time of a decision and in the case of equal votes, that of the President is preponderant [est preponderant].The members of the Constitutional Court are irremovable during the duration of their mandate. They may not be investigated nor arrested without the authorization of the Constitutional Court. 
They take an oath before assuming office. 
Art. 72 
The functions of a Member of the Constitutional Court are incompatible with any political, administrative function or any salaried employment. 
Art. 73 
The drafts or propositions of constitutional law are deferred for the advice of the Constitutional Court by the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly before being submitted to referendum or to vote of the National Assembly. 
Art. 74 
The decisions of the Constitutional Court are not susceptible to any recourse. They impose themselves upon public powers, to all administrative and juridical [juridictionnelles] authorities and to all physical and moral persons. 
Any text declared unconstitutional is null and of no effect: it may not be promulgated, nor applied. 
An organic law determines the organizational and functional regulations of the Constitutional Court. 
TITLE VII JUDICIAL POWER<title> 
Art. 75 
Judicial power is independent of the legislative power and of the executive power. 
Justice is rendered on the territory of the Central African Republic in the name of the Central African people by the Court of Cassation, the Council of State, Court of Accounts, the Tribunal of Conflicts, the Courts and Tribunals. 
Art. 76 
Judges are independent. They may only be submitted during the exercise of their functions to the authority of the law. Sitting Magistrates are irremovable. 
Art. 77The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the independence of the Judicial Power. He is assisted to this effect by the High Council of the Judiciary over which he presides. 
The High Council of the Judiciary strives for the development of the careers of the Magistrates and for the independence of the Judiciary. 
The organization and the functioning of the Judicial High Council are fixed by an organic law. 
Art. 78 
The Judicial Power, guardian of freedoms and property, is held to assure respect of principles consecrated as fundamental bases of the society by the present Constitution. 
CHAPTER 1 THE COURT OF CASSATION<title> 
Art. 79 
It is instituted a Court of Cassation which consists of three Chambers: 
<list>
- the Criminal Chamber, 
- the Civil and Commercial Chamber, 
- the Social Chamber. 
</list>
Art. 80 
Judges of the Court of Cassation are governed by their statutes and by the texts relative to the High Council of the Judiciary. 
Art. 81 
Decisions of the Court of Cassation are not susceptible to any recourse. 
Art. 82 
The Court of Cassation gives its advice on any judicial question that the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly submits to it. 
It may also, upon its own initiative, have brought to the attention of the President of the Republic reforms of a legislative or regulatory nature which appear to it to conform to the general interest. 
Art. 83An organic law determines the rules of organization and functioning of the Court of Cassation. 
Chapter 2 THE COUNCIL OF STATE<title>
Art. 84 
It is instituted a Council of State, jurisdiction of appeal and reconsideration of administrative tribunals, of administrative organisms of a juridical character, and of the Court of Accounts. 
The decisions rendered by the Council of State are not susceptible to any recourse. 
Art. 85 
The Council of State gives its advice on any administrative question that the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly submits to it. 
It may also, upon its own initiative have brought to the attention of the President of the Republic reforms of a legislative or regulatory character which is integral to its competence. 
Art. 86 
An organic law determines the rules of organization and of functioning of the Council of State. 
A law fixes the status of judges of the Council of State. 
Chapter 3 THE COURT OF ACCOUNTS<title> 
Art. 87 
It is instituted a Court of Accounts, of competent jurisdiction to judge the accounts and public accountants, those of territorial collectivities as well as those of public enterprises. 
Art. 88 
Decisions of the Court of Accounts may be deferred by means of appeal before the Council of State. 
Art. 89 
An organic law fixes the organization and the functioning of the Court of Accounts.
A law determines the status of judges of the Court of Accounts. 
Chapter 4 TRIBUNAL OF CONFLICTS<title> 
Art. 90 
It is instituted a Tribunal of Conflicts, of non-permanent jurisdiction. 
In the case of conflicts of competence between judicial jurisdictions and those of administrative character, this conflict is resolved by the Tribunal of Conflicts. 
Decisions of this jurisdiction have the authority of the thing judged. 
An organic law fixes the rules of organization and of functioning of the Tribunal of Conflicts. 
Title VIII THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE<title>
Art. 91 
It is instituted a non-permanent jurisdiction denominated the High [haute] Court of Justice. 
It is composed of 6 Magistrates and 6 Deputies elected by secret ballot by their peers. The President of the High Court of Justice is elected from among the Magistrates, the Vice-President from among the Deputies, within the same conditions that are here above specified. 
Art. 92 
Upon the demand of a Public Minister or of the National Assembly by a majority of two-thirds of the members which compose it, the President of the Republic may defer before the High Court of Justice the Ministers and Deputies who will be susceptible to being investigated for treason. 
The decision to put into accusation [mise en accusation], duly motivated, is taken by the President of the Republic who transmits it to the President and the Attorney General [Procureur General] near the said jurisdiction. 
Art. 93 
The President of the Republic is not responsible for the acts committed in the exercise of his functions, only in the case of treason. In this case, he may only be put in accusation by the National Assembly decided [statuant] by a majority of two-thirds of the Members which comprise it. 
The decision to put into accusation, duly motivated, is transmitted by the President of the National Assembly to the President and the Attorney General near the said jurisdiction. 
Art. 94 
When a decision is taken and in the case of a split decision, that of the President is preponderant. 
Art. 95 
Decisions rendered by the High Court of Justice are not susceptible to any recourse. 
Art. 96 
A law determines the rules of organization and functioning of the High Court of Justice. 
Title IX THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL<title> 
Art. 97 
It is instituted an ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL. 
The Economic and Social Council is obligatorily consulted upon any plan or any draft of law of program of action of an economic, social or cultural character, relevant to the domain of its competence. Upon its own initiative the Economic and Social Council may formulate recommendations or call the attention of the President of the Republic or of the Government to reforms which appear to it opportune on questions which are in its competence. 
Art. 98 
The Economic and Social Council gives its advice on any propositions and any drafts of law, ordinances and of decrees as well as upon any measure necessary to the economic, social and cultural development of the Republic which are submitted to it. It may be charged with any study of an economic social and cultural nature. 
An organic law determines the organization and functioning of the Economic and Social Council and the manner of designation of its members. 
Title X TERRITORIAL COLLECTIVITIES<title>Art. 99 
Territorial Collectivities of the Republic are the Regions, the Prefectures, the Subprefectures, the Communes. They may only be created and modified by the law. 
A law determines the manner of their administration and the modalities of the application of the present provision. 
Title XI REVISION<title> 
Art. 100 
The initiation of revision of the Constitution belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic and to the National Assembly stating by a three-fourths majority of the members which compose it. 
Art. 101 
Revision intervenes when the draft presented to the State has been passed by the National Assembly by a three-fourths majority of the members which compose it or has been adopted by referendum. 
No procedure of revision may be engaged or followed in the case of vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic or when it affects [porte atteinte] territorial integrity. 
The Republican form of the Central African State may not be the object of revision. 
Title XII TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS<title> 
Art. 102 
The mandate of the President of the Republic elected at the time of balloting on 22 August and 19 September 1993 arrive at expiration the 22 of October 1999. The mandate of the National Assembly elected at the time of balloting of 22 August and 19 November 1993 arrive at expiration the 1st of October 1998 except in the case of dissolution. 
The new Institutions provided by the present Constitution are put in place within the twelve months which follow the entry into force of this [celle-ci]. 
Art. 103 
The present Constitutional Law which abrogates all prior contrary dispositions enters into force after the adoption by the People by referendum and its promulgation by the President of the Republic.