Chad, proclaimed a Republic on November 28, 1958, acceded to national and international sovereignty on August 11, 1960. 
Since this date, it has known a stormy institutional and political evolution. 
Years of dictatorship and single party have prevented the blossoming of any democratic culture and of political pluralism. 
The different regimes that succeeded each other created and maintained the regionalism, the tribalism, the nepotism, the social inequalities, the violations of the Rights of Man, and of fundamental individual and collective liberties, whose consequences have been war, political violence, hatred, intolerance and suspicion between the different communities that make up the Chadian Nation. 
This institutional and political crisis which has been shaking Chad for more than three decades, has not for all that, thwarted [entancer] the determination of the Chadian people to attain the edification of a nation, dignity, freedom, peace and prosperity. 
So (it is) that the Sovereign National Conference, held in N'Djamena from January 15 to April 7, 1993, and having gathered the political parties, the civil society associations, the corps of the State, religious and traditional authorities, the representatives of the rural world, and personal resources, gave back the Chadian people their confidence and allowed the advent of a new era. 
In consequence, We the Chadian people: 
<list>
- Affirm by this Constitution, our will to live together in respect of ethnic, religious, regional and cultural diversity; to build a State of law and a united Nation founded on public liberties and fundamental Rights of Man, dignity of the human person, and political pluralism, on the African values of solidarity and fraternity; 
- Reaffirm our commitment to the principles of the Rights of Man as defined by the Charter of the United Nations of 1945, by the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of 1948 and the African Charter of the Rights of Man and of Peoples of 1981; 
- Proclaim solemnly our right and duty to resist and disobey any individual or group of individuals, any corps of State that would assume power by force or would exercise it in violation of the present Constitution; 
- Affirm our total opposition to any regime whose policy would be founded on the arbitrariness, dictatorship, injustice, corruption, extortion, nepotism, clannishness, tribalism, confessionalism, or confiscation of power; 
- Affirm our will to cooperate in peace and friendship with all peoples sharing our ideals of freedom, justice and solidarity, on the basis of principles of equality, reciprocal interests, mutual respect, and of national sovereignty, territorial integrity and noninterference; 
- Proclaim our attachment to the cause of African unity and our commitment to work in every way toward the realization of sub-regional and regional integration; 
- Adopt solemnly the present Constitution as the supreme law of the State. 
</list>
This Preamble is an integral part of the Constitution. 
TITLE I THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY<title> 
Article 1. 
Chad is a Republic, sovereign, independent, secular, social, one and indivisible, founded on the principles of democracy, the rule [regne] of law and justice. 
The separation between State and religions is affirmed. 
Article 2.Having a one million two hundred eighty-four thousand (1,284,000) km 2 area, the Republic of Chad is organized in Decentralized Territorial Collectivities, whose autonomy is guaranteed by this Constitution. 
Article 3. 
Sovereignty belongs to the people who exercise it either directly by referendum, or indirectly by the intermediary of their elected representatives. 
No community, no corporation, no political party or association, no syndical organization, no individual, or group of individuals may arrogate [attribuer] its exercise. 
The conditions of recourse to a referendum, are determined by this Constitution and by an organic law. 
Article 4. 
Political parties and groups concur in the expression of suffrage. They form freely and exercise their activities according to conditions specified [prevues] by the law and in respect of the principles of National Sovereignty, of the territorial integrity, of national unity and of pluralistic democracy. 
Article 5. 
All propaganda of an ethnic, tribalist, regionalist or confessionalist nature, tending to affect [porter attente] the national unity or the secularity of the State is forbidden. 
Article 6. 
Suffrage is universal, direct or indirect, equal and secret. 
All Chadians, of both sexes aged eighteen years and enjoying their civil and political rights, are electors under the conditions determined by the law. 
Article 7. 
The principle of the exercise of power is the Government of the people, by the people and for the people, founded on the separation of Executive, Legislative and Judicial Powers. 
Article 8. 
The national emblem is the tricolor flag - blue, gold and red - in vertical bands of equal dimensions; the blue band being on the side of the staff. 
The motto of the Chad Republic is Unity - Work - Progress.The National anthem is "The Chadienne". 
The capital of the Republic of Chad is N'Djamena. 
Article 9. 
The official languages are French and Arabic. 
The law establishes the conditions of promotion and development of the national languages. 
Article 10. 
The seals and coats-of-arms of the Republic of Chad are determined by the law. 
Article 11. 
The conditions for acquiring or losing the Chadian nationality are established by the law. 
TITLE II LIBERTIES, FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES<title> 
Article 12. 
Liberties and fundamental rights are recognized and their exercise is guaranteed to citizens under the conditions and forms specified by the Constitution and the law. 
Article 13. 
Chadians of either sex have the same rights and the same duties. 
They are equal before the law. 
Article 14. 
The State assures to all equality before the law, without distinction of origin, race, sex, religion, political opinion, or social position. 
It has the duty to see to the elimination of all forms of discrimination with regard to women and to assure the protection of their rights in all areas [domaines] of private and public life. 
Article 15.Under the reservation of political rights, foreigners admitted in due form on the territory of the Republic of Chad benefit from the same rights and liberties as Chadian nationals. They are held to comply with the Constitution, the laws and regulations of the Republic. 
Article 16. 
The rights of moral persons are guaranteed by this Constitution. 
Chapter 1 Liberties and Fundamental Rights<title> 
Article 17. 
The human person is sacred and inviolable. 
Each individual has the right to life, his personal integrity, to security, to freedom, to the protection of his private life and his possessions. 
Article 18. 
No one may be subjected to cruelties nor to degrading and humiliating treatments nor to torture. 
Article 19. 
Each individual has the right to the free development of his person with respect to the rights of others, good morals and public order. 
Article 20. 
No one may be held in slavery or servitude. 
Article 21. 
Illegal and arbitrary arrests and detentions are forbidden. 
Article 22. 
No one may be detained in a penitentiary institution unless he falls under the effects [coup] of a penal law in force. 
Article 23. 
No one may be arrested nor charged except by virtue of a law promulgated prior to the acts [faits] for which he is blamed.Article 24. 
Any accused is presumed innocent until the establishment of his culpability following a regular process offering indispensable guarantees for his defense. 
Article 25. 
Punishment is personal. No one may be held responsible and prosecuted for an act not committed by him. 
Article 26. 
Customary and traditional rules concerning collective penal responsibility are forbidden. 
Article 27. 
The freedoms of opinion and of expression, communication, conscience, religion, the press, of association, assembly, circulation, demonstration, and parade are guaranteed to all. 
These can only be restricted by the respect of the liberties and rights of others and the imperative to safeguard the public order and good morals. 
The law determines the conditions of their exercise. 
Article 28. 
The syndical freedom is recognized. Each citizen is free to belong to the union of his choice. 
Article 29. 
The right to strike is recognized. It is exercised within the order of the laws which regulate it. 
Article 30. 
The dissolution of associations, of political parties and of unions may intervene only according to conditions provided in their statutes or by judicial means [voie]. 
Article 31. 
Access to public employment is guaranteed to each Chadian without any discrimination under reserve of the specific conditions of each employment. 
Article 32.The State recognizes to all citizens the right to work. 
It guarantees to each worker a just remuneration for his services or his production. 
No one may be wronged [leser] in their work on account of their origins, opinions, beliefs, sex, or their marital status. 
Article 33. 
Each Chadian has the right to culture. 
The State has the duty to safeguard and promote the national values of civilization. 
Article 34. 
Each citizen has the right to the creation, to the protection and to the enjoyment of his intellectual and artistic works. 
The State assures the promotion and protection of the national cultural patrimony as well as artistic and literary production. 
Article 35. 
Each citizen has the right to instruction. 
Public education is secular and free. 
Private education is recognized and is exercised with the conditions defined by law. 
Basic education is obligatory. 
Article 36. 
The State and the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities establish the conditions and institutions which assure and guarantee the education of children. 
Article 37. 
The family is the natural and moral base of the society. 
The State and the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities have the duty to see to the wellbeing of the family. 
Article 38.The parents have the natural right and the duty to raise and educate their children. In this task, they are supported by the State and the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities. 
The children may be separated from their parents or from those who have them in charge, only when these fail their duty. 
Article 39. 
The State and the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities establish the conditions for the blossoming [epanouissement] and well-being of youth. 
Article 40. 
The State strives to provide for the needs of each citizen who, on account of his age or his physical or mental inaptitude, finds himself unable to work, notably by the institution of organisms of social character. 
Article 41. 
Private property is inviolable and sacred. 
No one may be dispossessed of it except for cause of public utility, duly established and in return for which a just and predetermined [prealable] indemnification. 
Article 42. 
The domicile is inviolable. Searches may be effected only in cases and forms provided by the law. 
Article 43. 
Every Chadian has the right to establish freely his domicile and his residence anywhere in the national territory. 
Article 44. 
Every Chadian has the right to move freely inside the national territory, to leave it and to return. 
Article 45. 
The privacy of correspondence and of communications is guaranteed by the law. 
Article 46.The right of asylum is granted to foreign nationals with the conditions determined by the law. 
The extradition of political refugees is forbidden. 
Article 47. 
Every person has the right to a healthy environment. 
Article 48. 
The State and the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities must see to the protection of the environment. 
The conditions of stocking, handling, and removal of toxic or polluting wastes originating from national activities are determined by law. 
The transit, importation, stocking, burying, [and] dumping on the national territory of foreign toxic or polluting wastes are forbidden. 
Chapter II Duties<title> 
Article 49. 
Every citizen is held to respect the Constitution, the laws and regulations as well as the institutions and the symbols of the Republic. 
Article 50. 
Public assets are inviolable. Everyone must respect them and protect them. 
Article 51. 
The defense of the Fatherland and of the integrity of the national territory is a duty for every Chadian. 
Military service is obligatory. 
The conditions for accomplishing this duty are determined by the law. 
Article 52. 
Every citizen has the duty to respect and protect the environment. 
Article 53.Each citizen participates, according to his income and his health, in public expenses. 
Article 54. 
No one may avail oneself of his religious beliefs, nor his philosophical opinions to excuse oneself from a duty dictated by the national interest. 
Article 55. 
The State has the duty to protect the legitimate interests of Chadian nationals abroad. 
Article 56. 
The State guarantees the political neutrality of the administration and the armed and security forces. 
Article 57. 
The State exercises its complete and permanent sovereignty over all national riches and natural resources for the well-being of the whole national community. 
However, it may concede the exploration and exploitation of those natural resources to private initiative. 
Article 58. 
The State guarantees the freedom of enterprise. 
TITLE III THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title> 
Article 59. 
The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic and the Government. 
Chapter I The President of the Republic<title> 
Article 60. 
The President of the Republic is the Chief of the State. 
He sees to the respect of the Constitution. 
He assures through his arbitration the regular functioning of the public powers as well as the continuity of the State.He is the guarantor of the independence, national sovereignty and unity, territorial integrity, and of the respect of treaties and international agreements. 
Article 61. 
The President of the Republic is elected for a five-year mandate by direct universal suffrage. 
He is re-eligible once. 
Article 62. 
Chadians of either sex fulfilling the following conditions may present themselves for the candidacy to the functions of President of the Republic: 
<list>
- to be born Chadian, of Chadian father and mother and to have no other nationality but Chadian; 
- to be at least 35 years old and at the most seventy; 
- to enjoy all civic and political rights; 
- to be in good physical and mental health; 
- to be of good morals. 
</list>
In addition the candidate must deposit a surety whose amount is specified by law. 
If the candidate is a member of the Armed Forces or security [forces], he must, to begin with, be relieved [disponibilite]. 
Article 63. 
Candidatures to be President of the Republic are deposited with the Constitutional Council forty (40) days at least and sixty (60) days at most before the first round of voting. 
The Constitutional Council decides on [arrete] and publishes the list of candidates, thirty days before the first round of voting. 
Article 64. 
The ballot is opened by the convocation of the Government. The election of the new President takes place thirty-five (35) days at the latest before the expiration of the current mandate.Article 65. 
In the case of death or incapacity of one of the two most favored candidates in the first round and before eventual withdrawals, the Constitutional Council after ascertaining it, decides [ordonne] that it is necessary to go through the whole electoral operation again. The same happens in case of death or incapacity of one of the two remaining candidates for the second round. 
Article 66. 
The election of the President of the Republic takes place through an uninominal majority vote in two rounds. 
The candidate who obtains the absolute majority of the expressed votes after the first round is declared elected. 
If none of the candidates obtained the absolute majority in the first round, a second round takes place the second following Sunday, for the two leading candidates. 
The candidate who obtained the highest number of votes at the end of the second round is elected President of the Republic. 
Article 67. 
The conditions of eligibility of the presentation of the candidatures, of the conduct of the ballot, of the tabulation and of the proclamation of the results are specified [precisees] by the law. 
Article 68. 
The Constitutional Council sees to the regularity of the ballot and certifies the results. 
The results of the ballot are the object of a provisional proclamation. 
If no contestation concerning the regularity of the electoral operations is brought to the Constitutional Council by any of the candidates within 5 days following the provisional proclamation, the Council declares the President of the Republic definitively elected. 
In case of contestation, the Constitutional Council must decide within fifteen days of the provisory proclamation; its decision leads to [emporter] definitive proclamation or annulment of the election. 
If no contestation is raised within five days and if the Constitutional Council determines [estimer] that the election is not tainted with any irregularity likely to lead to its annulment, it proclaims the election of the President of the Republic within ten (10) days following the vote.In case of annulment, a new round takes place within fifteen days following the decision. 
Article 69. 
The mandate of the new President takes effect on the date of expiration of the previous mandate. 
Article 70. 
Before entering into his functions, the President of the Republic takes an oath publicly before the Supreme Court in the presence of the members of the Parliament in these words:
"We,É President of the Republic, elected in accordance of the laws of the country, solemnly swear before the Chadian people and on my honor: 
<list>
- to preserve, respect, have respected and defend the Constitution and the laws; 
- to fulfill with loyalty the high functions that the Nation has confided; 
- to respect and defend the republican form of the State; 
- to preserve the territorial integrity and the unity of the Nation; 
- to spare no effort to guarantee justice to all the citizens; 
- to respect and to defend the rights and liberties of individuals."
</list>
Article 71. 
The functions of the President of the Republic are incompatible with the exercise of any other elected mandate, any public employment and of any other professional and lucrative activity. 
They are also incompatible with any activity within a party or a group of political parties or a syndical organization. 
Article 72. 
The President of the Republic is required [tenir], when he enters into his functions and at the end of his mandate, to make on his honor a written declaration of his assets and address it to the Supreme Court. 
Article 73.During his mandate, the President of the Republic may neither by himself nor by an intermediary, purchase or take in bailment anything that belongs to the domain of the State. 
He may not take part either by himself or by an intermediary in public or private sales of the State or of its subdivisions [demembrements]. 
Article 74. 
The law establishes the civil list and the other advantages allocated to the President of the Republic in function. 
It determines as well the modalities of paying retirement benefits and other advantages to former Presidents [who] enjoy their civic and political rights. 
Article 75. 
In case of absence from the country or temporary incapacity of the President of the Republic, his interim is assured by the Prime Minister within the limit of the powers which will have been delegated to him. 
Article 76. 
In case of the vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic for any cause or definitive incapacity declared by the Supreme Court seized by the Government and deciding by the majority of its members, the powers [attributions] of the President of the Republic, with the exception of the powers specified in Articles 79, 82, 83 and 87, are provisionally exercised by the President of Senate and, in case of the incapacity of the latter, by the Vice President of the same Senate. 
In any case, one proceeds to the new presidential elections forty-five (45) days at least and ninety (90) days at most after the start of the vacancy. 
Article 77. 
In the meantime, the Prime Minister may not engage the responsibility of the Government before the National Assembly nor may the latter make use of the motion of censure. 
The President of the Senate assuring the functions of the President of the Republic may neither dismiss the Prime Minister and his government, nor proceed to the revision the Constitution nor dissolve the National Assembly. 
Article 78.During the exercise of his functions, penal responsibility of the President of the Republic is engaged only in the case of high treason as defined in Article 178. 
Article 79. 
The President of the Republic appoints the Prime Minister. 
He terminates his functions upon presentation by the latter of the resignation of the Government. 
Upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, he appoints the other members of the Government and terminates their functions. 
Article 80. 
The President of the Republic presides over the Council of Ministers. 
Article 81. 
The President of the Republic promulgates the laws within fifteen (15) days following the transmission to the Government of the law definitely adopted. 
He may, before the expiration of this time limit, demand of Parliament a new deliberation of the law or certain of its articles. 
The new deliberation, which cannot be refused, suspends the time limit of promulgation. In [the] case of urgency, the time limit of promulgation is reduced to eight (8) days. 
Article 82. 
The President of the Republic, upon the proposal of the Government during the sessions or on the joint proposal of the two (2) Assemblies published in the Official Journal, and following advice of the Constitutional Council, may submit to referendum any bill of law concerning the organization of the public powers, or including [comporter] the approval of an accord of union or tending to authorize the ratification of a treaty which, without being contrary to the Constitution, would have effects [incidences] on the functioning of the institutions. 
After the adoption of the bill by referendum, the President of the Republic promulgates the law within the time limit specified in Article 81. 
Article 83. 
When the regular functioning of the public powers is threatened by persistent crises between the executive power and the legislative power, or if the National Assembly, in the space of a year, overthrows [renverser] the Government in two instances, the President of the Republic may, following consultation with the Prime Minister and the Presidents of the two (2) Assemblies, declare [prononcer] the dissolution of the National Assembly. 
The general elections take place within a time limit of forty-five (45) days following the dissolution of the National Assembly. 
The National Assembly meets of right the fifteenth working day following its election. If this meeting takes place outside the periods specified for the ordinary sessions, a session is opened of right for a duration of fifteen (15) days. 
It cannot proceed to a new dissolution in the year that follows these elections. 
Article 84. 
The President of the Republic signs the ordinances and the decrees taken in the Council of Ministers. 
He appoints, in the Council of Ministers, to the high civil and military functions of the State. 
An organic law specifies the offices he is provided in the Council of Ministers, as well as the conditions in which the power of nomination of the President of the Republic may be delegated by him for its exercise in his name. 
Article 85. 
The President of the Republic accredits and recalls the ambassadors and the extraordinary envoys before the States and international organizations. 
The ambassadors and extraordinary envoys are accredited to him. 
Article 86. 
The President of the Republic is the Supreme Chief of the Armies. He presides over councils and superior committees of the National Defense. 
Article 87. 
When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the Nation, the territorial integrity or the execution of international commitments are threatened in a grave and immediate manner and when the regular functioning of the public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic, after consultation of the Presidents of the Assemblies and the President of the Constitutional Council, takes in the Council of Ministers for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days, the exceptional measures required by the circumstances.This period may only be extended following the affirmation [avis conforme] of the two Assemblies. 
The President of the Republic informs the Nation by a message. 
The Parliament meets of right if it is not in session. 
These exceptional measures may never justify any [negative] affects [atteindre] to the rights to life, to moral and physical integrity and to the jurisdictional guarantees granted to individuals. 
Article 88. 
The measures taken by virtue of the preceding article must be inspired by the will to assure to the constitutional public powers, in the shortest time, the means to accomplish their mission. 
The National Assembly may not be dissolved during the exercise of the exceptional powers. 
Article 89. 
The President of the Republic exercises [disposer] the right of pardon. 
Article 90. 
The President of the Republic communicates with the two (2) Assemblies of the Parliament by messages that he has read and which do not give rise to any debate. Between sessions, the Parliament meets specially to this effect. 
Article 91. 
Decisions of the President of the Republic, other than those relating: 
<list>
- to the appointment of the Prime Minister; 
- to the dissolution of the National Assembly; 
- to the recourse to the referendum; 
- to the exercise of exceptional powers; 
- to the messages addressed by him to the Parliament; 
- to the seizing of the Constitutional Council;- to the appointment of the members of the Constitutional Council and the Supreme Court; 
- to the right of pardon; 
- to the simple decrees. 
</list>
are countersigned by the Prime Minister and, if occasion arises, by the responsible Ministers. 
Article 92. 
The main orientations of the policy of the Nation are defined by the Government and adopted in the Council of Ministers. 
Chapter II The Government<title> 
Article 93. 
The Government is composed of the Prime Minister and the Ministers. 
It executes the policy of the Nation determined in the Council of Ministers. 
Article 94. 
The Prime Minister is the Chief of the Government. He is appointed by decree of the President of the Republic. 
Article 95. 
The other members of the Government are appointed by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the Prime Minister. 
Article 96. 
The Prime Minister must, within a time limit of fifteen days at most, present the Government to the investiture of the National Assembly and obtain from it a vote of confidence on the policy programs of his Government. 
The Government is responsible before the National Assembly in the conditions and following the procedures provided in Articles 142 and 143. 
Article 97. 
The Prime Minister directs, coordinates and animates the governmental action.He disposes of the administration. 
He is charged with the execution of the policy of National Defense. 
Article 98. 
Under the supervision of the Prime Minister, the Government assures the public security and the maintenance of order in respect of the liberties and of the Rights of Man. 
To this end, it disposes all the police forces charged with the maintenance of order and of internal security. 
Article 99. 
The Government assures the execution of the laws. 
It disposes of the organs of control of the Administration and assures the proper functioning of the public services, the proper management of the public finances, national enterprises and public organisms. 
Article 100. 
The Prime Minister presides over the Council of the Cabinet. 
He substitutes for [suppleer] the President of the Republic in the presidency of the Council of Ministers, in virtue of an express delegation and for a specific [determine] agenda. 
He substitutes him equally in the presidency of the councils and committees of defense. 
Article 101. 
The Council of Ministers determines the matters for which the Prime Minister exercises the regulatory power. 
Article 102. 
The Prime Minister may delegate certain of his powers to the members of the Government. 
Article 103. 
The acts of the Prime Minister are countersigned, if necessary, by the Ministers charged with their execution. 
Article 104.At the beginning and the end of their term in office, the Prime Minister and the other members of the Government are expected to make on their honor a written declaration of their assets and to address it to the Supreme Court. 
The provisions concerning public transactions and adjudications specified in Article 73 are applicable to the members of Government. 
Article 105. 
The functions of a member of the Government are incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, of any function of professional representation with national character, of any public employment, or any professional and lucrative activity, with the exception of Superior Education, of Scientific Research, and of Health. 
An organic law establishes the conditions under which it is provided for the replacement of the holders of parliamentary mandates named to the Government. 
TITLE IV LEGISLATIVE POWER<title> 
Article 106. 
The legislative power is exercised by a Parliament composed of the National Assembly and the Senate. 
<list>
- The members of the National Assembly carry the title of Deputy; 
- The members of the Senate carry the title of Senator. 
</list>
Article 107. 
The Deputies are elected by universal suffrage. 
Article 108. 
All Chadians of either sex fulfilling the conditions established by the law may present themselves as candidates to the National Assembly. 
Article 109. 
The mandate of Deputy is four years [and is] renewable. 
Article 110. 
The Senate represents the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities.The Senators are elected by indirect universal suffrage, by an electoral college composed of the regional, departmental, and municipal councilors. 
Article 111. 
All Chadians of either sex, of at least forty (40) years of age, and fulfilling the conditions established by the law, may present themselves as candidates to the Senate. 
Article 112. 
The duration of the mandate of the Senators is six years, renewable by thirds every other year. 
The first third to be renewed is designated by a lottery. 
Article 113. 
An organic law establishes the number of members of each Assembly, their allowances, their regime of ineligibilities and of incompatibilities. 
It establishes equally the conditions according to which the persons [who are] named are elected to assure, in case of vacancy of a seat, the replacement of the deputies or the Senators until a general or partial renewal of the Assembly to which they belong. 
Article 114. 
The members of the Parliament enjoy parliamentary immunity. 
No member of Parliament [Parlementaire] may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or judged for opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise of his functions. 
No member of Parliament may, during session, be prosecuted or arrested in a criminal or correctional matter without the authorization of the Assembly to which he belongs, except in the case of a flagrant offense. 
No member of Parliament may, in between sessions, be arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of his Assembly, except in the case of a flagrant offense, of authorized prosecution or of definitive condemnation. 
In case of crime or established offense, the immunity may be revoked by the Assembly to which the member of Parliament belongs during the sessions, or by the Bureau of the same Assembly between sessions. 
In case of flagrant offense, the Bureau of the Assembly to which the member of Parliament belongs is notified immediately of the arrest.Article 115. 
The President of the National Assembly as well as the other members of the Bureau are elected at the beginning of the first session for the duration of the legislature. 
The Bureau of the Senate is elected after each partial renewal. Nevertheless, in case of an established deficiency [manquement], the members of the Bureaus of Parliament may be replaced following [a l'issue de] the vote of two-thirds of their Assembly. 
In case of the vacancy of the post in the Bureaus of the two (2) Assemblies for whatever cause that may be, new elections take place within the twenty-one (21) days which follow. 
Article 116.
The members of Parliament represents the whole Nation. Any imperative mandate is null and of no effect. 
Article 117. 
The right to vote of the members of Parliament is personal. 
However, an organic law may exceptionally authorize the delegation of the vote. 
In this case, no one may receive the delegation of more than one mandate. 
Article 118. 
The internal Regulations of each Assembly specify: 
<list>
- the composition, the rules of functioning of the Bureau as well as the prerogatives of its President; 
- the number, the mode of appointment, the composition, the role and competence of its permanent commissions, of its commissions of delegation, as well as of its temporary commissions; 
- the organization of administrative services; 
- the disciplinary regime of members of Parliament; 
- The different modes of balloting, with the exclusion of those provided by the Constitution; 
- All the rules concerning the functioning of Parliament.
</list>Article 119. 
If at the reopening of a session, the quorum of two-thirds of the members composing the Assembly is not attained, the sitting [seance] is postponed to the following third business day. In this case, the deliberations are valid only if at least half of the members of each Assembly is present. 
Article 120. 
The sittings of the Assemblies are valid only if they take place at the ordinary places of their sessions, except in case of force majeure. 
The sittings of the Assemblies are public. 
However, each Assembly may sit in a closed session at the demand of the Prime Minister or of a third of its members. 
The integral record of the debates of the Assemblies are published in the Official Journal. 
Article 121. 
The Parliament meets of right in two ordinary sessions a year. 
The first session opens March 5. 
The second session opens October 5. 
If March 5 or October 5 is a holiday, the opening of the session takes place the first working day which follows. 
The duration of each session cannot exceed ninety (90) days. 
Article 122. 
When the two chambers of Parliament meet, the Bureau of the National Assembly presides over the work. 
Article 123. 
The Parliament meets in extraordinary session at the demand of the Prime Minister or of the majority of the members composing the National Assembly on a specific agenda. 
When an extraordinary session is held at the demand of the members of the National Assembly, the decree of closure intervenes as soon as the Parliament has exhausted the agenda for which it had been convoked and at the latest fifteen days after the date of the opening of the session.The Prime Minister can solely demand a new session before the expiration of the month which follows the decree of closure. 
Article 124. 
Aside from the cases in which Parliament meets of right, the extraordinary sessions are opened and closed by decree of the President of the Republic. 
TITLE V RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE POWERS<title> 
Article 125. 
The law is passed [vote] by the Parliament. 
The law determines the rules concerning: 
<list>
- civic rights and fundamental guarantees granted to the citizens for the exercise of public liberties; 
- taxes imposed by the National Defense on the citizens on their person and on their assets; 
- the nationality, the state and capacity of persons, the matrimonial regimes, the inheritances and the gifts; 
- the Code of the family; 
- the determination of penal infractions as well as the applicable penalties, the penal procedure, amnesty, the creation of new orders of jurisdiction and the statute of magistrates; 
- the penitentiary regime; 
- the tax base, the interest rate and the modalities for collecting taxes of all kind; 
- the regime for issuing currency; 
- the creation of categories of public establishments; 
- the nationalization of enterprises and transfers of property of enterprises of the public sector to the private sector; 
- the fundamental guarantees granted to civil and military functionaries of the State; 
- the electoral regime;- the procedure according to which customary [laws] are recognized and brought into harmony with the principles of the Constitution; 
- the state of siege and state of urgency. 
</list>
The law specifies the fundamental principles of: 
<list>
- the general organization of the National Defense; 
- the free administration of the collectivities, their competences and their resources; 
- urban planning, and the development of the territory; 
- the charter of the political parties, the regimes of associations and of the press; 
- education, scientific research; 
- public health, social matters, and the rights of children; 
- the social security regime; 
- regime of property, rights [doits reels] and civil and commercial obligations; 
- the protection of the environment and the conservation of the natural resources; 
- the real estate regime; 
- the regime of the domaine of the State; 
- mutual investments [mutualite] , savings and credits; 
- the right to work and the syndical right; 
- the culture, the arts and sports; 
- regulation of transportation and telecommunications; 
- agriculture, stock farming, fishing, waters and forests. 
</list>
The provisions of this article may be made specific [pourront ere precisees] or completed by an organic law. 
Article 126. 
Matters other than those which are of the domain of the law are of a regulatory character.Texts of legislative form concerning these matters may be modified by decrees after the advice of the administrative chamber of the Supreme Court. 
Those texts among them which would have concerned [these matters] before the entry into force of this Constitution, may be modified by decree only if the Constitutional Council has declared that they are of a regulatory character in accordance with the preceding paragraph. 
Article 127. 
The declaration of war is authorized by the Parliament. 
Article 128. 
A state of siege and the state of urgency are decreed in the Council of Ministers. 
The Government informs the Bureaus of the two (2) chambers. 
The prorogation of these beyond twelve (12) days may only be authorized by a meeting [reunies] of the two chambers. 
Article 129. 
For the execution of its program, the Government may demand from the Parliament the authorization to take by ordinances, for a limited time, measures which are normally of the domain of the law. 
The ordinances are adopted in the Council of Ministers after consultation with the administrative chamber of the Supreme Court. 
They enter into force upon their publication and become lapsed if the bill of the law of ratification is not presented to the Parliament before the date established by the enabling law [loi d'habilitation]. 
At the expiration of the time limit mentioned in the first paragraph of this article, ordinances cannot be further modified except by the law, in matters which are of the legislative domain. 
Article 130. 
The members of the Government have access to the Parliament and its commissions. 
They attend at the demand of a member of Parliament [Parlementaire] or a commission. 
They may be assisted by collaborators.Article 131. 
The organic law is a law that makes specific [precises] or completes one or more constitutional provisions. 
It is voted upon in identical terms by the chambers without the possibility of giving preeminence to the National Assembly. 
It may be promulgated only if the Constitutional Council, obligatorily seized by the President of the Republic, has declared it in conformance with the Constitution. 
Not applicable to organic laws are those provisions that concern the enabling of legislation [legiferer] granted to the Government and those that grant to the commission of delegations the right to take measures which are of the domain of the law. 
Article 132. 
The program laws [lois de programmes] specify the objectives and the economic and social action of the State. 
Article 133. 
The finance laws determine the resources and responsibilities [charges] of the State within the conditions and under the reservations specified by an organic law. 
The Parliament votes on the bills of the law of finance according to conditions specified by an organic law. 
The bill of the law of finance is presented to the Bureaus of the two Assemblies at the latest on the eve of the opening of the second ordinary session. 
The Parliament has [disposer] eighty (80) days at most to vote on the bills of the law of finance. 
If, in the case of force majeure, the Government cannot present the bill of the law of finance of the current year so that the Parliament may dispose [of it], before the end of the ordinary session within the time limit specified in the preceding paragraph, this is, immediately and of right, followed by an extraordinary session whose duration is at most equal to the time necessary to complete the said time limit. 
If the bill of the law of finance is not definitely adopted at the expiration of the time limit of eighty (80) days specified above, it may be put into force by Ordinance. 
This Ordinance has to take into account the amendments voted by the Parliament and accepted by the Government.If, taking into account the above procedure, the law has not entered into force before the beginning of the budgetary year, the Government is authorized to renew by decree those services adopted. 
The Chamber of Accounts of the Supreme Court assists the Government and the Parliament in the control of the execution of the law of finance. 
Article 134. 
The initiative of law belongs concurrently to the Government and the members of the Parliament. 
The bills of law are deliberated in the Council of Ministers after consultation with the administrative chamber of the Supreme Court and presented [deposer] to the Bureau of one of the two Assemblies. 
The bills of the law of finance are first presented [soumettre] to the National Assembly. 
Article 135. 
The propositions and amendments formulated by the members of the Parliament are not admissible when their adoption will have by consequence either a reduction of public resources, or the creation or increase of public expenses, unless they will have been accompanied with a proposition of augmentation of receipts or of equivalent economies. 
Article 136. 
If it appears, during the legislative procedure, that a proposition or an amendment is not of the domain of the law, or is contrary to a delegation granted in virtue of the provisions of Article 129, concerning habilitation, the Government may oppose the non-receivability. 
In case of disagreement between the Government and the interested Assembly, the Constitutional Council, at the demand of either one of the two parties, decides [statue] within a time limit of eight (8) days. 
Article 137. 
The discussion of bills of law, before the first Assembly seized, concerns [porter] the text presented by the Government. 
An Assembly, seized of a draft adopted by the other Assembly, deliberates on the text which is transmitted to it. 
Article 138.The drafts and propositions of law are, at the demand of the Government or of the Assembly which has been seized, sent for study to the Commissions especially designated to this effect. 
Drafts and propositions for which no such demand was made are sent to one of the permanent Commissions. 
The number of permanent Commissions is specified by the internal Regulations of each Assembly. 
Article 139. 
Members of the Parliament and the Government have the right of amendment. 
When an Assembly has entrusted [confier] the consideration [examen] of a draft text to a Commission, the Government may, after the opening of the debates, oppose the consideration of any amendment which was not previously submitted to that Commission. 
If the Government demands it, the Assembly seized declares by way of a single vote on all or part of the text in discussion, keeping only the amendments proposed or accepted by it. 
Article 140. 
Any draft or proposition of a law is successively examined in the two chambers of the Parliament with a view to the adoption of an identical text. 
When, following a disagreement between the two (2) Assemblies, a draft or a proportion of a law could not be adopted after two readings by each Assembly, or if the Government has declared urgency, after one reading by each, the Government has the power [faculte] to engage [proroquer] the meeting of a joint Commission [Commission mixte paritaire] charged to propose a text on those provisions still in discussion. 
The text elaborated by the joint Commission may be submitted by the Government to the two Assemblies for approval. No amendment is admissible, except with the agreement of the Government. 
If the joint Commission does not reach the adoption of a common text, or if this text is not adopted according to conditions provided in the above article, the Government may, after a new reading by the National Assembly and by the Senate, demand the National Assembly to decide [statuer] definitively. In this case, the National Assembly may return either the text prepared by the joint Commission, or the last text which it voted on, completed if needed by one or more of the amendments of the Senate. 
Article 141.The agenda of the Assemblies comprises by priority and in the order specified by the Government, the discussion of the bills of law presented by the Government. 
One session a week is reserved to the study and adoption of propositions of laws. 
One session every other week is reserved to the questions of the members of Parliament and to the answers by the Government. 
Article 142. 
The Prime Minister, upon deliberation by the Council of Ministers, engages before the National Assembly, the responsibility of the Government on its program and eventually on a declaration of general policy. 
The National Assembly questions the responsibility of the Government by the vote of a motion of censure. Such a motion is admissible only if it is signed by at least one-tenth of the members of the National Assembly. The vote may take place only forty-eight hours after its presentation. The only votes counted are those favoring the motion of censure which can be adopted only by the majority of the members composing the National Assembly. 
If the motion of censure is rejected, its signatories may not propose another one in the course of the same session, except in the case described in the following paragraph. 
The Prime Minister may, upon deliberation of the Council of Ministers, engage the responsibility of the Government before the National Assembly on the vote of a text. 
In this case, this text is considered adopted, except if a motion of censure, presented within the next twenty-four hours, is adopted according to conditions specified in paragraph two (2) of this Article. 
The Prime Minister has the power [faculte] to demand the Senate for the approval of a declaration of general policy. 
Article 143. 
When the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure or when it disapproves the program or a declaration of general policy of the Government, the Prime Minister must present the resignation of the Government to the President of the Republic. 
Article 144. 
The closure of the ordinary or extraordinary sessions is postponed of right to permit, if occasion arises, the application of the provisions of Article 142. 
Article 145.The Government must provide [tenu de fournir] the Parliament all the explanations it demands concerning its management and concerning its activities. 
The means of information and control of the Parliament on the action of Government are: 
<list>
- interpellation; 
- written question; 
- oral question; 
- the Commission of inquiry; 
- the motion of censure; 
- the hearing in Commissions. 
</list>
These means are exercised according to conditions specified by the Internal Regulations of each chamber. 
TITLE VI JUDICIAL POWER<title> 
Article 146. 
Judicial power is independent of the executive power and of the legislative power. 
Article 147. 
Only one order of jurisdiction is instituted, of which the Supreme Court is the Supreme Instance. 
Article 148. 
The judicial power in Chad is exercised by the Supreme Court, the Courts of Appeal, the Tribunals, and the Justices of Peace. 
It is the guardian of the liberties and of the individual property, and sees to the respect of the fundamental rights. 
Article 149. 
Justice is administered in the name of the Chadian people. 
Article 150.The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the independence of the Magistrature. 
<list>
- He sees to the execution of the laws and of the decisions of Justice. 
- He is assisted by the Superior Council of the Magistrature. 
</list>
Article 151. 
The President of the Republic presides over the Superior Council of the Magistrature. The Minister of Justice is by right its First Vice President. 
The President of the Supreme Court is its second Vice President. 
The other members of the Superior Council of the Magistrature are elected by their peers, according to conditions specified by the law. 
Article 152. 
The Superior Council of the Magistrature proposes the appointments and the promotions of the magistrates. 
Article 153. 
The magistrates are appointed by a decree of the President of the Republic, upon affirmation [avis conforme] of the Superior Council of the Magistrature. They are dismissed according to the same conditions. 
Article 154. 
The discipline and responsibility of the magistrates at all levels belongs to the Superior Council of the Magistrature. 
In this case, the Presidency of the Superior Council of the Magistrature is assured by the President of the Supreme Court. 
Article 155. 
Sitting magistrates are only subject to the authority of the law, in the exercise of their functions. They are irremovable. 
Article 156.The other regulations of the organization, functioning as well as the regime of incompatibilities are specified by a law. 
Chapter I The Supreme Court<title> 
Article 157. 
The Supreme Court is the highest jurisdiction of Chad in judicial, administrative and financial matters. 
It also takes cognizance of [connaitre] the contentions of local elections. 
It is composed of three chambers. 
<list>
- A judicial chamber; 
- An administrative chamber; 
- A chamber of accounts. 
</list>
Article 158. 
The Supreme Court is composed of sixteen (16) members, including one president and fifteen (15) Counsellors. 
The President of the Supreme Court is chosen [from] among the high magistrates of the judicial order. 
He is appointed by a decree of the President of the Republic upon consultation with the Presidents of the National Assembly and of the Senate. 
The Counsellors are designated in the following fashion: 
<list>
- eight chosen [from] among the high magistrates of the judicial order respectively [dont]: 
- three by the President of the Republic; 
- three by the President of the National Assembly; 
- two by the President of the Senate. 
- seven chosen [from] among the specialists of Administrative Law, Budgetary Law and [Law] of the Public Accounts, respectively [dont]:- three by the President of the Republic; 
- two by the President of the National Assembly; 
- two by the President of the Senate. 
</list>
The powers [attributions] and the other regulations of the organization and functioning as well as the procedure to be followed before the Supreme Court, are determined by an organic law. 
Article 159. 
The members of the Supreme Court are irremovable. They remain in their functions until eligible [admission] for retirement, except in the case of conviction for misdemeanors and crimes, resignation, or definitive incapacity. 
Article 160. 
Before entering into their functions, the members of the Supreme Court [who are] not magistrates, take the following oath: 
"I swear to fulfill my functions faithfully and to the best of my ability, to exercise them in all impartiality with respect for the laws, and to keep deliberations secret."
Chapter II Customary and Traditional Rules<title> 
Article 161. 
Until their codification, the customary and traditional rules are applicable only in the communities where they are recognized. 
However, those customs contrary to the public order or those which promote inequality between citizens are forbidden. 
Article 162. 
Customary or traditional rules dictating matrimonial regimes and inheritances may be applied only with the consent of the parties concerned. 
In default of consent, the national law is solely applicable. 
The same [applies] in case of conflict between two or more customary rules. 
Article 163.Customary or traditional reparation may not be an obstacle to the public action. 
TITLE VII THE CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL<title>
Article 164. 
A Constitutional Council is instituted. 
Article 165. 
The Constitutional Council is composed of nine members including three magistrates and six jurists of the high level designated in the following manner: 
<list>
- one magistrate and two jurists by the President of the Republic; 
- one magistrate and two jurists by the President of the National Assembly; 
- one magistrate and two jurists by the President of the Senate. 
</list>
The mandate of the members of the Constitutional Council is of nine years and not renewable. 
The Constitutional Council is renewed by thirds every three years. 
The members of the Constitutional Council are irremovable during their mandate. 
The members of the Constitutional Council must be of recognized professional competence, good morals and high probity. 
Article 166. 
The Constitutional Council is the judge of the constitutionality of laws, treaties and international agreements. 
It is informed [connaitre] about contentions [affecting] presidential, legislative, and senatorial elections. 
It sees to the regularity of the operations of the referendum and proclaims its results. 
It rules obligatorily on the constitutionality of organic laws, before their promulgation, and the internal regulations of the Assemblies before they enter into effect. 
The Constitutional Council is the regulatory organ of the functioning of the institutions and of the activity of the public powers.It rules [on] the conflicts of attributions between the Institutions of the State. 
Article 167. 
The functions of a member of the Constitutional Council are incompatible with the title [qualite] of member of the Government, the exercise of any elective mandate, of any public function, and any other lucrative activity. 
Article 168. 
The President of the Constitutional Council is elected by his peers for a term of three (3) years [and is] renewable. 
Article 169. 
Before entering into their functions, the members of the Constitutional Council take the following oath: 
"I swear to fulfill faithfully the duties of my office, with strict respect for its obligations of neutrality and restraint, to see to the respect of the Constitution and to conduct myself with dignity and loyalty in the accomplishment of my mission."
Article 170. 
At the demand of the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate or of at least one-tenth of the members of the National Assembly or the Senate, the Constitutional Council will decide on the Constitutionality of a law, before it is promulgated. 
Article 171. 
Every citizen may raise the exception of unconstitutionality before any jurisdiction regarding a matter that concerns him. 
In this case, the jurisdiction suspends judgment and seizes the Constitutional Council which must make a decision within a maximum of forty-five (45) days. 
Article 172. 
The Constitutional Council, seized with a text, rules within fifteen (15) days. 
However, at the demand of the Government and in case of urgency, this time limit may be reduced to eight days. In this case, the seizing of the Constitutional Council suspends the time limit for promulgation. 
Article 173.No text may be promulgated or take effect with its provisions declared unconstitutional. 
Article 174. 
The decisions of the Constitutional Council are not susceptible to any recourse. 
They are applicable to the public powers, and all the administrative, military and judicial authorities. 
Article 175. 
The other competences, the organization and the functioning of the Constitutional Council as well as the immunities of its members are determined by an organic law. 
TITLE VIII THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE<title> 
Article 176. 
A High Court of Justice is instituted. 
Article 177. 
The High Court of Justice is composed of fifteen (15) members including: 
<list>
- six deputies; 
- four senators; 
- two members of the Constitutional Council; 
- three members of the Supreme Court; 
</list>
The members of the High Court of Justice are elected by their respective peers. 
The President is elected by the members of the High Court. 
Article 178. 
The High Court of Justice is competent to judge the President of the Republic and the members of the Government as well as their accomplices in case of high treason. 
Any deed affecting the republican form, the unification and secularity of the State, the sovereignty, the independence, and the integrity of the national territory is considered a crime of high treason.Considered as [assimiles] high treason are grave and characteristic violations of human rights, embezzlement of public funds, corruption, extortion, traffic in drugs and the introduction of toxic or dangerous waste with a view to their transit, storage or stockpiling on the national territory. 
The President of the Republic is not responsible for acts committed in the exercise of his functions, except in the case of high treason. 
Article 179. 
Except in the cases of high treason, the members of the Government are penally responsible for their acts before the jurisdiction of common law. 
Article 180. 
Impeachment of the President of the Republic and members of the Government is voted by secret ballot, by a majority of two-thirds (2/3) of the members composing each of the two chambers of Parliament. 
The President of the Republic and the members of the Government are suspended in their functions in case of impeachment. 
In case of indictment, the President of the Republic is stripped of his powers and the ministers of their functions by the High Court of Justice. 
Article 181. 
The High Court of Justice is bound by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors as well as by the penalties resulting from the penal laws which are in force at the time the deeds were committed. 
Article 182. 
An organic law establishes the rules of functioning as well as the procedure to be followed before the High Court of Justice. 
TITLE IX THE HIGH COUNCIL OF COMMUNICATION<title>
Article 183. 
A High Council of Communication is established. 
The High Council of Communication is an independent administrative authority. 
Article 184.The High Council of Communication is composed of nine (9) members appointed by decree of the President of the Republic. 
They are designated in the following manner: 
<list>
- two persons by the President of the Republic; 
- one by the President of the National Assembly; 
- one by the President of the Senate; 
- three professionals from the audiovisual communication [field] and the written press, designated by their peers; 
- one magistrate designated by the President of the Supreme Court; 
- one person of the world of culture, arts and letters designated by his peers. 
</list>
Article 185. 
The High Council of Communication elects its Bureau from among its members. 
Article 186. 
The High Council of Communication: 
<list>
- sees to the respect of ethical rules in matters of information and communication; 
- guarantees the freedom of the press and pluralistic expression of opinions; 
- regulates the relationship of communication between the public powers, the organs of information and the public; 
- assures to the political parties equal access to the public media; 
- guarantees to the associations equal access to the public media; 
- gives technical advice, [and] recommendations on the questions concerning the domaine of information. 
</list>
Article 187. 
The other powers [attributions] , the organization and the functioning of the High Council of Communication are specified by the law.TITLE X NATIONAL DEFENSE AND SECURITY<title> 
Article 188. 
The National Defense and Security are assured by the Armed Forces and Forces of Security. 
Article 189. 
The Armed Forces and Forces of Security are composed of: 
<list>
- the National Army; 
- the National Force of Gendarmes; 
- the National Police; 
- the National and Nomad Guard. 
</list>
Article 190. 
The Armed Forces and Forces of Security are at the service of the Nation: 
They are submitted to the republican legality. 
They are subordinated to the civil power. 
Article 191. 
The Armed Forces and Forces of Security are apolitical. No one may use them for individual ends. 
Article 192. 
The National Defense is assured by the National Army and the National Force of Gendarmes. 
The maintenance of public order and security is assured by the National Police, the National and Nomad Guard, and the National Force of Gendarmes. 
Chapter I The Chadian National Army<title> 
Article 193.The mission of the Chadian National Army is to defend the territorial integrity, national unity, to guarantee the national independence and the security of the country against any external aggression or threat. 
Article 194. 
The Chadian National Army participates in tasks of economical and social development as well as humanitarian operations. 
Article 195. 
The missions not provided for by this Constitution are defined by law. 
Chapter II The National Force of Gendarmes<title> 
Article 196. 
The mission of the National Force of Gendarmes is: 
<list>
- to assure the protection of persons and of property; 
- to assure the maintenance and restoration of public order; 
- to assure the respect of the laws and regulations. 
</list>
Article 197. 
The National Force of Gendarmes executes the tasks of the Judicial Police and the Administrative Police. Its power is exercised over the whole of the territory of the Republic of Chad with respect for the freedoms and Rights of Man. 
Chapter III The National Police<title> 
Article 198. 
The missions of the National Police are: 
<list>
- to see to the Security of the State; 
- to assure the maintenance and restoration of public order; 
- to see to the security and the protection of persons and property; 
- to see to the public peace and health;- to assure the respect of the laws and regulations. 
</list>
Article 199. 
The action of the National Police is exercised on the whole of the territory of the Republic with respect for the human freedoms and Rights of Man. 
Chapter IV The National and Nomad Guard<title> 
Article 200. 
The missions of the National and Nomad Guard are: 
<list>
- the protection of the political and administrative authorities; 
- the protection of public buildings; 
- the maintenance of order in the rural and nomad area [milieu]; 
- the guarding and surveillance of jails. 
</list>
Article 201. 
The action of the National and Nomadic Guard is exercised on the whole of the territory of the Republic of Chad with respect for the freedoms and Rights of Man. 
Article 202. 
The organization, the functioning, and the other attributions of the National Assembly, the National Force of Gendarmes, the National Police, and the National and Nomadic Guard are established by the law. 
TITLE XI THE DECENTRALIZED TERRITORIAL COLLECTIVITIES<title> 
Article 203. 
The Decentralized Territorial Collectivities of the Republic of Chad are: 
<list>
- the rural communities; 
- the communes; 
- the departments;- the regions. 
</list>
Article 204. 
The Decentralized Territorial Collectivities are endowed with a moral personality. 
Their administrative, financial, patrimonial, economic, cultural, and social autonomy is guaranteed by the Constitution. 
Article 205. 
The Decentralized Territorial Collectivities administer themselves freely by elected assemblies which rule through their deliberations on the matters which have been devolved to them by the Constitution and the law. 
The deliberations of the local assemblies are executed of right on their publication. 
However, they may not be contrary to the constitutional, legislative and regulatory provisions. 
Article 206. 
The members of local Assemblies are elected by direct universal suffrage for a renewable six-year mandate. 
Article 207. 
The local Assemblies elect from within, executive organs for a renewable three-year mandate. 
The executive organs are responsible before the local Assemblies. 
Article 208. 
The State is represented before the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities by the heads of decentralized administrative units, charged to defend the national interests and to have the laws and regulations respected. 
Article 209. 
The State sees to the harmonious development of all Decentralized Territorial Collectivities on the basis of national solidarity. 
Article 210.The Decentralized Territorial Collectivities assure, within the limits of their territorial competence [resort] and with the help of the State: 
<list>
- public security; 
- administration and development of the territory; 
- economic, social, sanitary, cultural and scientific development; 
- the protection of the environment. 
</list>
The law determines the distribution of the competences with consideration for local and national interests. 
Article 211. 
The Decentralized Territorial Collectivities vote on and manage their budget. 
Article 212. 
The resources of the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities are constituted notably by: 
<list>
- the proceeds of the duties and taxes voted by the Assemblies of the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities and collected directly by them; 
- the share that falls to them by right, of the proceeds of the duties and taxes collected for the benefit of the budget of the State; 
- the proceeds of endowments and subsidies attributed by the State; 
- the proceeds of loans contracted by the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities, either on the domestic market, or on the external market upon agreement of the national monetary authorities, with or without the warranty of the State; 
- donations and inheritances; 
- revenues from their patrimony; 
- the percentage on the proceeds from the resources of the soil and subsoil exploited on their territory. 
</list>
Article 213. 
The rules concerning the juridical statutes, the organization, the functioning and the attributions of the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities as well as their relations with the central power are determined by an organic law.TITLE XII TRADITIONAL AND CUSTOMARY AUTHORITIES<title>
Article 214. 
The traditional and customary authorities are the guarantors of the ways [us] and customs. 
Article 215. 
They cooperate in the shaping of a framework for the populations and support the action of the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities. 
Article 216. 
They are the collaborators of the Administration with respect for the freedoms and Rights of Man. 
Article 217. 
A law determines their statutes, powers [attributions] and remuneration with consideration of the local and national contexts. 
TITLE XIII COOPERATION, TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS<title> 
Article 218. 
The Republic of Chad may conclude with other States treaties of cooperation or association on the basis of principles of equality, mutual respect of sovereignty, territorial integrity, mutual advantages, and national dignity. 
It may establish with other states, organizations with joint management, coordination and cooperation in the economic, monetary, financial, scientific, technical, military and cultural fields. 
Article 219. 
The President of the Republic negotiates and ratifies the treaties. He is informed of all negotiations aiming to conclude any international agreement not submitted to ratification. 
Article 220. 
Peace treaties, defense treaties, commercial treaties, treaties concerning the use of national territory or the exploitation of natural resources, agreements concerning international organization, those that involve State finances or those concerning the well-being of persons may be approved or ratified only upon the authorization of the Parliament. 
These treaties and agreements take effect only after being approved and ratified. 
No secession, no exchange, no territorial adjunction is valid without the consent of the people expressed by means of a referendum. 
Article 221. 
If the Constitutional Council, seized by the President of the Republic or by the President of the National Assembly or the Senate, declares that an international commitment includes a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify may occur only after a revision of the Constitution. 
Article 222. 
The treaties and agreements regularly ratified have, as soon as published, greater authority than that of the laws, under the condition for each agreement or treaty to be applied by the other party. 
TITLE XIV REVISION<title> 
Article 223. 
The initiative of the revision belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic upon decision taken in the Council of Ministers and to the members of Parliament. 
To be taken into consideration, any draft or proposition of revision must be voted on, in identical terms, by a two-thirds majority of the members of the National Assembly and the Senate. 
Article 224. 
The revision of the Constitution is approved by referendum. However, a technical revision may take place with the approval of a three-fifths majority of the members of the National Assembly and the Senate meeting in Congress. 
Article 225. 
No procedure of revision may be started or pursued if it interferes with: 
<list>
- the integrity of the territory, independence or national unity;- the republican form of the State, the principle of the division of powers and secularity; 
- the freedoms and fundamental rights of the citizen; 
- political pluralism. 
</list>
Article 226. 
No procedure of revision may be started when the President of the Republic exercises the exceptional powers or when an interim President exercises the functions of President of the Republic, according to provisions of Articles 87 and 75 of this Constitution. 
TITLE XV TRANSITORY AND FINAL PROVISIONS<title> 
Article 227. 
The present Constitution is adopted by referendum. 
It takes effect upon its promulgation by the President of the Republic, within eight days following the proclamation of the results of the referendum by the Court of Appeal. 
Article 228. 
The acting President of the Republic continues to fulfill his duties until investiture of the elected President. 
Article 229. 
The Supreme Council of the Transition (CST) continues to exercise its legislative duty. 
It sees to the defense and promotion of the Rights of Man and of the Freedoms; it supervises the organization of the presidential elections. 
Upon the opening of the campaign of the legislative elections, the Superior Council of the Transition is placed in recess by right. 
The mandate of the Councillors ends upon the installation of the elected National Assembly. 
Article 230. 
During the period of recess of the Superior Council of Transition, the President of the Republic legislates by Ordinances. 
Article 231.Ordinances taken by the Government in application of the above Article 230, may not in any way and under any possible form, occur [intervenir] in the following fields: 
<list>
- the electoral regime; 
- the Charter of Political Parties; 
- the regime of the Associations and the Press; 
- civic rights and fundamental guarantees granted to the citizens for the exercise of public liberties; 
- nationality, the state and the capacity of persons, the matrimonial regime, the inheritances and liberalities; 
- the Code of the Family. 
</list>
Article 232. 
The Government continues to exercise its duties until the nomination of a new Government. 
Article 233. 
The other established Institutions continue to exercise their functions and attributions according to the laws and regulations in force until the adoption and establishment of new institutions. 
Article 234. 
The measures necessary to establish the Institutions specified by this Constitution are taken, either by legislative ways [voie], or by Decrees taken in the Council of Ministers. 
The Institutions of the Republic specified by this Constitution are established in a maximum time limit of thirty-six (36) months starting from the installation of the National Assembly. 
Article 235. 
Until the establishment of the Senate, the attributions of the latter fall to the National Assembly. 
Article 236.For the first national electoral consultation, the publication of the electoral lists and the convocation of the elections are made by decree taken in the Council of Ministers, upon advice of the Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI). 
Article 237. 
The First President elect enters into his functions twenty-one (21) days after the definitive proclamation of the results of the ballot. 
Article 238. 
Until the establishment of the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Council, their functions and competences fall to the Court of Appeal of N'Djamena. 
Article 239. 
As soon as it is promulgated, the present Constitution abrogates the Charter of the Transition and all the other anterior contrary provisions.