POLITICAL CONSTITUTION of the State of Chili.
Promulgated the 29th December, 1823.
THE Supreme Director of Chili to those who may see and hear these presents, be it known, 
That the Sovereign Constituent Congress of the Nation has decreed and sanctioned the Political Constitution of the State of Chili, in the following Code: 
In the name of God, the All-powerful Creator, Preserver, Benefactor, and Supreme Legislator, of the Universe, 
The National Constituent Congress of Chili decrees and sanctions the Political and Permanent Constitution of the State, under the following Titles:
<preamble>

TITLE I.
<title> OF THE CHILIAN NATION AND PEOPLE.
ART. I. The State of Chili is one and indivisible: the National Representation is consolidated for the whole Republick. 
II. Chili is a Nation independent of the Spanish Monarchy, and of any other Power. 
III. The Sovereignty belongs essentially to the Nation, and the exercise of it to its Representatives. 
IV. The Territory of Chili, North to South, extends from the Desert of Atacama to Cape Horn; and, East to West, from the Pacifick Ocean, including all the adjacent Islands, the Archipelago of Chiloé, and the Islands of Juan Fernandez, Mocha, and Santa Maria, to the Mountains of the Andes. 
V. The Constitutional Guarantees and the Laws protect every Individual resident in Chili.
VI. Those are Chilians: 
<list>
1. Who are born in Chili. 
2. Who are born in other Countries, if they be Children of a Chilian Father or Mother, and become domiciliated in Chili. 
3. Foreigners resident in Chili, married to a Chilian Woman, domiciliated according to the Laws, and exercising any profession. 
4. Foreigners married to Foreign Women, after a Year's residence, possessing a legal domicile, and exercising a profession enabling them to subsist. 
5. Those favoured by the Legislative Power. 
</list>
VII. Every Chilian is equal in the eye of the Law; and he may be called to employments under the conditions required by it. All are to contribute towards the expenses of the State in proportion to their means. All are its defenders. 
VIII. In Chili there are no Slaves. Whoever resides on its Territory during one day is free. Whoever carries on the Slave Trade shall not reside in Chili longer than one month, nor shall ever become naturalized. 
IX. Expenses for the defence of the Country, the Publick Administration, and the instruction of the Citizens, are essentially National. The Legislatures alone shall provide for others, after those shall have been settled. 
X. The Religion of the State is the Roman Catholick Apostolick, to the exclusion of the worship and exercise of any other.

TITLE II.
<title> OF ACTUAL CITIZENS.
XI. Every natural or legal Chilian is a Chilian Citizen, with the Right of Suffrage in the Electoral Assemblies, provided he be 21 Years of age, or have contracted marriage, and that he possess any of the following requisites: 
<list>
1. An immoveable property of 200 dollars. 
2. A business or trade belonging to himself worth 500 dollars. 
3. Being a Proprietor of, or being regularly instructed in, any permanent manufacture. 
4. The having produced or brought to the Country any invention, industry, science, or art, the utility of which is approved by the Government. 
5. The having fulfilled his civick duties. 
6. The being a Roman Catholick, or favoured by the Legislative Power.
</list> 
All must be instructed in the Constitution of the State, their names inscribed in the great National Book, and be in possession of the Certificate of Citizenship, at least one month before the Elections. They must be able to read and to write, after the Year 1840. 
XII. Citizenship shall be forfeited: 
<list>
1. By naturalization in a Foreign Country. 
2. By accepting employment from other Governments, without permission of the Senate. 
3. By declining, without sufficient cause, the fulfilment of any duty required by the chief Authorities of the State. 
4. By fraudulent Bankruptcy. 
</list>
XIII. Citizenship shall be suspended, in consequence: 
<list>
1. Of having been condemned to corporeal or other degrading punishment, unless reinstated in society. 
2. Of physical or moral incapability of free and deliberate action; 
3. Of being a fiscal debtor for a protracted period. 
4. Of want of employment or known manner of living. 
5. Of being a menial servant. 
6. Of being proceeded against criminally. 
7. Of habitual drunkenness, or being addicted to prohibited games. 
</list>
Declaration being made of the defects mentioned in this and the former Article, one month previous to the Elections, and by competent authority. 

TITLE III.
<title> OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER.
XIV. A Citizen, with the Title of Supreme Director, shall govern the State, with submission to the Laws, and hold exclusively the exercise of the Executive Power. The office shall last 4 Years; re-election being allowed a second time by two-thirds of the Votes. 
XV. In the event of the sickness, death, resignation, deposition, or absence of the Director, or of his being in command of the Armed Force, the President of the Senate, separated from that body and its functions, shall take his post. He shall also officiate in his stead, during his absences in the Interior, in such part of the Administration as the Director may appoint. 
XVI. The Dress of the Supreme Director shall be peculiar, and distinguished from that of the Civil or Military Officers. 
XVII. To be Supreme Director it is requisite: 
<list>
1. To be a Citizen by birth, and, if a Foreigner, to have exercised the Citizenship for 12 Years, and to have been previously declared deserving in an eminent degree. 
2. For a Native, to have been 5 Years; and, for a legalized Citizen, to have been 12 Years, an immediate resident in the Country; unless he have been absent on official service of the State; and to be 30 Years of age.
</list>
XVIII. The exclusive faculties of the Supreme Director are: 
<list>
1. To govern the State; executing and fulfilling the Laws and Regulations which may have been sanctioned. 
2. To promulgate the Laws. 
3. To originate, exclusively, the Laws, except during the Constitutional Period, when the same belongs to the Senate, and the sanction of them to the Director. 
4. To organize and dispose of the Land and Sea Forces conformably to the Law. 
5. To nominate the Generals in Chief, with the consent of the Senate. 
6. To declare War in the Constitutional form. 
7. To decree the supply of the funds legally destined for the branches of Publick Service. 
8. To nominate the Officers of the Army and Navy below the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel. 
9. To dictate hostile or defensive measures, cf urgency, in the event of a sudden attack from without, or of any internal commotion; consulting on the occasion with the Senate. 
10. To appoint to civil and ecclesiastical employments, appertaining to civil nomination or presentation, which are not prohibited by the Constitution. 
11. To nominate the Ministers of the Cabinet, previously consulting with his Council of State, and his Councillors, according to the Constitution. 
12. To watch over the ministerial conduct of the functionaries of justice, and the fulfilment of their decrees. 
13. To remove his Ministers, without assigning a cause. 
14. To take especial care that the Constitution be fulfilled, in respect of the Elections and the requisite qualifications. 
15. To pardon and commute punishments, with the consent of the Senate. 
16. To withhold or confirm Warrants for Papal Bulls and Ecclesiastical Ordinances; with the consent of his Council of State, and the sanction of the Senate, if they relate to matters of Government; and with the consent of the Supreme Court of Justice, if they relate to contentious matters. 
17. To suspend Persons in Office, for unfitness, neglect of duty, or crimes. In the first case, with the consent of the Senate, and in the two last, communicating the necessary information to the Tribunals of Justice for judicial decision. 
18. To negotiate Treaties of Peace, Alliance, Commerce, Subsidies, and Limits, subject to the sanction of the Senate. 
19. To render an account annually to the Senate, of the state of the Nation, in all the branches of Publick Administration.
20. To prepare, through the medium of his Ministers, an estimate of the annual expenditure, and to report the application of the preceding estimate. 
</list>
XIX. It shall not be lawful for the Supreme Director: 
<list>
1. To command the Armed Force, or to absent himself from the Territory of the Republick, without leave of the Senate. 
2. To nominate any Officer to the effective command of a Corps, of and superior to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel: the proposing and nomination of which must receive the consent of the Senate. 
3. To take cognizance of judicial matters, whether relating to the Police, Government, or any other Department. 
4. To deprive any one of personal liberty for more than 24 hours, or to inflict corporeal punishments. 
5. To suspend, on any pretext, the assembling of the National Chamber, immediately after the Veto of the Senate shall have been pronounced. 
6. To grant employments, without the particular exercise of his Ministry acknowledged by the Law, to extend their number, or to distribute money, on any other ground than that of actual service or legal retirement. 
7. To suspend the Electoral Assemblies. 
8. To despatch Diplomatick Agents, either with Powers or an Official Character, to Foreign Countries, without the consent of the Senate. 
9. To create commissions, with emolument or salary, without the consent of the Senate. 
10. To issue any order without the signature of his Ministers; he being responsible if it be obeyed under any other form. 
</list>
XX. At the expiration of his office, the Supreme Director shall deliver to the Senate a Report on all the operations of his Administration, to the end that, together with the notes and observations thereon of the Senate, it may be printed, and, the name of the Director being inscribed on the Electoral Lists, the Assemblies may declare (in the same form as in the Elections) how far his conduct may be deemed meritorious. 

TITLE IV.
<title> OF THE MINISTERS OF STATE.
XXI. There shall be, for the present, three Ministers, Secretaries of State, for the directorial despatch of business. 
XXII. Each Minister shall be personally responsible for the acts which he shall have signed alone, and all of them for those which they shall have signed in common. 
XXIII. Every organick instruction drawn up by the Directory, on the acts which shall have been sanctioned by the Senate, relating to Foreign Affairs, shall be considered in concert with the Council of State, and shall have the signature of the respective Minister of State, without which requisite it shall not be executed. Should any extraordinary case demand one of a secret nature, the Minister who issues the instruction and signs it shall be personally responsible for the same. 
XXIV. To be a Minister, it is necessary to be a Citizen, to be 30 Years of age, to be of good repute, and to have a well-known competency. 
XXV. No Minister shall absent himself from the Country until the expiration of 4 months, after the termination of his office. 
XXVI. To render the responsibility of a Minister effective, the Senate shall declare when there be cause for the institution of legal proceedings against him, the Supreme Court of Justice adjudging it afterwards, on principles of prudence and discretion, with reference to what is purely of a ministerial nature. 
XXVII. The business and interior organization of each Department shall be settled by a regulation, prepared by the Government, and sanctioned by the Senate. 

TITLE V.
<title> OF THE COUNCIL OF STATE.
XXVIII. There shall be a Council of State, composed of two Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, an Ecclesiastical Dignitary, a Military Chief, an Inspector of Fiscal Rents, and the two officiating Directors of National Economy, who shall receive no other emolument than the Salary attached to their employment. The Ex-Directors are Members of this Council. 
XXIX. The Council of State shall be consulted: 
<list>
1. Respecting those Projects of Law which cannot be submitted for the sanction of the Senate without the previous assent of the Council of State. 
2. Respecting the nomination of Ministers of State, the Council having the right of proposing their dismissal. 
3. Respecting the Estimates of Fiscal Expenses, which must annually be laid before the Senate. 
4. Respecting all matters of superior importance. 
</list>
XXX. The Council shall meet in the House of the Director, on two appointed days in the week, and on extraordinary occasions, when called by the Supreme Director, who shall always preside over it. 
XXXI. The Council shall be divided into 7 Sections, each Section being entrusted to a particular Member, who shall prepare and explain the business to be expedited. 
XXXII. The Sections are: 
<list>
1. Interior Government, Justice, Legislation, and Elections. 
2. Commerce and Foreign Affairs. 
3. Publick Instruction, Morals, Services, National Merit, and Ecclesiastical Affairs.
4. Fiscal and Publick Finance. 
5. War and Marine. 
6. Mines, Agriculture, Industry, and the Arts. 
7. Publick Establishments, and every description of Police. 
</list>
XXXIII. A Book shall be kept in the Council of State, in which all the decisions given by the Director shall be registered. In the consultations on the nomination of Ministers of State, each Councillor shall record his personal vote with his name. 
XXXIV. The Councillors shall be permanent, unless they be removed or superseded by the Supreme Director. 

TITLE VI.
<title> OF THE SENATE.
XXXV. There shall be a permanent Body, with the title of the Conservative and Legislative Senate. 
XXXVI. It shall be composed of 9 individuals, elected Constitutionally, for the space of 6 Years, who may be re-elected at any period. 
XXXVII. To be a Senator it is necessary: 
<list>
1. To be 30 Years of age. 
2. To possess a Property, the value of which is not less than 5,000 dollars. 
3. To have been a Resident during three Years immediately previous to the Election, unless the person should have been absent in the employment of the State. 
4. To be in the exercise of Citizenship. 
</list>
XXXVIII. The attributes of the Senate are: 
<list>
1. To watch over the observance of the Laws, and the conduct of the Authorities. 
2. To sanction the Laws proposed by the Directory, or to suspend their sanction until the opinion of the National Assembly shall have been ascertained. 
3. To suspend, immediately, the Executive Acts of the Directory, should it perceive in them a serious and dangerous tendency, or a violation of the Laws. 
4. To watch over the National customs and morals, taking care of education, and that the civick and moral virtues be always distinguished by rewards and honours. 
5. To protect and defend individual Rights, under the strictest responsibility. 
6. To report meritorious conduct, keeping a register of the services and virtues of every Citizen, in order to present and recommend them-to the Directory, and to propose them as deserving persons to the National Chamber.
</list>
XXXIX. In virtue of the foregoing Articles it belongs to the Senate :-To sanction: 
<list>
1. Regulations and Ordinances for every Publick Body or Ad, ministration, proposed by the Directory. 
2. Declarations of War, or measures against Aggressions, with the previous consent of the National Chamber. 
3. Treaties of Peace, and other Treaties with Foreign Nations. 
4. Taxes and Contributions, with the previous assent of the National Chamber. 
5. Estimates of the Publick and Fiscal Expenses prepared by the Executive. 
6. Debts and Foreign Loans, if proposed on any extraordinary exigency, with the previous assent of the National Chamber. 
7. The creation or suppression of Offices, and their salaries. 
8. The formation of Cities, Towns, and the demarkation of Territories. 
9. The ceremonies, objects, rewards, and honours, of National Festivals. 
10. Publick Establishments of every description. 
11. The ingress, or stationing, of Foreign Troops, or Squadrons, within the jurisdiction of the State, and the manner in which it is to be effected. 
12. The departure of Naional Troops from the Territory of the State. 
13. The Land and Sea Forces for each Year, or as Publick urgency demands. 
14. To urge the Directory, at any time, to negotiate a Peace. 
15. To sanction rewards and honours to deserving Citizens. 
16. To regulate the Law, Weight, and Mould of the Coinage. 
17. To examine and approve the application of the Publick Revenue, every Year, and at any time when it may deem it necessary. 
18. To declare and register the Right of Citizenship. 
19. To propose to the National Chamber the Persons who are to be declared deserving, in order that the Chamber may confirm the same, if their merits are of an ordinary kind; or to consult the Nation respecting them, if they are of a superior description. 
20. To declare when there is cause to institute Criminal Proceedings against any Publick Functionary, who shall, in the mean while, be suspended from office. 
21. To sanction the privileges which the Directory shall propose, for the Inventors or Promoters of useful establishments. 
22. To sanction the acquisition or alienation of Publick Property. 
23. To approve the apportionment of Taxes in the Departments. 
24. To exercise the right of Police and Correction in the place of its sittings, and in the district in which it deliberates.
25. To exercise the right, of proposing Laws each Year, during 2 periods of 15 days each: the first to commence at the termination of the month in which the visiting Senate shall conclude its annual visit; and the second, 6 months after the first period. Also, of inviting the Directory at any time to propose such Law as it may consider necessary or suitable to the interests of the State. 
26. To consult the National Chamber, in respect of accusations and criminal causes against Senators; who shall be tried by the Supreme Court of Justice, after the National Chamber shall have declared that there is cause for the formation of a process, with the concurrence of the Senate. 
</list>
XL. The President of the Senate shall be elected annually in the Electoral Assemblies, and the Election must fall on one of the Senators for the time being. 

TITLE VII. 
<title> OF THE FORMATION OF THE LAWS.
XLI. The Supreme Director shall propose the Law to the Senate, after it shall have been approved and signed by his Council of State. 
XLII. The Law being received, the Senate shall sanction it, if it consider it useful, and necessary for the publick good. 
XLIII. If it appertain to War, Contributions, or Loans, it shall assemble and obtain the assent of the National Chamber, after which it shall sanction it. 
XLIV. Should the Senate consider the Law proposed prejudicial or unnecessary, it shall return the same to the Director with its observations; in which case, the Director may either withdraw his proposition, or transmit it a second time to the Senate, with answers to the objections. 
XLV. Should the Senate still deem it prejudicial, it shall suspend its sanction, and shall declare its veto, after it shall have consulted the opinion of the National Chamber. 
XLVI. A Law, approved by the Chamber, shall necessarily receive the sanction of the Senate; and, if rejected by the Chamber, it shall be considered as not having been proposed. 
XLVII. On the occasion of the veto, or the suspension of the Senate, the National Chamber must have been legally convoked. 
XLVIII. No Law shall be proposed to the Senate until it has been discussed three times in the Council of State, and unless it shall have been printed eight days before the discussion. The Senate shall not sanction or return it without three further discussions on the observations of the Director. 
XLIX. At the two periods of' the Year, when the Senate shall possess the right of proposing Laws, the Supreme Director shall sanction the Law, under similar regulations, and with the consultive Vote of the Chamber. 
L. The proposed Law shall be discussed in the Council of State, with the previous observations of the Ministers, who, in all cases, shall possess the right to give their opinions in the said Council. 
LI. The Senate may suspend an Executive Act, or one seriously prejudicial or inexpedient, by referring it back to the Director. Should he reply, and persist, without satisfactorily explaining the objections, or defer his reply for a longer period than that fixed by the Senate, the Senate shall pronounce its veto, and convoke the National Chamber, in order to approve or suspend the same. 

TITLE VIII.
<title> OF THE MEANS OF RENDERING EFFECTIVE THE OTHER ATTRIBUTES OF THE SENATE.
LII. Each Senator shall be an Inspector, for the term of a Year, of some Tribunal, Magistracy, Administration, Corporate Body, or Publick Establishment, (except the Directory and the National Chamber) he shall preside over its affairs one or more days in the month, but not at stated or fixed periods; he shall regulate their order, make his observations, and communicate the same to the Senate or the Government. 
LIII. In order to decide upon the merit of Citizens, three Senators shall be especially charged with adopting and regulating the instructions and justifications necessary for that purpose; they shall render an account thereof to the Senate, and cause the same to be recorded in the General Register of Civick Merit, in which the Provinces shall be separated. There shall be a Secretary, solely for this Department. 
LIV. All Functionaries, to whatever class or dignity they may belong, shall be bound to render a faithful account to the Municipalities, of the merit and service of each Citizen; which they will convey to their respective Political Chiefs, in order that the latter may be enabled to give documentary evidence thereof to the Senate as well as to the Directory. The same may be rendered by private Citizens. 
LV. It is a crime deserving of publick accusation for any Functionary or intermediate Authority to omit giving such account, or remitting the same to the Senate. 
LVI. The Senate, after consultation with the Directory, or being urged thereto by it, shall propose the deserving Citizens. 
LVII. To make known those deserving in a high degree, (after consulting with the National Chamber, in order to obtain its assent,) it shall propose them for the approval or rejection of the Electoral Assemblies, at their periodical meetings. 
LVIII. Every Senator shall, in each Year, visit some of the Provinces of the State, so that every 3 Years the whole may be visited by him. 
He shall therein personally enquire into: 
<list>
1. The merits and services of the Citizens. 
2. Their moral and civil habits. 
3. The observance of the Laws. 
4. The fulfillment of the duties of Functionaries. 
5. Publick Education and Instruction. 
6. The Administration of Justice. 
7. The collection of the Fiscal and Municipal Funds. 
8. The training of the Militia. 
9. The local Police, Charity, and Benevolence. 
10. Religious conduct. 
11. All other objects connected with his office. 
</list>
LIX. He shall conform to the Instructions of the Senate, in what regards the attributes of that Magistracy, and to those of the Directory in what belongs to the Executive Power; his duties on these occasions are, to advise, instruct, and report upon the conduct of, the respective local Authorities, and to declare if there be ground for Legal Proceedings; transmitting, in the latter case, documentary evidence thereof to the Tribunals appointed by the Constitution and the Law; the Functionary being in the meanwhile suspended from his office. 

TITLE IX.
<title> OF THE NATIONAL CHAMBER.
LX. The National Chamber is a meeting of National Counsellors, in a temporary Assembly. 
LXI. To become a National Counsellor it is necessary: 
<list>
1. To be an eligible Citizen. 
2. To be 30 Years of age. 
3. To possess Property of the value of 1000 dollars at least. 
</list>
LXII. Counsellors shall not be answerable for their opinions. They shall remain in office during S Years, one of them being renewed in each Year. During the first 7 Years the lot shall decide who are to be renewed. The Members who have died, who may be incompetent, or have been dismissed, shall be considered as having been drawn by the lot, and shall be included in the number deficient. 
LXIII. There shall not be less than 50, nor more than 200, whatever may be the extent of the population. 
LXIV. The Counsellors shall meet in the same place as the Senate and Directory. The lot shall decide which of those who inhabit other Provinces shall attend the sittings when they take place in the Capital. 
LXV. The National Chamber shall be legally and actually convoked by the Act of a suspensive veto of the Senate, or of the Supreme Director, when the sanction shall belong to him.
LXVI. A Minister of State, a Secretary of the Senate, and the Procurator General, shall cite the Chamber, in virtue of the Veto or Senatorial Decree, and shall preside at the ceremony of drawing lots for the Assembly. For that purpose they shall place the names of all the Counsellors living in the Capital, in an urn, out of which 25 shall be drawn by lot, who shall assemble immediately in the Hall of the Sessions, and as soon as they shall have elected their President, the former shall retire. In default of any of the Functionaries who may be drawn, the others shall be eligible for the Assembly. 
LXVII. No National Chamber shall be formed unless four-fifths of those drawn by lot be assembled, and in default of that number, the same Chamber shall have a fresh drawing, by lot, and continue in Session, until it be completed. 
LXVIII. A whole day shall not elapse between the pronouncing of the Veto and the assembling of the Chamber. 
LXIX. The attributes of the National Chamber are: 
<list>
1. To approve or reject the Laws which may be proposed, in the following Form only: "It ought to be sanctioned." "It ought not to be sanctioned." 
2. To approve or reject a Declaration of War, measures of defence, taxes, and loans, although no Veto may have preceded; under the same Form as that for Laws. 
3. To approve in the same Form the proposal of deserving Persons of an ordinary and of a superior description. 
4. To nominate the Tribunal to protect the Liberty of the Press, the Censors, and the Commission for the trial of those Individuals. 
</list>
LXX. The National Chamber shall have 3 Sittings for legislative consultations, with an intermission of 3 days between each of them. On the first, the Law shall be presented to them, when it shall hear the Orators of the Senate and the Directory, which shall consist of a Minister or Councillor of State and a Secretary of the Senate. On the second and third, it shall discuss the matter, and, on the last, shall definitively decide upon it. The Orators shall not be present during the discussion and decision. 
LXXI. For Executive Acts it shall have 2 Sittings on two succeeding days. On the first, the Veto shall be presented to it, and it shall hear the Orators; on the second it shall decide; the discussion taking place on both days. 
LXXII. On any extraordinary occasion the Chamber shall previously declare if there be urgency; it shall, however, decide within the time appointed, but not in less than two sittings, although the interval be but a few hours. 
LXXIII. The Ministers of State, the Secretary of the Senate, and the National Procurator, shall not exercise the functions of Counsellors during their Office.
LXXIV. The National Chamber shall be immediately annulled: 
<list>
1. If it assemble without a previous Veto, or for any other purpose than that clearly and distinctly appointed by the Constitution. 
2. If, after meeting, it attempt to be a permanent Body. 
3. If it extend its deliberations beyond the specifick object proposed by the Veto, and designated by the Constitution. 
4. If it attempt to alter, modify, or add to, the proposition submitted to it, or to extend its powers beyond the approval or rejection, of a Law, of an Executive Act, or of the declaration and report respecting meritorious Individuals. 
</list>

TITLE X.
<title> OF ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES. 
LXXV. The Citizens of Chili shall meet in Electoral Assemblies, to proceed to the Elections, Nominations, and Censures established by the Constitution. 
LXXVI. The meeting of Citizens in the number and form required by the Constitution, for the purpose of electing, censuring, or nominating meritorious Individuals, as Citizens, qualified to fill, and be proposed for, the Magistracies of the State, agreeably to the Law, constitutes an Electoral Assembly. 
LXXVII. An Electoral Assembly shall, for the present, be formed in every District, Parish, or Section of the Municipalities, which contains 200 voting Citizens; and, as the Population increases, an Assembly shall be formed for every Population which does not contain upwards of 400. 
LXXVIII. Although there be one-fourth above or below the required number of Citizens in the whole of the Municipality, or in its respective Districts, Parishes, or Sections, an Electoral Assembly shall nevertheless be formed: but, should the excess or deficiency be greater, one district shall be joined to another of the same Municipality. A Municipality shall have the right to form an Electoral Assembly, although the number of its Citizens be less than that required for the ordinary Assemblies. LXXIX. The Assembly shall proceed as a National Electoral Assembly when it elects or censures Functionaries of the Nation; and as a Provincial Assembly when they belong to a Department. 
LXXX. All Chilians shall be Members of the Electoral Assemblies, who are possessed of a legal certificate of Citizenship without any other qualification. 
LXXXI. A Regidor, or, in his absence, a Prefect or Inspector, shall convoke the Electoral Assembly to meet at the place appointed. 
LXXXII. A list shall be placed on the table of each Assembly, of the Citizens who compose it, who must be matriculated in the General Register of their Municipality.
LXXXIII. In the presence of the Citizens assembled at the hour and on the day appointed by Law, there shall be placed in the urn the names of those of the Assembly who are inscribed in the Municipal Register. The ballot shall proceed until 12 Individuals, who can read and write, be drawn; the first 6 of whom shall be the Committee of Scrutiny, and the remaining 6 their substitutes. 
LXXXIV. The Scrutineers being appointed, the convoking Functionary alone shall have the inspection of the Police. 
LXXXV. The Scrutineers shall elect a President and Secretary from amongst themselves, to whom the convoking Functionary shall deliver the lists of the Elections, and the National and Provincial censures, containing the number of Individuals who are to be balloted. 
LXXXVI. The Ballot shall decide which half of the Individuals composing the Assembly shall retire, without reference to the Absentees, or Members who may be unable to attend. 
LXXXVII. The List of Individuals drawn shall be immediately posted up in the most publick places of the District, and on the following day, between 6 o'clock in the Morning and 6 in the Evening, the suffrages of each Citizen shall be taken, who, at the time of voting, shall receive the List, and may retire alone to a convenient spot, (accompanied by the Secretary, if he be unable to read) and indicate upon the List each Person whom he desires to elect or censure. The Secretary shall be sworn to secrecy, and to the faithful discharge of this duty. 
LXXXVIII. The Electoral Lists shall contain the names of the Persons legally qualified for each of the Employments which are to be filled up in these Elections; the Names of the Functionaries subjected to censure; and the Names of those proposed as meritorious in the highest degree, which shall be distinguished by a mark attached to each Name. 
LXXXIX. The Citizens who remain 4 vote, after the drawing by Lot, and other arrangements, whatever be their number, shall form a Legal Assembly. 
XC. All doubts shall be decided by the Scrutineers, on the first day, without appeal (unless it affect their personal responsibility). If their votes be equal, that of the President shall be decisive. 
XCI. As soon as the voting is concluded, it shall be made publick: and four legalized Copies thereof shall be prepared, and transmitted to the Municipality, the Chief of the Department, the Directory, and the Senate. The urn which contains the votes shall be kept in a secure place, locked with two keys, one of which shall be kept by the President of the Scrutineers, and the other by the Political Chief, until the Votes be promulgated by the Directory.

TITLE XI.
<title> QUALIFICATION AND CENSURE OF FUNCTIONARIES.
XCII. The Constitution requires, that the principal portion of its Functionaries be elected directly by the Nation, their competency being previously ascertained. 
XCIII. The fitness of the Functionary will be made known by the qualification, which must be verified by the Constitutional Magistracies. 
XCIV. The Electoral Assemblies will, therefore, elect to vacant Offices those Persons only who are entitled to them, and are qualified for the employment. 
XCV. The Departmental Councillors alone will be elected by the Delegations, without a previous qualification. 
XCVI. The Nation has also the right to displace its Functionaries, Should they not fulfill their duties, or abuse their Ministry. 
XCVII. The exercise of this National faculty is called the Censure, and the Nation shall verify it every 2 years, for the present, in its periodical Electoral Assemblies. For this purpose, there shall be delivered to each Citizen, at the time of voting, a List of the Persons whom the Constitution subjects to the censure. 
XCVIII. Should a Functionary be censured by a majority of the votes of the Nation, or of the respective Provinces, he shall be deprived of his employment. He shall not be reputed a delinquent, unless he shall have been legally judged: should he be declared innocent, he shall not, however, be restored within the period of the same Elections. 
XCIX. The National Electoral Assemblies shall possess the right to elect and censure the Supreme Director; the Senators; the Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice; the Military of, and superior to, the rank of Colonel; the Fiscal Inspectors; the Directors of National Economy; the Procurador General; the Counsellors of the National Chamber; and, for the present, the Ministers of the Court of Appeal. 
C. They shall also possess the exclusive right to censure the Ministers and Councillors of State, and the Members of the Tribunal of the Liberty of the Press. 
CI. The Electoral Provincial Assemblies, in their respective districts, shall possess the right to elect and censure the Members of the Court of Appeal, whenever, as a consequence of the increase of the Population, the States shall possess different Courts; and also the Departmental Councillors. 
CII. They shall possess the exclusive right to censure the Governors, Intendants, and Judges. 
CIII. They shall possess the right to present for Archbishopricks and Bishopricks.
CIV. Each election or provincial censure shall be performed solely by the Assemblies comprehended within the districts of the jurisdiction of the Functionary, or of the whole Body, one of the Members of which is to be elected or censured. 
CV. The Delegates and Regidors can be censured only by the Councils of Department, in accordance with the Chief of the Department, and with the consent of two-thirds of the whole number of Voters. 
CVI. The qualification of Persons as eligible for employments shall take place in the following form. The Senate, the Supreme Director, and the Departmental Councils, each in its particular Magistracy, shall qualify from 1 to 3 Persons for each employment vacant, of those contained in Article XCLX. 
CVII. The Departmental Councils may qualify, generally, 3 persons belonging to other Provinces, for general employments; but not more than one person of their own Province. For Provincial Employments they may qualify indiscriminately, from their own or from another Province. The qualification of the same person by various Authorities is unobjectionable and legal. 
CVIII. Three persons, at least, shall be proposed for Provincial Employments, by the Supreme Director, the Senate, and the Departmental Council of the Province. These employments are comprehended in those mentioned in Articles CI. and CIII. 
CIX. Each qualifying Authority shall transmit its propositions in duplicate to the Senate and Directory, and those from every part of the Nation shall be printed and published by the 8th of September. 
CX. Qualified Persons, who may wish to withdraw from the election, shall express such wish within 40 days immediately following the 8th of September, in order that their names may be erased from the Lists of eligible Persons. The employments of Councillors, Departmental Councillors, and Municipal Functionaries cannot be declined. 
CXI. The Electoral Assemblies, throughout the Nation, shall meet on the 10th of December, the Lists of eligible Persons being previously sent to all the Municipalities. 
CXII. Vacant Employments, before the periodical Elections take place, if they be general, shall be filled up by the Director, with the concurrence of his Council of State, and if they be Provincial, by the Governor-Intendant, subject to the confirmation of the Supreme Director. 
CXIII. A Person elected for two Employments, may select which he prefers, and that which he declines shall be filled by the Person who obtained the majority of Votes. In an equality of votes for an employment, the question shall be decided by lot. 
CXIV. No Citizen shall be appointed to electoral employments, nor to any which are honorary, jurisdictional, or are rewarded with salary, or emoluments from the State, exceeding 500 dollars, of whatever class, or description, who shall not have obtained his civic merit, or have legally acquired the same by having held such an employment without salary. 
CXV. Civic merit is a particular service to the Country which protects his rights, and whose prosperity is identified with that of the Citizen. The Senate shall frame a regulation describing the services which constitute civic merit, whose bases are: 
<list>
1. To serve 5 Years in the National Militia. 
2. To make improvement in landed property, beneficial to the State, as indicated by Law. 
3. To be a Proprietor, or experienced Agent, of any art or useful industry, the materials of which are the production of the Country. 
4. To be occupied for some time, gratuitously, in giving instruction, for the encouragement of morality, science, or industry. 
5. To execute, gratuitously, laborious duties at the instance of the Publick Authorities. 
6. To contribute by means of talent, money, or personal labour, towards a publick object. 
7. To serve usefully and gratuitously in the administration of the State. 
8. To be the Author of some literary work, or to discover means of advancing the National prosperity. 
9. To provide useful employment for women and mendicants. 
10. To encourage the establishment of manufactories. 
11. To subscribe towards Funds or Companies destined to promote agriculture, mining and commerce. 
12. To assist gratuitously, or to any considerable extent, in the erection and support of correctional prisons and hospitals, and other establishments of charity and beneficence; and in works of local Police, cleanliness, and ornament. 
13. To hold voluntarily a considerable share in Publick roads, bridges, canals, or other works, for the purpose of facilitating Commerce. 
14. To be employed in any Campaign, in the service of the State, without personal reproach, or to perform distinguished services in garrison. 
15. To undertake gratuitously, municipal functions, or those of Departmental Councils. 
16. To be engaged in succouring distressed, infirm, or maimed persons. 
17. To promote with zeal the observance of religious morality, and sacred worship. 
18. To be occupied with the study of medicine, moral philosophy, or natural science.
19. To be declared meritorious, in consequence of celebrity in the institutions and departments of education. 
20. To contribute gratuitously to any fiscal or public expence. 
21. To be the Father of more than 6 legitimate Children. 
22. The advantages to result to the well deserving shall be decided in proportion to their civic merit, at the discretion of the legislature. 
</list>

TITLE XII. 
<title> OF THE JUDICIAL POWER. 
CXVI. The Judicial Power shall protect the rights of individuals, agreeably to the following principles 
CXVII. It shall deprive no one of their property, except on the ground of publick necessity, declared by the Senate to be extremely urgent, but not without previous indemnification. 
CXVIII. The personal right of presenting petitions to the constituted Authorities, without restriction or modification, shall be free, if exercised legally and respectfully. 
CXIX. No partial Assembly of Citizens shall assume to itself the sovereignty or rights of the Nation, or exercise Publick Authority or Functions without formal Delegation. 
CXX. The house of a Citizen shall be inviolable; and can only be searched by virtue of an especial decree of the competent Authority, previously exhibited to the owner of the house. 
CXXI. Every Judge is answerable for the delays and abuses of the Judicial Forms. 
CXXII. No one shall be condemned unless judged legally, and in virtue of a Law promulgated anterior to the act committed. 
CXXIII. No one shall be imprisoned except in the cases provided for by Law, and agreeably to its forms. Whoever shall decree or execute an arbitrary arrest shall be severely punished. 
CXXIV. No one shall be imprisoned or detained except in his own house, or in a publick place destined for that purpose. 
CXXV. The person charged with the custody of prisoners, or detained persons, shall not receive any one until after lie shall have inserted in his register the decree, ordering the arrest, by which lie may be enabled to prove that he acted under competent authority. 
CXXVI. No interdict shall prevent a Senator, or the Magistrate who superintends the Prison, from visiting the accused. 
CXXVII. Every person, at the moment of his being arrested or imprisoned, shall receive a certificate, wherein it shall be set forth that lie is detained by order of the proper Judge. The Officers of the prison shall acquaint the Senate, or the Representatives of the Provinces, with the fact, should the accused desire it, and transmit his Official communications either to the Judge or to the Post Office.
CXXVIII. No one shall be imprisoned more than 48 hours without being informed of the cause of his detention, and of the measures which have been taken in consequence thereof. 
CXXIX. During a trial the witnesses shall be confronted after their declaration, should either party require it. The Judge shall examine the witnesses in criminal causes. 
CXXX. The accused may defend his own cause, or employ legal advisers for that purpose. He may at any time summon the Judges to the prison, or write to them, if they be distant, or to the Authorities superior to the Judges. Letters on criminal causes shall be faithfully and gratuitously delivered. 
CXXXI. Those who visit prisons in virtue of their office shall be responsible for arbitrary acts within the same, unless they protest against them. 
CXXXII. The penalty of confiscation, and infamy descending punishments, are wholly prohibited. 
CXXXIII. The Judge and any Functionary objected to, shall immediately cease to act; but the person who challenges him shall be liable to punishment if his objection be without cause, and not sanctioned by the law. Few obstacles will thus exist to the right of challenge; one of the principal guarantees. 
CXXXIV. When sufficient security has been given for the person, or the property, no one, unless condemned to corporeal punishment, shall be imprisoned or detained. 
CXXXV. The prompt application of punishment, propriety of conduct, and the certain reward of virtue, are the principles by which the Law will prevent crime. 
CXXXVI. No one shall be tried, except in a Tribunal previously established by the Law, and never by a Special Commission. In every case the parties shall be allowed to apply to the Judges for judgments and depositions. 
CXXXVII. No law-suit shall be carried further than the Courts of First Instance and Appeal. Suits of nullity shall be admitted only when the essential forms of judicial proceeding established by Law shall have been departed from ; the Tribunal which tried the suit, being retained in such cases, and deciding the question of nullity upon the principal ground alleged in support of it. 
CXXXVIII. Any Citizen who shall remonstrate against arbitrary or unjust conduct on the part of the constituted Authorities, owing to the essential forms of proceeding not having been adhered to, or the superior Decree for the protection of his rights having been willfully disregarded, shall be gratuitously assisted in his remonstrance, by all the Judicial Functionaries, he giving security for the expenses in the event of his remonstrance being declared to be unfounded.
CXXXIX. In civil society, all citizens shall be of the same condition. The veteran class of the Army shall for the present preserve its military condition conformably to the existing laws. 
CXL. Writings not communicated, scarcely exceed the responsibility of thought, with respect to which, therefore, measures of security only can be taken against their becoming afflictive. 
CXLI. Every delinquent found in the act, may be arrested without a Decree, and by any person, for the purpose only of taking him before the competent judge.
CXLII. Neither rates, personal services, or any species of tax or contribution, shall be demanded unless by virtue of a publick regulation legally approved, and in pursuance of a Decree of the competent authority consequent upon such regulation, which shall be exhibited to the citizen at the time of application. 

TITLE XIII.
<title> OF THE SUPRE31E COURT OF JUSTICE.
CXLIII. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be the first judicial magistracy of the State. 
CXLIV. It shall be composed of 4 Members, a President, and the National Procurador, who must possess all the qualifications requisite for a Minister of State, be of the profession of the law, and have practised for 10 years as Advocates. 
CXLV. As a body, it shall be styled Excellency, in common with the Senate, and the Supreme Director, and its members shall be styled Senhors. 
CXLVI. Its attributes are: 
<list>
1. To protect, and to cause to be respected, on its demand, by other authorities, the individual and judicial guarantees. 
2. To take cognizance of the nullities of sentences of Courts of Appeal, in the particular case, and in the manner, pointed out by the Constitution. 
3. To take cognizance judicially, and agreeably to the Law of Nature and of Nations, of questions concerning Ambassadors and other diplomatick Ministers. 
4. Of matters of local jurisdiction, and of those of diocesan and ecclesiastical dignities, which, according to the laws, privileges, patronage, and national independence, belong to the judicial sovereignty of the Nation. 
5. Of civil and criminal causes, concerning the Supreme Director, the Senators, Ministers, and Councillors of State, and of Ministers of the Courts of Appeal. 
6. Of the proceedings of the Chiefs of the General Administration, or Departmental Government.
7. Of causes relating to National Patronage. 
8. Of charges of violence, throughout the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal of the capital. 
9. Of matters of competency between the Superior Tribunals. 
</list>
CXLVII. The Courts of Appeal shall take cognizance in the first instance, of such of the foregoing matters as legally admit of appeal, and the appeal shall be carried before the Supreme Court of Justice. In causes concerning Ministers of' the Courts of Appeal, the Law Judges shall take cognizance thereof in the first instance, and the Supreme Court decide on appeal. 
CXLVIII. The Supreme Court shall have an immediate superintendence, and a correctional, regulatory, and moral ministry, over the Tribunals and Courts of the Nation. It shall also have jurisdiction over the Criminal Police, agreeably to the regulation to be made concerning these attributes. 
CXLIX. In pursuance of the foregoing Article, the Supreme Court alone shall take cognizance: 
<list>
1. Of vexatibns, delays, and other offences, and injuries; caused by the Judges of Appeal, as a consequence of the judgments they pronounce; proceeding summarily, without altering the Court, and for the purpose only of declaring the personal responsibility of the judge, after the process shall have been concluded. If, during the law suit, appeals be made against such abuses, they shall be peremptorily decided within 8 days. 
2. Of doubts concerning the meaning of a law, in concert with the Senate, which shall give its opinion. 
3. It shall submit annually to the Senate, a memorial respecting the improvements which it may deem advisable in the administration of justice. 
4. It shall propose 3 persons to the Supreme Director, in order that he may select and nominate one of them for a Law Judge. 
5. It shall name the lawyers who are to settle disputes in the Court of Appeals, and the substitutes for its Ministers. 
6. One of its members shall visit every jail, and place of continement in the capital, monthly, without privilege or exception whatever. 
7. It shall report every month the business which has been transacted in the Tribunals, in order to encourage expedition. 
8. In contentious matters, which might occasion scandalous dissension and injury to families or the State, it may compel the parties to on accommodation sanctioned by one of its members. 
9. Each member may act as a judge Conciliator in the capital, this being one of his principal attributes. 
10. It shall be charged with the consultive and preparatory labour of framing the legal codes of the State, which it shall conclude within the time, and in the form, prescribed by the Senate.
</list>
CL. Its members shall continue in office for life, unless they fail in their duty, or be censured. 
CLI. The attributes of the Procurador General are 
<list>
1. To bring forward all business of a publick nature. 
2. To defend the constitutional guarantees, when violated by the first Magistracies of the State. 
3. To maintain the National rights of all classes, of whatever Nation; and those of the country, in respect of itself, or of the Directory. 
4. To prosecute all publick functionaries, officially, or in virtue of legal denouncements, publick or secret, he being personally responsible for any neglect or connivance. 
5. To claim before the Senate the declaration or proposal in favour of deserving persons, who have rendered service to the State, without expence to the individuals. 
6. He shall, moreover, take part in all that relates to publick and fiscal business; to national morality; to the moral police of the ecclesiastical hierarchy; to remonstrances against abuses respecting towns and persons, and to whatever appertains to the advancement of publick order ; having the right of petition and consultation before all the Supreme Powers, and before all the tribunals of the State. 
</list>
CLII. The Procurador-General shall have two Vice Procuradors attached to his Office. 

TITLE XIV.
<title> OF THE COURTS OF APPEAL.
CLIII. For the present there shall be one Court of Appeal for the whole State, composed of four Members and a President. As a body it shall be styled "most illustrious"; its Members, individually, Senhor, when addressed officially. 
CLIV. To be a Minister of the Court of Appeal, it is necessary that he be an eligible Citizen, be 30 years of age, and have exercised the profession. of the Law publickly for 8 years. 
CLV. As the increase of the population shall render it necessary, Courts of Appeal shall be established in places suited to the convenient Administration of Justice. 
CLVI. The attributes of such Courts are: 
<list>
1. To take cognizance in Appeals concerning Civil and Criminal business of the State, including that of any branch which may not have been mentioned in the Constitution. 
2. Of the proceedings of the judges of first instance, in the form prescribed in Section 1 of Art. 149. 
3. Of matters which require a practical or technical knowledge; calling to its aid experienced Persons as coadjutors; naming a merchant, a miner, or two persons employed in agriculture, to enable them to decide in such cases respectively ; matters of a fiscal nature being always decided by reference to the Chief of the branch to which the question may relate. 
</list>
CLVII. A regulation for the Administration of Justice shall designate the description of cases which may be brought in Appeal before the Court. 
CLVIII. One of the Members shall, in turd, visit every two months the publick offices of Notaries, to correct such defects as he may discover, or may have been pointed out to him by the Court. 
CLIX. The Court of Appeal shall take care that the judges in the Departments visit the gaols and places of Confinement; that they regulate the police thereof, and transmit to it detailed reports of all criminal causes, together with a statement of the condition and the number of prisoners and detained persons, and of what may be proper to be done; and shall send these details, with its observations, to the Supreme Court. 
CLX. One of its Members shall visit, every week, the prisons and places of confinement; shall personally interrogate the accused as well as the judges, and superintend their interior regulations and police. 
CLXI. If the imprisonment of a culprit shall have exceeded 6 months, it shall send weekly to the Supreme Court a separate bulletin of the progress of the cause, and of the grounds of his continued detention. 
CLXII. Advocates, Notaries, and Procuradors, shall be examined, and admitted to their functions by the Court of Appeal, which shall have the power of dismissing at its pleasure unfit members of the two last classes, without assigning their reason for so doing. 
CLXIII. There shall be delegates from the Court of Appeal, in the Provinces, who shall decide the cases of appeal, and pronounce the sentence upon them, after which the process shall be transmitted to the tribunal. If both parties agree, they may apply to the said court to decide and pronounce sentence. 
CLXIV. The Court of Appeal may for the present nominate as delegates the Secretaries of the Intendencies, until other lawyers and other measures are fixed upon. 
CLXV. The President of the Supreme Court shall take cognizance of objections against a Minister of the Court of Appeal ; and the Supreme Court of those against the whole of that tribunal. The Court of Appeal shall decide those against a Minister of the Supreme Court, and those against the whole of the Supreme Court shall be decided by the Senate. 
CLXVI. The members of the Court of Appeal shall continue in office for life, unless they fail in their duty, or be censured.

TITLE XV.
<title> OF JUDGES OF CONCILIATION.
CLXVII. No one shall bring a judicial suit before the ordinary tribunals, until after he have applied to the Judges of Conciliation. 
CLXVIII. All civil suits shall be submitted for conciliation, as well as such criminal ones as may admit of it without prejudice to the publick interests. Ecclesiastical suits, concerning personal rights and civil actions, may also be submitted for conciliation. 
CLXIX. It will be the duty of the conciliators to attend to the applications of the parties, and to the proofs advanced to explain the matter in dispute, and to encourage or propose a means of conciliation, informing the parties concerned of their respective rights. 
CLXX. If both parties decline conciliation, a certificate shall be given to them to enable them to apply to the tribunals. If either be disposed to compromise, the terms offered shall be recorded, and if the result of the judicial sentence be similar thereto in substance, the dissenting party shall be condemned in costs. 
CLXXI. In the affairs of minors, and of persons incapable of legal action, communication shall be had with their representatives, and the Court of Appeal shall confirm the conciliation, in matters of considerable import, and the Law Judges in those of minor importance. 
CLXXII. Fiscal actions admit of no conciliation. 
CLXXIII. When flight is apprehended, bail as security may be previously required. 
CLXXIV. In the Capital, the Judges of conciliation shall be the Members of the Supreme Court of Justice, and, in the Provinces which possess Law Judges, the Alcaldes of the municipality. Where there are no Law Judges, the Alcaldes shall take cognizance in the first instance, and one or two Regidors shall be Judges of conciliation. In matters of commerce, in the great Capitals, two merchants, with the title of Consul, shall fill that post, and one in the delegations or inferior cities. 
CLXXV. Affairs of minor importance shall be conciliated by the Prefects and other Regidors of the municipality. 

TITLE XVI
<title> PRACTICAL JUDGMENTS.
CLXXVI. When disputes arise respecting boundaries, local regulations, water courses, international affairs, matters concerning mines, and other objects, which essentially require local information, they shall be considered by competent judges, who shall enquire into the point in dispute, and promptly decide the same after a verified examination. 
CLXXVII. These judges shall be one or two persons named, with the consent of the parties interested, before the Judge Conciliator, or an ordinary tribunal, and they shall be necessarily compelled to decide within a prescribed period. 
CLXXVIII. If they be appointed Arbitrators, their sentence shall be without appeal. If they proceed in the usual manner, the appeal shall be decided before one or two judges named in the same form. 
CLXXIX. They shall cause their sentences to be carried into effect with the assistance of the Political Chief. 

TITLE XVII.
<title> DIRECTION OF NATIONAL ECONOMY.
CLXXX. There shall be a Magistracy in the State, under the title of the Direction of National Economy. 
CLXXXI. It shall be composed of at least 6 Directors of superior activity, education, and probity, who shall be removed if they be of an inert and passive character. It shall have a Secretary. 
CLXXXII. This Magistracy shall be charged with the inspection and direction of commerce, industry, agriculture, mercantile navigation, manufactures, mines, fisheries, roads, canals, the police of health, ornament and cleanliness, woods and plantations, general and particular statistics, publick benevolence; and whatever conduces to the advancement of industry, agriculture and trade. 
CLXXXIII. Two directors shall always be employed in executing the ordinary functions of the Directory; 2 shall be engaged, during the term of 4 years, in examining the maritime and territorial localities of the State, to establish or perfect therein the arrangements which the Directory have decreed; and the remaining 2 or more Directors shall repair as Envoys to Foreign Countries, and shall employ at least 5 years in their diplomatick and economical mission, their attention being directed to all matters connected with their department; to the selection of objects fit for adoption by the Country ; and to the procuring for it useful professors, and the aid that may be necessary for that purpose. 
CLXXXIV. They shall all, in the first instance, engage in the duties generally, and shall be alternately employed in such of them as the Government, after consultation with the council, shall direct. 
CLXXXV. They shall consult with the Government, in all matters connected with their institution, which shall be subject to its approbation. 
CLXXXVI. The revenues derived from commercial companies, mines, town lands, privileges, and municipal or publick funds, and from whatever may be at present or hereafter raised within the State, for its prosperity or internal improvement, shall be separated from the Fiscal Treasury, and be in charge of the Directory. 
CLXXXVII. They shall consult with the Departmental Councils, and the municipalities, concerning the direction, wants, and arrangements of the Provinces. 
CLXXXVIII. The directors shall retain their places at the pleasure of the Government, in concert with the Senate. 
CLXXXIX. The Senate shall act in accordance with the Supreme Director, in the sanctioning of their propositions. 

TITLE XVIII.
<title> OF INTERIOR GOVERNMENT.
CXC. The State shall be regularly divided into Departmental Governments, Delegations, Sub-delegations, Prefectures, and Inspections. 
CXCI. In each Department there shall be one sole Political and Military Government, which the Supreme Director shall nominate with the consent of the Senate. Its duration shall be at the pleasure of the Director, but subject to the censure of the Province. 
CXCII. The Delegations shall be governed by a Delegate, dependent on the Departmental Government. 
CXCIII. The Delegate shall be chosen from amongst 3 Persons proposed by the Departmental Council, and approved or rejected by its Governor, and shall be selected by the Supreme Director. He shall be subject to the censure of the Departmental Council, with the concurrence of two-thirds of its Members, and the Directorial approbation. His Office is for 4 Years. He may be re-elected by two thirds of the votes of the Electoral Assemblies. 
CXCIV. The Delegate shall name the Sub-delegates, Prefects, and Inspectors, subject to the approval or rejection of the Governor. In districts which have only one Prefect, he shall be the Sub-Delegate. 
CXCV. Ten inhabited houses, either in a town or in the country, shall constitute a Community, and be under an Inspector; and 10 Communities a Prefecture. 
CXCVI. The Prefectures shall be the political basis of the habits, virtues, police, and statistics. They shall form a family regulated by certain duties of mutual beneficence: they shall watch over and be answerable for the vicious, the wanderers, or poor of their Prefecture: they shall mutually assist each other, more especially when the chiefs of families are engaged in the defence of their Country. The Prefects shall be the ordinary judges in certain suits, and conciliators in others, according to tho regulation to he formed for the arrangement of such matters.
CXCVII. Inspectors shall be subordinate to Prefects, and be more immediately employed in the detail of the matters under their direction. 
CXCVIII. The Prefectures of a district shall depend on their respective Sub-delegation, and the latter on the Delegation. 
CXCIX. Neither the Police, the Senate, the Directory, the Governors, nor any Publick Authority, shall demand information from persons, respecting any crime, or offence, or the fitness, character, or conduct of any individual, which cannot be obtained through the proper organ for such matters, and according to the regulation prescribed. 
CC. Inspectors, Prefects, and Sub-Delegates, shall be exempt from all municipal payments, or extraordinary contributions, and by their office may obtain the Civic Merit. 
CCI. The attributes of the Departmental Governors are: 
<list>
1. To maintain publick order and security. 
2. To correct and watch over the fulfillment of the duties of the Functionaries as Directorial Representatives. 
3. To have the economical superintendence of the Fiscal and Publick Revenue. 
4. To promulgate the Laws, and carry them into effect in their respective Districts. 
5. To be subordinate to the Directory in all matters of Civil and Military Government, within their jurisdiction. 
</list>
CCII. They are prohibited from interfering in the judicial cognizance and imprisonment of Citizens, unless temporarily, and until they shall have been handed over to the respective judges. 
CCIII. To be a Governor or Delegate, it is requisite to be in the exercise of Citizenship, with the right of voting; to be 25 Years of age, and to have obtained the Civic Merit. 
CCIV. The Delegates and Sub-Delegates shall be subordinate to the Governor in their respective attributes. 
CCV. For the present there shall be 2 Law Judges in the Capital, and 1 in each Department, (and also in the Delegations, when the Population and applications shall have increased,) who shall take cognizance in the first instance, of all judgments not excluded by the Constitution, unless they be privileged causes. 
CCVI. He shall be the Assessor in all written causes, which may at present be brought before the Delegations, and shall be entrusted with whatever belongs to the Judicial Departmental power. 
CCVII. The Law Judge in the Departments, and an Alcalde in the Delegations, may act as substitutes for Political Chiefs. 
CCVIII. In the capital of each Department there shall be a Departmental Council, composed of a voting Member, or a substitute, which each Delegation shall name in the Electoral Assemblies. It shall be renewed every 3 Years, and its Members may be re-elected.
CCIX. The Governor shall preside over all its functions, with the exception of what concerns the qualification of Functionaries; and it shall assemble only at the Constitutional periods. Its faculties shall be consultive whenever the Constitution grants it no other prerogative. 
CCX. Its attributes shall be: 
<list>
1. To be the Council of the Governor in matters of moment, on which he may consult it. 
2. To be Censor of the Municipalities and Delegates, to inform the respective powers of their omissions or exactness, and even to displace them, if two-thirds of it agree thereto. 
3. To conduct within its Department the National economical administration. 
4. To watch over Publick Instruction, and the establishments of Piety and Charity. 
5. To superintend the legal collection of the Publick Revenue. 
6. To regulate with the Governor the proportion to be paid by each Delegation, of the contributions and charges imposed on the Department, the Government deciding in cage of disagreement. 
</list>
CCXI. The Departmental Council shall name the Municipalities of each District, on the information of the respective Delegate, and shall propose 3 Persons to the Directory for each Delegate, and agreeably to the Constitution. 
CCXII. This Council shall also qualify persons, for the National and Provincial employments, eligible in the Electoral Assemblies. 
CCXIII. It shall assemble, generally, at two periods of the Year, for one month at each time ; the first at the time of the qualification of the Functionaries, and the second, in the month of July; and, extraordinarily, at all times when it shall be called by the Governor in momentous cases. 
CCXIV. The Governor shall be chief member of the Council, except in matters of qualification. 

TITLE XIX.
<title> OF THE MUNICIPALITIES.
CCXV. There shall be Municipalities in all the Delegations, and also in the Sub-delegations where it may be convenient, composed of Regidors, who shall never exceed 12 in number, and, where it may be practicable, not be less than 7, with 1, if not 2, Alcaldes. 
CCXVI. The Members of the Municipalities shall be nominated by the respective Departmental Councils, and the respective Governments shall confirm them. The censure of them shall belong solely to the Departmental Council; and their suspension to the Political Chiefs, the cause being referred to the Tribunals. 
CCXVII. To be a Regidor it is necessary to be in the exercise of Citizenship, and to be 25 Years of age.
CCXVIII. It shall belong to the Municipalities to superintend, in their respective districts, the police, education, and customs, and the quota of the contributions; to form their Municipal Ordinances, subject to the approbation of the Senate ; and to attend to all the objects in general belonging to the Departmental Council, conferring with those Councils and the Direction of Economy. 
CCXIX. No one can decline Municipal duties, unless employed in the Finance or regular Army. 
CCXX. The peculiar functions of its Members are: 
<list>
1. Alcaldes shall be conciliators where there are Law Judges; and where there are none, they shall be the ordinary Judges, naming in their stead 2 Regidors for the conciliation. In the Capital there shall be no Alcaldes. 
2. The Senior Regidor shall watch over: Civic Merit, and other services of Citizens, and report thereupon to the Senate and the respective Authorities; the competency of Functionaries; and publick morality. 
3. The second: scientific and industrious education. 
4. The third: the police of health, security, ornament, cleanliness, and recreation, jails, and supplies for the town. 
5. The fourth: Agricultural police, security, and regulations. 
6. The fifth: the Arts, Trades, Manufactures, and every description of industry. 
7. The sixth: the defence and protection of Orphans, and other persons without civil representation ; of absentees, and the helpless. Also Hospitals, Workhouses, Houses of Correction, and all benevolent and pious Institutions. 
8. The seventh shall be the Syndic or Municipal Procurador, and be charged with the defence and receipt of Publick property, and with the direction and management of all claims and agencies, concerning objects of territorial improvement, whether in virtue of his Office, or by order of the Municipality. 
</list>
CCXXI. The remaining Regidors shall act as substitutes, or assist in the execution of the duties entrusted to the others. 
CCXXII. Each Regidor shall be rewarded by emoluments derived from the objects connected with their Institution, payment of which will result from the act or exercise of the functions confided to him ; he shall, on the other hand, be punished, if he do not fulfill his duty in respect of persons or matters in a satisfactory manner. 
CCXXIII. The cognizance and general deliberation of all the Municipality, in the business entrusted to the Regidors, shall not be prevented by special Commissions. 
CCXXIV. The Municipalities and their Regidors shall be subordinate to the Political Chief, who shall preside over them.

TITLE XX.
<title> OF THE NATIONAL FORCES.
CCXXV. The forces of the State are composed of all Chilians capable of bearing arms, for the maintenance of internal security and exterior defence. 
CCXXVI. The Publick Forces shall be essentially obedient. No armed body shall deliberate. 
CCXXVII. The Senate shall every Year decree the amount of the Permanent Army, which shall be the only Army of the State. 
CCXXVIII. The Publick Forces shall not pass from one Department to another, unless by virtue of a Directorial Decree, the case of Foreign Invasion excepted. 
CCXXIX. It shall not demand requisitions, nor any description of aid whatever, unless through the medium of the Civil Authorities, and by their express Decree. 
CCXXX. Every Chilian, in order to the enjoyment of his rights, must be inscribed or entered in the Registers of the National Militia, when he has reached the age of 18. 
CCXXXI. The Chilian Nation shall never declare itself in a state of War without previously inviting its Enemies to a reconciliation, by means of Plenipotentiaries, or through the arbitration of some other Power. Should it perceive any meditated hostile intention or aggression, it shall immediately make such overture, and in the meanwhile the Director shall adopt measures of defence, consulting with the Senate, and afterwards proceeding to the Declaration of Aggression, or of War, in the Constitutional Form, when that shall have taken place. 
CCXXXII. The Publick Forces shall be divided into a Veteran and a National Militia. 
CCXXXIII. In every Department, and in each Delegation, Corps of National Militia, both Infantry and Cavalry, shall be formed. 
CCXXXIV. A special Regulation shall organize every thing respecting the National Militias. 

TITLE XXI.
<title> OF THE PUBLICK REVENUE.
CCXXXV. The Legislative Body alone shall impose direct or indirect Contributions, and the levying of them in any part of the State or its Territory shall be prohibited without the authority of the Legislature, whether as temporary or voluntary, or on any other pretext whatever. 
CCXXXVI. Every Year, with the approbation of the Senate, a statement of the Income and Expenditure of such Year shall be published, divided according to the Departments of each Ministry of State.
CCXXXVII. No money shall be drawn out of the Publick Treasury, without a specification of the Law which authorizes the expense, and the amount which may be applied thereto. Any Treasurer who should pay any order exceeding that amount shall be responsible for the same. 
CCXXXVIII. The Publick Money shall be deposited in the Central Treasury and its Dependencies. Every Directorial Warrant shall be registered in the Accomptant General's Office, and in the Central Treasury. 
CCXXXIX. There shall be an Accomptant General's Office, where the accounts of all the Fiscal Departments and Branches shall be examined and liquidated. For the present there shall be only one Chief, possessing the title of Principal Accomptant. 
CCXL. The Municipal Revenues shall also be examined and liquidated therein as well as those belonging to the Direction of Economy of the State. 
CCXLI. There shall be a General Inspection of all the Fiscal, Publick, and Municipal Revenues of the State. 
CCXLII. Its Chiefs shall be two Fiscal Inspectors with their Departments respectively. 
CCXLII. The attributes of the Inspectors shall be: 
<list>
1. To remonstrate against all Directorial Warrants, not included in, or exceeding, the legal estimate. 
2. To register legal Warrants, and the grounds for their payment, or Fiscal Disbursements. 
3. To interpose or commence the legal proceedings in behalf of the Exchequer, should any neglect be discovered on the part of its Agents. 
4. To investigate the accounts, and verify the statements of the Accomptant General's Office. 
5. To explain doubts and legal enquiries, and the Regulations of the general administrations. 
6. To give information to the Senate, upon the Annual Estimates prepared by the Ministers, and on the expediency of the supplies which may be to be provided. 
7. To enquire into, and render an account to the Directory of, the fulfillment of Fiscal Laws. 
8. To watch over the legal organization and good management of all Fiscal Administrations and Treasuries, Publick and Municipal, belonging to the State. 
9. To give information, annually, to the Senate and Directory, on the abuses discovered, and on the improvements of which the Administration of these branches may be susceptible, and especially on the economy which may be practised in respect of the objects of Publick Expenditure.
10. To make remarks on the accounts of the Administration of the Revenue, giving explanations of the same to the Directory. 
11. To answer the enquiries of the Government and Senate on Fiscal matters, and to present to them organick projects. 
</list>
CCXLIV. One of the two Inspectors shall remain in the Capital, performing the said functions, and visiting carefully, every 3 months, all the administrations connected with their Department. 
CCXLV. The other shall be engaged a portion of each Year in visiting the Administrations of the State, so that in 4 Years the whole of them shall have been visited. 
CCXLVI. During those visits, abuses shall be corrected, Fiscal Enactments shall be established; the conduct, activity, and competency of the Functionaries shall be enquired into; arrangements may be provisionally suspended; and every thing shall be adopted which may appear conducive to the better regulation and improvement of their Administrations connected with their institution. 
CCXLVII. The Law shall regulate the alternate order of their duties, and the form of proceeding, of each of the Inspectors. 
CCXLVIII. There shall also be, in each week, economical Juntas of Finance, in the Capital and in the Provinces, composed of the principal Chiefs of each Department, and a Fiscal Inspector; those in the Capital under the presidency of the Minister of Finance, and those in the Provinces, under that of the Chief of the Department; for the purpose of consulting upon affairs of moment, or arrangements connected with the Exchequer and its Departments. 

TITLE XXII.
<title> NATIONAL MORALITY.
CCXLIX. In the Legislation of the State a Moral Code shall be drawn up, which shall prescribe, in detail, the duties of a Citizen at every period of his age, and in every condition of social life, in order to regulate his habits, employment, duties, publick education, religious conduct, and amusements; so that the Laws may serve as customs, and the customs as civic and moral virtues. The following Articles shall be the basis of the Code, which shall be prepared as speedily as possible. 
CCL. In the Register of National Morality or Merit of Citizens, which is to be kept by the Senate, the principal virtues for which the declaration of merit shall be given, are the following: 
<list>
1. Improvements effected in the Provinces, Delegations, and other Territories of the State, by the activity and zeal of their respective Chiefs. 
2. Improvements in Publick Establishments and Civil and Fiscal Departments, brought about by their Functionaries.
3. Reputation, obtained by Judges, for their extraordinary integrity and zeal for justice. 
4. Honourable and distinguished conduct, in respect of the Law, the Magistrates, and Parents. 
5. Valour, and remarkable activity in the fulfilment of military duties, and great danger encountered in defence of the Country. 
6. Magnanimity in proclaiming, defending, and protecting the merit of others. 
7. Zeal and sacrifices in defence of the oppressed, and for the just preservation of a Fellow-citizen. 
8. Subscriptions, or extraordinary personal exertions, for the encouragement of industry, general benevolence, and publick improvement. 
9. Subscriptions and sacrifices for the encouragement of moral, industrious, religious, and scientific instruction. 
</list>
CCLI. An establishment for lending money on pledges (Montepio) shall be formed, from the proceeds of a small tax imposed on those who may receive Publick and Fiscal salaries or emoluments, of every description. This fund shall be augmented: 
<list>
1. By a percentage on all trading Companies. 
2. By mulcts and pecuniary penalties levied by all Tribunals and Authorities. 
3. By a duty upon all collateral and foreign inheritances. 
4. By a tax upon the licences granted, and establishments permitted, for the proper recreation of the Citizens. 
</list>
CCLII. This fund shall be applied solely to rewards, in favour of Citizens who may be declared meritorious, of whatever class, or privilege; its destination being: 
<list>
1. The support of their Widows, Children, or Parents. 
2. The relief of the said meritorious Citizens, should they be reduced to evident poverty. 
3. A regulation shall prescribe the circumstances, form, and quota, of these Rewards, as well as the two or three fold amount to be granted to those declared meritorious in an eminent degree. 
</list>
CCLIII. Learning and literary talents, employed to the benefit of the Country, shall be rewarded from this fund; but with the indispensable condition that the Persons are distinguished for good conduct and morality. 
CCLIV. The Country shall take upon itself the gratuitous education of the Children of meritorious Persons, wholly, or in part, according to the means of the establishments. 
CCLV. It shall take upon itself, in like manner, the education of young Persons who possess extraordinary talents for the arts and sciences.
CCLVI. Every Student declared meritorious, by the Institutions, for particular good conduct, shall receive his education gratuitously, with the certainty of employment in his profession, unless he cease to conduct himself well. 
CCLVII. The promotion of publick instruction, industrious and scientific, shall be one of the first duties of the State. Two Publick Institutions shall be established in the Capital; one for industry, the other for science, which may serve as a model and seminary for the Institutions in the Departments. Primary Schools shall be established in all the towns and parishes. A moral Code, and in the mean time, a Regulation, shall organize the System of Education in the Institutions. 
CCLVIII. Four Civic Festivals shall be celebrated in each Year, with all exterior splendour, and every possible demonstration of respect to merit; on which days those who may have distinguished themselves, by virtues connected with such Festival, shall receive honours and rewards. These shall be bestowed for: 
<list>
1. Publick Benevolence and National improvement. 
2. Justice, filial love and respect; and obedience to the Magistracy. 
3. Agriculture and the Arts. 
4. National gratitude; and the encouragement of the eminently meritorious, and the Defenders of the Country. 
</list>
CCLIX. The Secretary of the Senate shall publish every 3 months, a "Civic Mercury," containing an account of the distinguished and extraordinary services of the People, Corporations, Magistrates, Military Bodies, Functionaries, and eminent Citizens of all ranks and classes in the State; and of the rewards which have been given to virtue. 
CCLX. Out of the funds of the Establishment for lending Money on Pledges, and in preference to others, 8 annual premiums shall be given as follows: 2 to the Chiefs of departments or territories who have most advanced the prosperity and morality of their jurisdictions: 2 to the most deserving agriculturists: 2 to the founders or supporters of any manufacture, useful to the Country, by the consumption of its produce ; and 2 to the citizens and functionaries most distinguished for publick benevolence, or services in their calling. 
CCLXI. The Inspectors and Prefects, and the Regidors of education and police, in their respective districts, shall be responsible: 
<list>
1. For the wandering and the vicious. 
2. For the want of education or instruction of all Chilians exceeding 10 years of age.
</list>

TITLE XXIII.
<title> OF THE USE OF THE PRESS.
CCLXII. The Press shall be free, and be protected and encouraged, in so far as it may lead to the promotion of morality and good conduct to the examination and discovery of useful objects within human reach, to the due exposition of the civic virtues and the faults of functionaries in employment, and the encouragement of proper and decorous amusements. 
CCLXIII. It shall be prohibited: 
<list>
1. From attacking the conduct of any private citizen, or the private actions of publick functionaries. 
2. From discussing the mysteries, dogmas, and religious and moral discipline, generally approved by the Catholick Church. 
</list>
CCLXIV. A Tribunal for the Liberty of the Press shall be formed, composed of 7 persons, from amongst 21, who may be rejected, or changed. Literary councillors shall also be appointed, and a judicial commission to decide upon the particular duties of those individuals who may be selected by the National Chamber; which shall frame a regulation detailing their respective attributes. 
CCLXV. Every writing intended for publication shall be submitted to the Council of good men, for the mere and only purpose of pointing out to the author any objectionable passages which it may contain. 
CCLXVI. Information thereof having been given to the author, he may either correct them, or vindicate them, without costs, in a publick proceeding before the Tribunal for the Liberty of the Press, which shall be limited to the mere inspection of the passages objected to, and he shall not afterwards be answerable for the publication. Should he not chuse to correct the same, or vindicate them before the Tribunal, he shall be at liberty to publish them, subject to the legal penalty attached to an abuse of the Press, if it prove so to be; but in such cases it shall not be printed, unless the author be a person of respectability, and enabled to give good security for personal responsibility. 
CCLXVII. A writing may be submitted anonymously for revision, and the Councillor shall keep it secret, if so required. 
CCLXVIII. No writing shall remain in the possession of the Councillor for a longer period than that prescribed by the regulation, after which it may be printed at the responsibility of the said Councillor. 

TITLE XXIV.
<title> OF INTERNAL TRANQUILLITY, PERMANENCY OF THE CONSTITUTION, AND OATH OF FUNCTIONARIES.
CCLXIX. In the event of any serious civil discord, or of an insurrection in any Province, the Senate, the Government, the Supreme Court of Justice, or the Departmental Council of the Capital, (either Body in default of the other), shall declare the convocation of the National Chamber, for the sole object of electing the Commission of National Conciliation. 
CCLXX. This Commission shall be composed of 3 National Councillors elected by a majority. They may elect those who are not Councillors, should the exigency of the moment require it. 
CCLXXI. From the moment of their election, their persons shall be inviolable. They shall have the right to present themselves before the Armies, or assemblies of the State, to treat with the chiefs or persons they may think proper, and safe conduct shall be given to them to repair to any place or conference whatever. 
CCLXXII. Whoever shall plot against the life or liberty of the National Conciliators, or of the persons charged with their safe conduct, shall be declared an Out-law, and be subject to the penalty of death. Such crime shall never be pardoned, and the Chief within whose jurisdiction it be committed, shall not be employed by the State, unless he punish it. 
CCLXXIII. The National Conciliators shall not command any armed corps, or join with any party under pain of death. 
CCLXXIV. They shall treat with the Chiefs of Provinces, or discordant parties, and shall employ every means in their power to reestablish order, conciliation, and obedience to the Laws. 
CCLXXV. The present Code shall be the permanent Constitution of the State. Neither the Senate itself, nor jointly with the National Chamber, can annul its laws, or suspend its fulfilment. 
CCLXXVI. Should circumstances, or an extended and satisfactory investigation, prove that any Law be objectionable, and its execution impracticable, the Senate shall propose its repeal, and the proposition shall be discussed in 3 monthly Sessions of 3 days each. It shall then be remitted to the National Chamber, in which it shall be discussed in 2 monthly Sessions of 2 days each: and should its repeal be approved by the Chamber, it shall be transmitted for the confirmation of the periodical Electoral Assemblies, which shall decide the question, affirmatively or negatively, in their respective ballots. 
CCLXXVII. Functionaries of every class and description belonging to the State, shall take the following oath on entering office: 
"That they will obey and defend the Constitution and the Laws of the State, the suspensive veto of the Senate, the resolutions of the National Chamber, and the orders and decrees of the Directory. That they will obey and recognise as functionaries, those nominated by the People in the Electoral Assemblies; and, if possible, chastise with the punishment of death, those who may attack the inviolability of the National Conciliators, or of those charged with their safe conduct." The Supreme Director, the Senators and Ministers of State, the Procurador-General, the Governors, Intendants and Delegates, the Departmental Councillors, and the Ministers of the Courts of Justice and Appeal, shall also swear that they profess the Roman Catholick Religion. 