CHAPTER I.-The State, Government and Sovereignty<title>
ART. 1. 
Chile is a unitary State. The Government is republican, democratic and representative. 
2. 
Sovereignty resides essentially in the nation, which delegates the exercise thereof to the authorities established by this constitution. 
3. 
No person or assembly of persons can assume the title or representation of the people, arrogate its rights or prefer petitions in its name. The infraction of this article is sedition. 
4. 
No magistracy, person or assembly of persons can take upon themselves, not even under the pretext of extraordinary circumstances, any authority or rights other than those expressly conferred upon them by the laws. Every act in contravention of this article is null and void. 
CHAPTER II.-Nationality and Citizenship<title> 
5. The following are Chileans:
<list>
(1) Persons born within the territory of Chile, except the children of foreigners who are in Chile in the service of their Government and children of foreigners passing through the country, all of which children may choose between the nationality of their fathers and Chilean nationality. 
(2) Children born of a Chilean father or mother in a foreign country, by the sole fact of taking up residence in Chile. The children of Chileans born abroad whose father or mother is in the actual service of the Republic are Chileans even for purposes where the fundamental laws or any other laws require birth in Chilean territory.
(3) Foreigners who have obtained a letter of naturalization in accordance with the law and who have expressly abandoned their former nationality. 
(4) Persons who have obtained a special grant of naturalization by law. 
</list>
Naturalized persons shall have the right to hold public office by popular election only after being in possession of letters of naturalization for 5 years. 
The law shall lay down the procedure for option between Chilean and foreign nationality; for the grant, refusal and cancellation of letters of naturalization and for the establishment of a register of all these acts. 
6. 
Chilean nationality is lost:
<list>
(1) By naturalization in a foreign country. 
(2) By the cancellation of letters of naturalization. 
(3) By entering the service, in time of war, of the enemies of Chile or of the allies of such enemies. 
</list>
Persons who for any of the causes mentioned in this article have lost their Chilean nationality can be rehabilitated only by law. 
7. 
Citizens with the right to vote are those Chileans who have completed 21 years of age, who can read and write and are inscribed in the electoral registers. 
These registers shall be public and valid for the period laid down by law. 
The inscriptions shall be continuous and shall be suspended only during the periods fixed by law. 
In the popular elections the ballot shall always be secret. 
8. 
The exercise of the right to vote is suspended:
<list>
(1) By reason of physical or mental incapacity which impedes free and responsible action. 
(2) By reason of the indictment of a citizen for a punishable crime. 
</list>
9. 
Citizenship, together with the right to vote, is lost:
<list>
(1) By having forfeited Chilean nationality. 
(2) By condemnation to punishment involving loss of civic rights. Persons who for this reason have forfeited citizenship may petition the Senate for rehabilitation. 
</list>
CHAPTER II.-Constitutional Guarantees<title>
10. 
The constitution assures to all the inhabitants of the Republic:
(1) Equality before the law. In Chile there is no privileged class. 
There are no slaves in Chile and those who enter the territory are free. Slave trade cannot be carried on by Chileans. 
Any foreigner who exercises it cannot reside in Chile or become a naturalized citizen of the Republic. 
(2) The manifestation of all creeds, liberty of conscience, and the free exercise of all forms of worship which are not contrary to morality, to good behavior or to public order, the respective religious faiths being able therefore to erect and maintain churches and dependencies thereof subject to conditions regarding safety and hygiene established by the laws and regulations. 
Churches, congregations and religious institutions of whatever creed shall have the rights which the laws at present in force grant and recognize with regard to property; they will, however, be subject, within the guarantees of this constitution, to the common law in the matter of the exercise of dominion over their future property. 
Churches and their dependencies dedicated to religious service are exempt from taxation. 
(3) The liberty to express opinions, without previous censorship, by word of mouth or in writing through the medium of the press or in any other manner without prejudice to the liability to be responsible for transgressions and abuses committed in the exercise of this liberty in the form and in the cases laid down by law. 
(4) The right of assembly without previous permission and without arms. In squares, streets and other public places, meetings shall conform to the general police regulations. 
(5) The right of association without previous permission, in accordance with the law. 
(6) The right of presenting petitions to the constituted authorities upon any subject of private or public interest with no other limitation than that such petitions shall be couched in proper and respectful terms. 
(7) Freedom of education. Public education is a prime interest of the State. Primary education is obligatory. 
There shall be a superintendency of public education charged with the inspection and direction of national instruction,  under the authority of the Government. 
(8) Admission to all public offices and duties, subject to no other conditions than those imposed by the laws. 
(9) Equal distribution of duties and taxes in proportion to property or in the scale or form fixed by law; as well as the equal apportionment of the other public obligations. Taxes, whether direct or indirect, can only be imposed by law and, without its special authorization, it is forbidden to any State authority or to any individual to impose them even under the guise of a voluntary contribution or under any other pretext. 
No kind of personal service or contribution may be demanded except in virtue of a decree issued by a competent authority and founded on a law authorizing such demand. 
No armed body may make requisitions or exact any kind of aid, except through the medium of the civil authorities, and in virtue of an order issued by such authorities. 
The system of recruiting and of providing substitutes for the land and sea forces shall be determined by a special law. 
All Chileans capable of bearing arms shall be bound to inscribe themselves in the military registers, unless especially exempted therefrom by law. 
(10) The inviolability of all property, without any distinction. 
No one may be deprived of his property or of any part thereof, or of any right which he may have thereto, except in virtue of a judicial sentence or by expropriation for some purpose of public utility, certified as such by law. In such case there shall previously be paid to the owner the indemnity arranged with him or fixed by the relevant award. 
The exercise of the right of property is subject to the restrictions and rules necessary for the maintenance and progress of the social order, and with this object the law may lay down obligations or impositions of public utility in the general interests of the State, of the health of the citizens and of the public welfare. 
(11) Exclusive ownership of discoveries and production, for the period conceded by law. Should the law require expropriation, proper indemnification shall be given to the producer or inventor. 
(12) Inviolability of domicile. The house of every person inhabiting Chilean territory may only be broken into for a special purpose designated by law, and in pursuance of an order issued by the competent authority. 
(13) Inviolability of epistolary and telegraphic correspondence. 
No public papers or documents may be opened, intercepted or noted, except in the cases especially provided for by law. 
(14) Security of labour, industry and works of social welfare, especially those referring to hygienic housing and economic conditions, of life, so as to provide each inhabitant with a minimum of welfare adequate for the satisfaction of his personal needs and of those of his family. This organization will be regulated by law. 
The State will favor the proper distribution of property and the constitution of family property. 
No kind of labour or industry may be prohibited, unless it be injurious to public morals, safety or health; or unless it be declared by a law that its prohibition is required by the national interest. 
It is the duty of the State to watch over the public health and the hygienic welfare of the country. Each year a sufficient sum of money must be appropriated for the maintenance of a national health service. 
(15) Liberty to sojourn in any part whatsoever of the Republic, to move from place to place and to leave the territory, provided always that the police regulations be duly observed and that no prejudice be thereby created to other persons. No one may be arrested, prosecuted, imprisoned or exiled, save in the manner determined by law. 
</list>
11. 
No person may be condemned, except after legal trial and in virtue of a law promulgated before the commission of the offense which the sentence concerns. 
12. 
No person may be tried by special commissions. 
Every person must be tried by the court prescribed and previously established by law. 
13. 
No person may be arrested save in virtue of a warrant issued by a public functionary expressly authorized thereto by law. Such warrant must first be communicated to him in legal form, unless he is caught in flagrante delicto, in which case he may be apprehended for the sole purpose of being taken before the competent judge. 
No person may be detained, deprived of his liberty as, a preventive measure or imprisoned save in his own house or in public places devoted to that purpose. 
14. Governors of prisons may not receive in such prisons any person, whether as a detained person or a person under trial or as a prisoner, without copying into their register the order of arrest issued by the duly authorized competent authority. They are, however, empowered to receive within the prison as detained persons those who may be brought there to appeal before the competent judge; but with the obligation to give an account thereof to the latter within 24 hours. 
15. 
If the authorities shall have caused any person to be arrested, they must inform the competent judge within the following 48 hours and must place the arrested person at his disposal. 
16. 
Every individual who shall have been arrested, charged or imprisoned in a manner contrary to that laid down in the preceding articles may apply, by himself or through any person acting in his name, to the court indicated by law, demanding that the legal forms be observed. This court may order that the accused be brought before it, and such order shall be implicitly obeyed by all those in charge of prisons or places of detention. Having acquainted itself with the facts of the case, the court shall order the immediate liberation of the accused, or shall cause the legal defects to be remedied, or shall place the accused at the disposal of the competent judge, proceeding in a summary and expeditious manner and either itself correcting defects or reporting to whomsoever it appertains to correct them. 
17. 
No order for debarring access to the prisoner can prevent the official in charge of the place of detention from visiting any detained, charged or imprisoned person who may be there. 
It is the duty of this official, whenever the party detained requires it, to transmit to the competent judge a copy of the warrant of arrest; or to demand that such copy shall be given to him or himself to give a certificate that such and such a person is detained, if at the time of arrest this requirement shall have been omitted. 
18. 
In criminal cases the accused cannot be compelled to give evidence upon oath touching the offense itself, neither can his ascendants or descendants, spouse or relations as far as the third degree of consanguinity, and the second degree of relationship, inclusive, be so compelled. 
Torture may not be applied nor may the penalty of confiscation of property be imposed in any case, without prejudice, however, to confiscation in cases provided for by law. 
19. 
Sufficient security having been given, either for personal appearance or for the suit, according to the nature of the case as provided by law, no person must be arrested or subjected to preventive imprisonment unless he is responsible for a crime for which the law provides corporal punishment. 
20. 
Any person in whose favor a sentence of acquittal has been pronounced, or upon whom judgment has been definitely stayed, shall have the right to indemnification in the manner provided by law for any material or merely moral injury which he may have suffered unjustly. 
21. 
The State treasuries may not effect any payment, except in virtue of a decree issued by a competent authority, in which is designated the law or the part of the budget which authorizes the payment in question. 
22. 
Obedience is the essential duty of the national forces. No armed body is competent to deliberate. 
23. 
Any decision given by the President of the Republic, the Chamber of Deputies, the Senate or the courts of justice, in the presence of, or upon the demand of an army, of a general at the head of an armed force, or of any assembly of the people, whether armed or not, convoked in disobedience to the public authorities, is null and void and of no effect whatsoever. 
CHAPTER IV.-The National Congress<title>
24. 
The National Congress is composed of two Chambers, the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. 
25. 
In the election of deputies and senators a system shall be employed which shall result in practice in the proportional representation of opinions and of the political parties. 
26.
The verification of the elections of senators and deputies and the examination of applications to nullify such elections are functions of the Verification Tribunal. 
The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, however, have the exclusive right to pronounce upon the incapacity of their members and to permit their resignation if the reasons for such resignation be of such a nature as to incapacitate them morally or physically for the exercise of their functions. For the acceptance of a resignation, the concurrence of two-thirds of the deputies or senators present is necessary. 
27. 
To be elected a deputy or senator it is necessary to possess the requirements for citizenship, with the right to vote, and never to have been condemned to punishment involving the loss of civic rights. 
Senators must, in addition, have completed 35 years of age.
28. The following persons cannot be elected as deputies or senators:
<list>
(1) Ministers of State. 
(2) Intendants and Governors. 
(3) Magistrates of the high courts of justice, judges of first instance and officials of the Public Ministry. 
(4) Private persons, and managers or administrators of juridical persons or companies who have entered into, or have guaranteed, contracts with the State. 
</list>
29. 
The offices of deputy and senator cannot be held simultaneously with each other or with those of representatives or with municipal office. They are also incompatible with any public employment remunerated by State or municipal funds and with any function or commission of the same nature, with the exception of employments, functions or commissions of higher, secondary or special education, with a seat in the town in which Congress holds its sessions. 
The person elected must choose between the office of deputy or senator and the other post, employment, function or commission which he holds, within 15 days if he is in the territory of the Republic, and within 100 days if he should be absent. These periods shall be counted from the date of the approval of the election. Should the choice not be declared within the appointed time, the elected person will cease to occupy the office of deputy or senator. 
30. 
No deputy or senator, from the moment of his election and up to 6 months after the completion of his term of office, may be appointed to any function, commission or public employment remunerated from State or municipal funds. 
This provision does not hold good in the case of an external war; nor does it apply to the office of President of the Republic, Minister of State or diplomat, i.e., agent; but only posts conferred in wartime may be held simultaneously with the functions of deputy or senator. 
31. 
A deputy or senator who absents himself from the country for more than 30 days, without the permission of the Chamber to which he belongs, or during the recess of that Chamber, without the permission of its President, shall forfeit his office. Absence for more than a year can only be authorized by special law. A deputy or senator who during his term of office makes or guarantees contracts with the State, or who acts as lawyer or attorney in any kind of lawsuit pending against the State or as solicitor or agent in private negotiations of an administrative nature, shall also forfeit his office. 
32. 
Deputies and senators are inviolable in regard to the opinions which they may express, or the votes which they may cast in the discharge of their functions. 
33.
No senator or deputy, from the day of his election, may be charged, prosecuted or arrested, save in the case of flagrante delicto, unless the court of appeal of the circuit concerned previously sanctions the accusation in full session, and declares that there is good cause for proceeding with the charge. Appeal from this decision may be made to the Supreme Court. 
34. 
If any deputy or senator is arrested in flagrante delicto he shall be immediately placed at the disposal of the court of appeal concerned together with the summary report on the case. The court shall then proceed in accordance with the dispositions of the preceding article. 
35. 
As soon as it is declared by a definite resolution that grounds exist for proceeding with the charge, the accused deputy or senator shall be suspended from the exercise of his functions and be placed at the disposal of the competent judge. 
36. 
If any deputy or senator dies or for any reason ceases to belong to the Chamber of Deputies or to the Senate, before the last year of his mandate, a substitute shall be appointed in the manner established by the electoral law for the remaining period of his term of office. 
The deputy or senator who accepts the office of Minister of State must be replaced within a period of 30 days. 
The Chamber of Deputies<title>
37. 
The Chamber of Deputies is composed of members elected by the departments or by groups of adjacent departments within each province, as provided by law, by direct vote and in the manner laid down in the electoral law. 
One deputy shall be elected for every 30,000 inhabitants and for any fraction thereof, not less than 15,000. 
38. 
The Chamber of Deputies shall be entirely renewed every 4 years. 
39. 
The particular and exclusive functions of the 
Chamber of Deputies are:
<list_1>
(1) To declare whether or not there is ground for accusations which 10 at least of its members may formulate against the following functionaries:
<list_2>
(a) The President of the Republic, for acts of his administration which have gravely compromised the honour or safety of the State, or openly infringed the constitution or the laws. This accusation may be tabled while the President is still in office and during the 6 months following the expiration of his mandate. During this latter period he may not leave the country without the consent of the Chamber; 
(b) Ministers of State for treason, extortion, malversation of public funds, subornation, infraction of the constitution and violation of the laws, either in the sense of having left them unexecuted, or of having gravely compromised the safety or honour of the nation. These accusations may be tabled while the Minister is still in office or during the 3 months following the expiration of his period of office. During this time he may not absent himself from the Republic without the consent of the Chamber or, during the recess of the latter, of its President; 
(c) Magistrates of. the high courts of justice for gross neglect of duty; 
(d) Generals and admirals of the armed forces for having gravely compromised the safety or honour of the nation; and 
(e) Intendants and Governors, for the crimes of treason, sedition, infraction of the constitution, malversation of public funds and extortion. 
</list_2>
In all these cases the Chamber, within a period of 10 days, having previously heard the accused and also a report by a commission of 5 deputies chosen by lot, the accused being excluded, shall declare whether or not there are grounds for the accusation. This report must be completed within a period of 6 days. Otherwise, after that time, the Chamber shall proceed without it. Should the decision be in the affirmative, 3 deputies shall be named to present it and conduct it before the Senate. 
If the accused does not attend the session to which he is summoned or does not send a written defense, the Chamber may summon him afresh or proceed without his defense. 
For a declaration that grounds exist for the impeachment in the case of (a) the vote of the majority of the deputies in office shall be necessary. 
In the other cases the accused shall be suspended from his functions from the moment when the Chamber declares that there exist grounds for the impeachment. The suspension shall cease if the Senate rejects the accusation or does not pronounce upon it within 30 days. 
(2) To criticize the acts of Government. In order to exercise this function the Chamber may, on the vote of the majority of the deputies present, adopt resolutions or submit observations which shall be transmitted to the President of the Republic in writing. The resolutions or observations shall not affect the political responsibility of the Ministers, and shall be answered in writing by the President of the Republic or verbally by the Minister concerned. 
</list_1>
The Senate<title>
40. 
The Senate is composed of members elected by direct voting by the nine provincial groups established by law, with due regard to the characteristics and interests of the different regions of the territory of the Republic. Each group may elect 5 senators. 
41. 
The Senate shall be renewed every 4 years by sections, in the manner established by law. Each senator shall remain in the exercise of his functions for 8 years. 
42.
The particular and exclusive functions of the 
Senate are:
<list>
(1) To take cognizance of the accusations submitted by the Chamber of Deputies, in accordance with article 39, after hearing the accused. If the latter does not attend the session to which he is summoned or does not send a written defense, the Senate may summon him afresh or proceed without his defense. 
The Senate shall decide like a jury, and shall confine itself to declaring whether or not the accused person is guilty of the crime or abuse of power which is imputed to him. 
The declaration of guilt must be made by two-thirds of the senators in office in the case of the impeachment of the President of the Republic, and by a majority of the senators in office in other cases. 
A declaration of guilt deprives the accused of his office. 
The functionary found guilty shall be tried in accordance with the laws by the usual competent tribunal, both with a view to the application of the punishment assigned to the crime committed and to the adjudication of the civil responsibility for the damage and injury caused to the State or to private individuals. 
(2) To decide whether or not there are grounds for admitting complaints which any private individual may bring against the Ministers, by the same procedure as in clause 1 above, on account of injuries which he may have suffered unjustly as a result of any act of theirs. 
(3) To declare whether or not there are grounds for instituting proceedings on criminal charges against Intendants and Governors, except in the case where accusations are tabled by the Chamber of Deputies. 
(4) To take cognizance of disputes regarding competence between the political or administrative authorities and the high courts of justice. 
(5) To grant the rehabilitations referred to in article 9. 
(6) To give or withhold its consent to the acts of the President of the Republic, in the cases required by the law or the constitution. 
If the Senate does not pronounce upon these acts within 30 days after the President of the Republic has requested it to expedite the matter, its approval shall be taken for granted. 
(7) To give advice to the President of the Republic whenever consulted by him. 
</list>
Attributes of Congress<title>
43. 
The particular and exclusive attributes of Congress are:
<list>
(1) To approve or reject annually the account which the Government must present of the expenditure of the funds appropriated to meet the costs of the public administration. 
(2) To give its consent to the departure of the President of the Republic from the national territory. 
(3) To declare, should the President of the Republic tender his resignation, whether or not the reasons on which he bases it incapacitate him for the discharge of his duties, and consequently to accept or reject his resignation. 
(4) To declare, should there be room for doubt, whether the impediment which prevents the President from fulfilling his duties is of such a nature that a new election ought to be held. 
(5) To approve or reject treaties which the President of the Republic presents to it, before their ratification. 
</list>
All these resolutions in Congress will go through the same procedure as a law. 
44. 
It is only in virtue of a law:
<list>
(1) That taxes of any class or kind may be imposed; that existing ones may be repealed; that their distribution between provinces or communes may be indicated where necessary; and that their proportion or scale may be determined. 
(2) That authorization may be given for the contracting of loans or for any other kind of transaction which may affect the credit or financial responsibility of the State. 
(3) That authorization may be given for the alienation or renting of State or municipal property when the concession thereof is for more than 20 years. 
(4) That the estimate of revenue may annually be approved and the expenditure of the public administration fixed by the same law. The budget law may not alter expenditure or taxes approved by general or special laws. 
Variable expenses only may be modified by it; but the initiative for increasing them or for altering the estimate of revenue belongs exclusively to the President of the Republic. 
The draft budget law must be submitted to Congress 4 months previous to the date on which it ought to enter into force; if at the end of this period it shall not have been approved, the draft presented by the President of the 
Republic shall be in force. If the draft shall not have been presented at the proper time, the period of 4 months shall be counted from the date of its presentation. 
Congress may not approve any new expenditure which is a charge on the funds of the nation without creating or indicating at the same time the sources of the funds necessary to meet such expenditure. 
(5) That public appointments may be created or abolished, their functions determined or modified and the corresponding salaries increased or diminished; that pensions may be given; and that the grant of public honors may be decreed to those who have rendered important services. 
(6) That the remuneration enjoyed by deputies and senators may be fixed. During a legislative period the remuneration may only be modified in such a way that it does not become effective until the following period. 
(7) That the political or administrative division of the country may be laid down or modified; that major ports may be created and custom houses established. 
(8) That the weight, value, type and denomination of the coinage and the system of weights and measures may be indicated. 
(9) That the strength of the land and sea forces to be kept up in time of peace or in time of war may be fixed. 
(10) That the introduction of foreign troops into the territory of the Republic may be permitted and the time of their stay therein fixed. 
(11) That the departure of the national troops from the territory of the Republic may be permitted, the time for their return being fixed at the same time. 
(12) That proposals by the President of the Republic to declare war may be approved or rejected. 
(13) That personal liberty and the freedom of the press may be restricted, or the exercise of the right of assembly suspended or restricted when demanded by the imperious necessity of the defense of the State, of the preservation of the constitutional regime or of internal peace. This may only be done for periods not exceeding 6 months. Should these laws indicate penalties, such penalties shall always be applied by the established tribunals. Apart from the cases prescribed in the present clause, no law may be issued for the suspension or restriction of liberties or rights guaranteed by the constitution. 
(14) That general pardons or amnesties may be granted. 
(15) That the city in which the President of the Republic must reside, the National Congress hold its sittings and the 
Supreme Court function may be appointed. 
</list>
The Making of Laws<title>
45. 
Laws may have their origin in the Chamber of Deputies or in the Senate by means of a message from the President of the Republic or by means of a motion by any member of Congress. 
The motions may not be signed by more than 10 deputies or 5 senators. 
Supplements to parts or items of the budget may be proposed only by the President of the Republic. 
Laws regarding taxes, of whatever nature they may be, regarding the estimates for the public administration and regarding recruiting can originate only in the Chamber of Deputies. 
Laws respecting amnesties and general pardons can originate only in the Senate. 
46. 
The President of the Republic may draw attention to the need of expediting the progress of a bill, and in such event the respective Chamber must pronounce upon it within a term of 30 days. 
The manifestation of urgency may be repeated in all the constitutional stages of the bill. 
47. 
A bill which shall have been rejected in the Chamber of its origin may not again be introduced until a year later. 
48. 
When a bill has been passed in the Chamber of its origin it shall be sent immediately to the other Chamber for discussion. 
49.
A project which shall have been totally rejected by the revising Chamber shall be returned to the Chamber of origin, where it shall be reconsidered, and, if approved therein by two-thirds of the members present, it shall be sent a second time to the Chamber which rejected it. It shall be considered to be rejected by this latter Chamber if two-thirds of the members present so agree. 
50. 
A bill which shall have been extended or amended by the revising Chamber shall be returned to the Chamber of origin, where the additions or amendments shall be considered approved if voted by a majority of the members present. 
If, however, the additions or amendments are rejected, the bill shall be returned a second time to the revising 
Chamber; whence, if the additions or amendments be approved afresh by a majority of two-thirds of the members present, the bill shall be returned to the other Chamber. It shall be understood that this latter Chamber rejects the additions and amendments if two-thirds of the members present so agree.
51. 
When, owing to obstinacy, agreement cannot be reached between the two Chambers on fundamental points of a bill, or when one Chamber substantially modifies a bill of the other, joint committees may be formed consisting of an equal number of deputies and senators, to propose the form and manner of solving the difficulties produced. 
52. 
When a bill has passed both Chambers it shall be submitted to the President of the Republic, who, if he likewise approves it, shall direct its promulgation as a law. 
53. 
If the President of the Republic disapproves of the bill, he shall return it to the Chamber of origin, with the necessary observations, within the space of 30 days. 
54.
If both Chambers approve the observations, the bill shall have the force of law, and shall be returned to the President for promulgation. 
Should the two Chambers reject all or any of the observations and maintain, by a majority of two-thirds of the members present, the whole or part of the bill approved by them, it shall be returned to the President for promulgation. 
55. 
If the President of the Republic shall not have returned the bill within 30 days reckoned from the date of its retransmission to him, it shall be understood that he approves it, and it shall be promulgated as a law. Should Congress close its sessions before the expiration of the above-mentioned 30 days, the President shall return the bill within the first 10 days of the next ordinary or extraordinary sessions. 
Sessions of Congress<title>
56. 
The ordinary sessions of Congress shall open on the 21st May of each year and close on the 18th September. 
At the opening of each ordinary legislative period, the President of the Republic shall give an account in full Congress of the administrative and political condition of the nation. 
57. 
Congress will hold extraordinary sessions when convoked by the President of the Republic, or when convoked by the President of the Senate acting at the written request of the majority of the members of the Chamber of Deputies or of the Senate. 
When convoked by the President of the Republic it may not deal with other legislative business than that indicated in the convocatory message; suggested constitutional reform, however, may be proposed, discussed and put to the vote, even when it does not appear therein. 
When convoked by the President of the Senate it may deal with any business within its province. 
58. 
The Chamber of Deputies may not sit or adopt resolutions without the attendance of a fifth part of its members, nor the Senate without the attendance of the fourth part of its members. 
Each Chamber shall establish, in its rules of procedure, the closure of debates by simple majority. 
59. 
The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate shall open and close their ordinary and extraordinary legislative periods at the same time. They may, however, assemble separately for the consideration of affairs which are their exclusive attribute, in which case the President of the respective Chamber shall convoke it. 
CHAPTER V.-The President of the Republic<title>
60. 
A citizen with the title of "President of the Republic of Chile" governs the State, and is the supreme chief of the nation. 
61. 
To be elected President of the Republic it is necessary to have been born within Chilean territory, to be at least 30 years of age and to possess the qualifications necessary to become a member of the Chamber of Deputies. 
62. 
The President of the Republic shall remain in office for a period of 6 years, and may not be re-elected for the period following. 
63. 
The President shall be elected by the direct vote of the citizens who have the right to vote throughout the Republic 60 days before the date on which the President in office is to lay down his functions, and in the form provided by law. 
The examination of claims which may be put forward with regard to the voting, rectifications and the general scrutiny of the elections shall be functions of the Verification Tribunal. 
64. 
The two Chambers of Congress, united in public session, 50 days after the ballot, the majority of their members being present, and the President of the Senate presiding, shall take cognizance of the general scrutiny effected by the Verification Tribunal, and shall proceed to proclaim President of the Republic that citizen who shall have obtained more than half of the valid votes. 
Should the scrutiny fail to result in this majority, the full Congress shall select one of the two citizens who shall have obtained the highest relative majorities; if, however, two or more citizens shall have tied in obtaining the highest relative majority, the election shall be between them alone. 
If, on the day indicated in this article, there should not be assembled the majority of the total number of the members of Congress, the session shall take place on the following day with such deputies and senators as may attend. 
65. 
The majority required for the election effected by full Congress shall be more than half the votes. Voting shall be secret. 
If the first vote does not give this absolute majority, a, second vote shall be taken, the votes being then confined to the two persons who in the first instance shall have obtained the greatest number of suffrages. Blank votes shall be given to the person obtaining the highest relative majority. 
In case of a tie, a third vote shall be taken on the following day and in the same manner. 
If there is again a tie, the President of the Senate shall have a casting vote. 
66. When the President of the Republic is commanding the armed forces in person, or when, through illness, absence from the territory of the Republic, or other grave reason, he cannot exercise his functions, the Minister of State who, by the order of precedence stipulated by law, is entitled thereto shall act as his substitute, with the title of "Vice-President of the Republic." In default of this Minister, the President shall be represented by the Minister who follows next in order of precedence, and, in default of all the Ministers, by the President of the Senate, the President of the Chamber of Deputies or by the President of the Supreme Court. 
In the event of death, of a declaration that grounds exist for resignation, or of any kind of absolute incapability or of incapacity which cannot cease before the expiration of the constitutional period, the Vice-President shall, during the first 10 days of his administration, issue the necessary orders for the holding of a fresh presidential election within a period of 60 days, in the form contemplated by the constitution and the electoral law. 
67. 
The President cannot leave the territory of the State during his term of office without the consent of 
Congress. 
68. 
The President shall cease his functions on the day upon which the 6 years fixed for the duration thereof are completed, and he shall be succeeded by the newly-elected President. 
69. 
Should the President-elect be prevented from entering into office, the President of the Senate shall, in the interval, replace him, with the title of " Vice-President of the Republic." In default of the President of the Senate, the President of the Chamber of Deputies and, in .default of him, the President of the Supreme Court shall act as substitute for the President of the Republic. 
If, however, the impediment which prevents the newly elected President from taking up office is absolute or is likely to last indefinitely or for a longer time than that fixed for the exercise of the office of President, the Vice-
President shall, during the 10 days following the declaration which must be made by Congress, issue the necessary orders for the holding of a fresh election, within a period of 60 days, in the form contemplated by the constitution and the electoral law. 
70. 
The President-elect, upon entering office, shall, in the presence of both Chambers of Congress, take before the President of the Senate an oath or promise faithfully to discharge the office of President of the Republic, to preserve the integrity and independence of the nation and to preserve and enforce the constitution and the laws. 
71. 
To the President of the Republic is entrusted the administration and government of the State; and his authority extends over everything, since its object is the preservation of public order in the interior, and the external security of the Republic, in accordance with the constitution and the laws. 
72. 
The special attributes of the President are:
<list>
(1) To consent to the formation of laws, in conformity with the constitution; and to sanction and promulgate them; 
(2) To issue such regulations, decrees and instructions as he may deem expedient for the execution of the laws; 
(3) To prorogue the ordinary sessions of Congress and to convoke extraordinary sessions; 
(4) To watch over the official conduct of judges and others employed in the administration of justice and with that object to require that the Supreme Court, if in conformity with practice, shall declare their misbehavior, or that the Public Ministry shall either apply for disciplinary measures from the competent tribunal or, if the case demands it, shall formulate the corresponding accusation; 
(5) To nominate at his pleasure the Ministers of State, officials of departments, diplomatic agents, Intendants and 
Governors. 
The nomination of Ambassadors and diplomatic Ministers shall be subject to the approval of the Senate, but these and the other functionaries mentioned in the present clause, are exclusively responsible to the President of the Republic and hold office so long as they enjoy his confidence; 
(6) To appoint the magistrates of the high courts of justice and the judges of first instance; 
(7) To make the other civil and military appointments specified by laws in accordance with the administrative statute, and to confer, with the consent of the Senate, the office and rank of colonel, captain in the navy and other superior military and naval appointments. On the field of battle the President may confer these higher military appointments alone; 
(8) To remove officials whom he has appointed, for incapacity or any other cause which renders their service useless or prejudicial, with the consent of the Senate if the officials are heads of offices or high employees, and on a report of the competent authority if they are junior employees, in conformity with the organic laws of each department; 
(9) To grant pensions, retired pay and compassionate gratuities in accordance With the laws; 
(10) To watch over the collection of the public revenues and decree their expenditure in accordance with the law; 
(11) To grant juridical personality to private corporations and to cancel it; to approve, reject or accept modifications in the statutes which must regulate such corporations; 
(12) To grant special pardons. Officials accused by the Chamber of Deputies and tried by the Senate can only be pardoned by Congress; 
(13) To dispose of the land and sea forces; to organize them and distribute them as he may consider advisable; 
(14) To command in person the land and sea forces, with the consent of the Senate. In this case the President of the Republic may reside in any place occupied by Chilean arms; 
(15) To declare war, when previously authorized by law; 
(16) To maintain political relations with foreign Powers, receive their agents, admit their consuls, conduct negotiations, make preliminary stipulations, conclude and sign all treaties of peace, of alliance, of truce, of neutrality and of commerce, concordats and other conventions. Before ratification, treaties shall be presented for the approval of Congress. The discussions and deliberations upon these matters shall be secret, if the President of the Republic so requires; and 
(17) To declare in a state of emergency one or more provinces invaded or threatened in case of foreign war, and in a state of siege one or more points of the Republic, in case of foreign attack. 
In case of internal commotion, it is for Congress to declare a state of siege in one or more places; but should 
Congress not be assembled, the President can do this for a limited time. If, upon the meeting of Congress, the time so fixed shall not have expired, the declaration made by the President of the Republic shall be considered as a draft law. 
The declaration of a state of siege only concedes to the President the power to remove individuals from one, department to another, and the power to arrest them in their own houses and detain them in places which are not prisons or places intended for the detention or imprisonment of ordinary criminals. 
The measures taken owing to a state of siege shall not have a longer duration than the state of siege itself, and they may not be such as to violate the constitutional guarantees given to deputies and senators. 
Ministers of State<title>
73. 
The number of the Ministers and their respective departments shall be determined by law. 
74. 
To be appointed Minister it is necessary to possess the qualifications required in order to be a member of the Chamber of Deputies. 
75. 
All the orders of the President of the Republic must be signed by the Minister of the respective department, and they shall not be obeyed without this essential requisite. 
76. 
Each Minister shall be individually responsible for the acts which he signs, and collectively, with the other Ministers, for those which he subscribes or decides in common with them. 
77. 
As soon as Congress opens its ordinary sessions, the Ministers must submit a report to the President of the 
Republic on the state of the nation, in so far as regards the business of the department over which each one has charge, so that the President may in turn give an account to Congress. 
With the same object they shall also be obliged to present to him an annual estimate of the expenditure to be incurred in their respective departments, and an account of the application of the sum voted to cover the expenses of the preceding year. 
78. 
Ministers may, when they deem it opportune, be present at the sittings of the Chamber of Deputies or of the 
Senate, and may take part in the debates, having a preferential right to speak, but not the right to vote. 
CHAPTER VI.-Tribunal for the Verification of Elections<title> 
79. 
A special tribunal, which shall be known as the "Verification Tribunal" shall verify the elections of the 
President of the Republic, of deputies and of senators. 
This tribunal shall proceed like a jury in the appreciation of the facts and shall issue a verdict in accordance with law. 
Its members shall be 5 and shall be changed every, 4 years, at least 15 days before the date of the first election which they are to verify. 
The same tribunal shall verify all the elections which shall take place during the 4 years. 
The 5 members of the Verification Tribunal shall be chosen by lot from among the following persons:
<list>
One from among the persons who have discharged the duties of President or Vice-President of the Chamber of Deputies for more than 1 year. 
One from among the persons who have discharged the duties of President or Vice-President of the Senate for an equal period. 
Two from among the persons who discharge the duties of judges of the Supreme Court. 
One from among the persons who discharge the duties of judges of the Court of Appeal in the city where Congress holds its sessions. 
</list>
The organization and procedure of the Verification Tribunal shall be regulated by law. 
CHAPTER VII.-The Judiciary<title>
80. 
The power to judge civil and criminal cases belongs exclusively to the courts established by law. 
Neither the President of the Republic nor Congress can, in any case, exercise judicial functions, transfer to themselves cases sub judice or revive suits which have been decided. 
81. 
A special law shall determine the organization and attributes of the tribunals which may be necessary for the speedy and complete administration of justice throughout the territory of the Republic. 
Only in virtue of, a law may innovations be made in the attributes of the tribunals or in the number of their members. 
82. 
The law shall determine the qualifications which judges must have, as also the number of years for which persons nominated judges of the high courts or judges of first instance must have exercised the profession of barrister. 
83. 
With regard to the nomination of judges, the law shall be adjusted to the following general principles:
<list>
The judges and attorneys of the Supreme Court shall  be selected by the President of the Republic from a list of 5 individuals submitted by that court. The 2 senior judges of the Court of Appeal shall be on the list. The other 3 places shall be filled according to the merits of the candidates. Persons not connected with the administration of justice may figure on the list. 
The judges and attorneys of the Court of Appeal shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from a list of 3 persons proposed by the Supreme Court. 
Judges of first instance shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from a list of 3 persons proposed by the Court of Appeal of the circuit concerned. For the drawing up of these lists a competitive contest shall be opened at which interested persons shall submit their qualifications and antecedents. 
In the case of a post in the Court of Appeal the senior judge of first instance, and, in the case of a post as judge of first instance, the next senior judge of first instance, shall respectively have a place in the corresponding list. The other two places shall be filled according to the merits of the candidates. 
</list>
84. 
Judges are personally responsible for the crime of bribery, for non-observance of the laws which regulate procedure and, in general, for any betrayal of trust or maladministration of justice. The cases in which, and the manner in which, this responsibility is to be made effective shall be determined by law. 
85. 
Judges shall continue in office during good behaviour; but the junior judges shall -exercise their respective functions for the period laid down by the laws. 
Judges, whether temporary or permanent, may only be removed from office in consequence of a legal sentence. Nevertheless, the President of the Republic may, on the proposal of, or in agreement with, the Supreme Court, authorize exchanges or order the transfer of judges from one post to another of the same category. 
In any case the Supreme Court may, if so required by the President of the Republic, or on the petition of an interested party, or on its own initiative, declare that judges have misconducted themselves; and after hearing a report from the accused and from the Court of Appeal respectively, may, by a two-thirds majority of its members, decide upon his removal. 
These decisions shall be communicated to the President of the Republic for their fulfillment. 
86. 
The Supreme Court is entrusted with the directive, corrective and economic superintendence of all the tribunals of the nation, in accordance with the law which determines their organization and attributes. 
The Supreme Court, in particular cases of which it takes cognizance or which have been submitted to it in appeal arising out of a lawsuit before another tribunal, may declare inapplicable in that connexion any legal precept contrary to the constitution. This appeal may be lodged at any stage of the suit, without suspension of its course. 
It shall likewise take cognizance of all disputes regarding competence which may arise between the political or administrative authorities and the tribunals of justice, and which do not fall within the province of the Senate. 
87. 
There shall be administrative tribunals composed of permanent members to settle complaints lodged against arbitrary acts or dispositions of the political or administrative authorities where the constitution or the laws do not provide that other tribunals shall take cognizance of such complaints. Its organization and attributes are matters to be arranged by law. 
CHAPTER VIII.-The Internal Government of the State<title>
88. 
For the internal government of the State, the territory of the Republic is divided into provinces, the provinces into departments, the departments into sub-delegations and the sub-delegations into districts. 
Intendants<title>
89. 
The head of the Government of each province is an Intendant, who shall exercise his functions in conformity with the laws, and the orders and instructions of the President of the Republic, of whom he is the regular and immediate agent. The duration of his office is 3 years. 
The Intendant, within the province over which he has jurisdiction as representative of the President of the Republic, shall superintend all public works and services in the territory of the province. 
Governors<title>
90. 
The government of each department resides in a Governor, subordinate to the Intendant of the province. The duration of his office is 3 years. 
The Intendant of the province is also Governor of the department in the capital of which he resides. 
The Governors are appointed by the President of the Republic, on the proposal of the respective Intendant, and are removable by the latter with the approval of the President of the Republic.
Sub-Delegates<title>
91. 
The sub-delegations are governed by a sub-delegate, subordinate to the Governor of the department, and appointed by him. The sub-delegates shall remain in office for 1 year and are removable by the Governor, who shall give a reasoned account to the Intendant. 
Inspectors<title>
92. 
The districts are governed by an Inspector, under the orders of the sub-delegates, by whom he shall be appointed and by whom he is removable after cause shown to the Governor. 
CHAPTER IX.-Internal Administrative Regime<title> 
93. 
For internal administration, the national territory is divided into provinces and the provinces into communes. 
There shall be in each province the number of communes stipulated by law, and each communal territory shall coincide with a complete sub-delegation. 
The administrative division known as a province shall be equivalent to the political division of the same name, and the administrative division known as a commune shall be equivalent to the political division known as a sub-delegation. 
The law when creating new communes shall always take care to establish the corresponding sub-delegations and to indicate the same boundaries for both. 
Provincial Administration<title>
94. 
The administration of each province resides in the Intendant, who shall be advised, in the manner laid down by law, by a Provincial Assembly, of which he shall be President. 
95. 
Each Provincial Assembly shall be composed of representatives chosen by the municipalities of the province at their first session by cumulative vote. 
These offices are unpaid and their duration shall be 3 years. 
The municipalities shall appoint the number of representatives laid down for each one by law. 
96. 
To be appointed representative, the same qualifications are required as for a deputy, with the addition that it is necessary to have lived for more than 1 year in the province. 
97. 
The Provincial Assemblies shall function in the capital of the province concerned, and in their-first session each year shall, by a majority of the members present, appoint an individual from amongst themselves to discharge the office of Vice-President of the Assembly. 
98. 
The quorum for Provincial Assemblies shall be the majority of their actual members; they shall have the administrative attributes, and shall dispose of the revenues, stipulated by law. They may be likewise authorized by law to impose specified taxes for local benefit. 
They may be dissolved by the President of the Republic with the consent of the Senate. 
Should a Provincial Assembly be dissolved, steps shall be taken to replace its members, for the remaining period of their term of office, in the manner provided in article 95. 
99. 
The Provincial Assemblies must make known to the President of the Republic each year, through the medium of the Intendant, the needs of the province, and shall indicate the sums required to meet them. 
100. 
The regulations or resolutions issued by a Provincial Assembly must be brought to the-knowledge of the Intendant, who may suspend their execution within 10 days should he consider them contrary to the constitution or the laws or prejudicial to the interests of the, province or of the State. 
A regulation or resolution suspended by the Intendant shall be returned for the consideration of the Provincial Assembly. 
Should the latter maintain its original resolution by the vote of two-thirds of the members present, the Intendant shall ordain its promulgation and it shall be carried into effect. 
Should, however, the reason for the suspension have been that the regulation or resolution is contrary to the constitution or to the laws, the Intendant shall submit the case to the Supreme Court for a final decision. 
Communal Administration<title>
101. 
The local administration of each commune or group of communes established by law resides in a municipality. 
Each municipality, on being constituted, shall appoint a mayor to preside over it and execute its decisions. 
In towns of more than 100,000 inhabitants and in others specified by law, the mayor shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, and may be remunerated. He is removable by the President of the Republic, acting with the consent of the Provincial Assembly concerned. 
102. 
The municipalities shall have the number of aldermen which the law lays down for each one. The number shall not be, less than 5 or more than 15. 
These offices are unpaid and their duration is 3 years. 
103. 
To be chosen as alderman it is necessary to possess the same qualifications as those required for a member of the Chamber of Deputies and, moreover, to have lived in the commune for more than 1 year. 
104. 
The election of aldermen shall be by direct vote and in conformity with the special provisions laid down in the law of the organization and attributes of municipalities. 
For this purpose there shall be, in each commune, special registers, to be inscribed in which it shall be necessary to have attained 21 years of age and to know how to read and write. Foreigners, moreover, must have resided in the country for 5 years. 
The verification of the elections of aldermen, the examination of claims of nullity which may be made in connexion with them, and the decision on cases which may subsequently supervene, rest with the authority appointed by law. 
105. 
The quorum for the meetings of municipalities shall be the majority of its actual aldermen. They shall exercise the administrative attributes and dispose of the revenues which the law may determine. 
More particularly their duties are:
<list>
(1) To superintend public health, comfort, embellishment and recreation; 
(2) To promote education, agriculture, industry ant commerce; 
(3) To superintend primary schools and other educational services supported by municipal funds; 
(4) To superintend the construction and repair of roads, causeways and bridges and all other necessary, useful or ornamental works supported by municipal funds; 
(5) To administer and invest funds relating to public estates and revenues, in conformity with the rules laid down by law; and 
(6) To draw up municipal ordinances upon these matters without prejudice to the attributes granted by the following article to the Provincial Assembly concerned. 
</list>
The law may impose on each municipality a contribution towards the general expenses of the province, proportionate to the annual revenue of the municipality. 
Municipal employees shall be appointed in conformity with the statute which shall be established by law. 
106. 
The municipalities shall be subject to the corrective and economic supervision of the Provincial Assembly concerned, in accordance with the law. 
The powers bestowed upon the Intendant by article 100, with regard to the Provincial Assembly, shall belong to the latter vis-A-vis the municipalities within its jurisdiction. 
The municipalities may be dissolved by the Provincial Assembly on the grounds established by law and on the vote of the majority of the representatives specially summoned for the purpose, without prejudice, however, to the provisions of article 100. 
Administrative Decentralisation<title> 
107. 
The laws shall by degrees entrust to the provincial or communal organizations the administrative attributes and powers which at present are being exercised by other authorities, with the object of effecting the decentralization of the internal administrative regime. 
The general services of the nation shall be decentralized by means of the formation of the zones fixed by the laws. 
In all cases the superintendence of the services of a province shall be in the hands of the Intendant, and the ultimate supervision of them shall belong to the President of the Republic. 
CHAPTER X.-Reform of the Constitution<title>
108. 
The reform of the provisions of the constitution shall be subject to the same mode of procedure as a bill, with the exceptions indicated below. 
The approval of a projected reform in each Chamber requires the consenting vote of the majority of the deputies or senators in office. 
The two Chambers, united in public session, with the attendance of the majority of the total number of their members, shall, 60 days after a project has been approved in the manner indicated in the foregoing paragraph, take cognizance thereof, and shall proceed to vote upon it without further debate. 
If the project is approved by the majority of the full Congress, it shall be sent to the President of the Republic. 
If, on the day fixed, the majority of the total number of the members of Congress should not assemble, the session shall take place on the following day, with such deputies and senators as may attend. 
109.
The only observations which the President of the Republic may make upon the project shall be for the purpose of proposing modifications or amendments in the reforms agreed upon by the full Congress. 
Should the modifications proposed by the President of the Republic be approved by both Chambers, the project shall be returned to the President for promulgation. 
Should both Chambers reject all or any of the observations of the President of the Republic, and maintain by a majority of two-thirds of the members present the whole or part of the project approved by them, it shall be returned to the President in order that he may promulgate it, or in order that, if he thinks fit, he may, within a period of 80 days, consult the nation, by means of a plebiscite, upon the points of disagreement. The project approved in the plebiscite shall be promulgated as a constitutional reform. 
110. 
As soon as the project is promulgated, its provisions shall form part of the constitution, and shall be considered as incorporated in it. 
Temporary Provisions<title>
First: 
The existing laws on the subject matter of article 80, clause 3; article 73, clauses 8, 13 and 14; and article 95, clauses 3 and 4 of the constitution of 1833,(1) suppressed by the present reform, are cancelled. 
For a period of 5 years the State shall deliver to the Archbishop of Santiago the sum of 2,500,000 pesos yearly, to be spent in the country on the needs of the Catholic Church. 
Second: 
The elections for the appointment of the new President of the Republic shall take place on the 24th 
October, 1925, in order to comply with the dispositions of article 63, and in order that the President-elect may assume office on the 23rd December of that same year. 
Third: 
In the event of no citizen obtaining the necessary majority in the ballot-boxes, the proclamation of the new President of the Republic shall be effected by the deputies and senators elected in conformity with the following provisions. For this sole purpose the Verification Tribunal shall give special powers to the candidates whom it considers to have the best right in the light of the antecedents which have come to its knowledge. 
Fourth: 
The general elections for the new Congress shall take place on Sunday, the 22nd November, 1925. 
Fifth: 
Pending the establishment by law of the provincial groups, referred to in article 40, the following are established:
<list>
(1) Tarapaca and Antofagasta. 
(2) Atacama and Coquimbo. 
(3) Aconcagua and Valparaiso. 
(4) Santiago. 
(5) O'Higgins, Colchagua and Curico. 
(6) Talca, Linares and Maule. 
(7) Nuble, Concepcion and Bio-Bio. 
(8) Arauco, Malleco and Cautin. 
(9) Valdivia, Llanquihue and Chiloe.
</list> 
The groups of adjacent departments, referred to in article 37, shall be temporarily fixed by the President of the Republic, with due regard to the general census which was taken on the 15th December, 1920. 
Sixth: 
The electoral law for the new Congress shall indicate the manner of deciding which senators in each group of provinces shall enjoy a period of 8 years and which shall enjoy a period of only 4 years, in order to arrange for the partial election of the Senate, in conformity with article 41. 
Seventh: 
The constitutional period for the new Congress shall date from the 21st May, 1926, without prejudice, however, to its being convoked to extraordinary sessions as soon as the Verification Tribunal definitely approves the powers of deputies and senators-elect. 
Eighth: 
Until the relevant law is issued, the monthly salary of deputies and senators shall be 2,000 pesos. 
From this sum shall be deducted monthly 50 pesos for each session of the Chamber or of commissions which may not have taken place or which may have been terminated through the non-attendance of the deputy or senator, except in the case where two commissions have been held at the same time and he has attended one of them. 
Ninth: 
For the purposes of article 79 it shall be considered that all persons who have held the offices of President or Vice-President of the Chamber of Deputies or of the Senate, before the promulgation of this reform of the constitution, have been in office for the year required by this article. 
Tenth: 
The present constitutional reform shall come into force 30 days after its publication in the " Official Gazette." 