In the Name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost The Senate and House of Representatives of New Granada, in Congress Assembled : 
Experience having shown that several of the provisions of the Constitution adopted by the Granadine Convention of 1832 present serious inconveniences when reduced to practice, and also that with respect to others doubts have arisen as to the terms in which they are expressed and set forth, it has become indispensably necessary to amend some and to add or repeal others, and 
Considering 
That to do this by means of several additional acts would increase the doubts and confusion; and that consequently it would be better to amend the same throughout by deleting such portions as are to be abolished or changed and by retaining such as are to remain in force; 
By virtue of the power granted the Senate and House of Representatives by Title XII of the above-mentioned Constitution, there is made the following amendment of the CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF NEW GRANADA 
TITLE I THE REPUBLIC OF NEW GRANADA<title> 
SECTION I THE GRANADINE NATION<title>
Article 1: 
The Republic of New Granada is composed of all Granadines united in one national body under a compact of political association for their common benefit. 
Article 2: 
New Granada shall be forever essentially and irrevocably a sovereign nation, free and independent of all foreign power or domination; and it is, not, and never shall be, the patrimony of any family or individual.SECTION 2 GRANADINES<title>
Article 3: 
Granadines are such either, by birth or naturalization. 
Article 4: 
The following are Granadines by birth: 
<list>
(1) All free persons born in the territory of New Granada before the place of their birth was declared independent of Spain; 
(2) Other persons born in the territory of New Granada of parents who are Granadines by birth or naturalization; 
(3) Those born abroad of Granadine parents absent in the service of New Granada, or absent because of their devotion to the cause of the independence and liberty of New Granada. 
</list>
Article 5: 
The following are Granadines by naturalization: 
<list>
(1) All free persons who, although born outside the territory of New Granada, were domiciled therein at the time the place of their residence was declared independent of Spain, and who afterwards submitted to the Colombian Constitution of 1821; 
(2) All persons born free in the territory of New Granada of alien parents who are not present in New Granada in the service of another country or government; 
(3) All free alien women who have married or shall marry Granadines; 
(4) Children of slaves born free by virtue of law in the territory of New Granada; 
(5) All emancipated slaves born in the territory of New Granada; 
(6) Those who obtain letters of naturalization in accordance with law. 
</list>
SECTION 3 DUTIES OF GRANADINES<title>
Article 6: 
It shall be the duty of Granadines: 
<list>
(1) To live in submission to the Constitution and laws, and to obey and respect the authorities established by them; 
(2) To contribute to the public expenses; 
(3) To serve and defend the country, even at the sacrifice of life if necessary; 
(4) To guard the preservation of public liberties.
</list>
SECTION 4 THE TERRITORY OF NEW GRANADA<title>
Article 7: 
The limits of the territory of the Republic are the same as those which in 1810 separated the territory of the Viceroyalty of New Granada from the Captaincies-General of Venezuela and Guatemala, from the Portuguese possessions in Brazil, and those established by the treaty approved by the Congress of New Granada May 30, 1833, relative to .the Ecuadorian boundary. These limits may be changed only by means of public treaties approved and ratified according to Article 67, paragraph 7, and Article 102, paragraph 2, of this Constitution, the ratifications having been duly exchanged. 
Article 8: 
The territory of New Granada shall be divided into Provinces, each Province shall be composed of one or more Cantons, and each Canton shall be divided into Parishes. The law shall prescribe the division of the territory into Provinces, and these into Cantons, and it shall determine the authority to be entrusted with the duty of dividing the Cantons into Parishes. 
TITLE II CITIZENS<title>
Article 9: 
Male Granadines (varones) must meet the following qualifications to be citizens: 
<list>
(1) To be twenty-one years of age; 
(2) To be the owner of real property of an unencumbered value of 30o pesos situated in New Granada, or have an annual income of 15o pesos, and to pay, the direct taxes prescribed by law on such property or income; 
(3) To be able to read and write; this qualification shall apply, however, only to those who reach their twenty-first year by or after January 1, 185o. 
</list>
Article 10: 
Citizenship shall be suspended: 
<list>
(1) For those accused of criminal offenses meriting corporal or infamous penalty; 
(2) For nonpayment of sums due the National Treasury, or any of the other public funds; 
(3) For mental derangement; 
(4) By judicial decree to that effect. 
</list>
Article 11: 
Citizenship is forfeited: 
<list>
(1) For having been condemned to a corporal or infamous punishment, until restored to citizenship; 
(2) For selling one's vote or buying that of another in any election prescribed by this Constitution or by law; 
(3) For obtaining letters of naturalization in a foreign country.
</list>TITLE III THE GOVERNMENT OF NEW GRANADA<title>
Article 12: 
The Government of New Granada is republican, popular, representative, elective, and responsible. 
Article 13: 
For administrative purposes the supreme power shall be divided among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches; and none of these may exercise the powers granted by this Constitution to either of the other two, each branch being restricted to its own function. 
Article 14: 
It is the duty of the Government to protect the liberty, security, property, and equality of Granadines. 
Article 15: 
It is also the duty of the Government to protect Granadines in the enjoyment of the exercise of the Apostolic Roman Catholic religion. 
TITLE IV THE RELIGION OF THE REPUBLIC<title>
Article 16: 
The Apostolic Roman Catholic religion is the only cult supported and maintained by the Republic. 
TITLE V ELECTIONS<title> 
SECTION I THE ELECTION OF ELECTORS<title>
Article 17: 
Every four years, in the year in which Canton Electors hold ordinary elections for the President of the Republic, Senators, and Representatives, there shall be chosen in each Parish one Canton Elector for each one thousand inhabitants; Parishes having less than one thousand inhabitants shall nevertheless choose one Elector. 
Article 18: 
The election of the Electors to which the Parish is entitled shall be by a plurality of votes cast by the duly qualified voters in the Parish; each voter shall vote for a number of individuals which is twice that of the number of Electors to .which the Parish is entitled. 
Article 19: 
Parochial voters are those inhabitants of the Parish who are in full exercise of the rights of citizenship. 
Article 20: 
In each Parish the votes of the parochial voters shall be inscribed in a register by the authority and in the manner prescribed by law. 
Article 21: 
Officials charged with holding elections shall do so at the times prescribed by law without awaiting orders; such officials shall give the voters eight days' notice of the elections to be held. 
Article 22: 
The time and manner in which elections shall be held shall be determined by law; the law shall also determine the authority for canvassing the votes as well as the regulations for voting.
SECTION 2 CANTON ELECTORS<title>
Article 23: 
To be an Elector, it is required: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights citizenship; 
(2) To be twenty-five years of age; 
(3) To be able to read and write; 
(4) To be a resident of one of the Parishes of the Canton. 
</list>
Article 24: 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic Secretaries of State, and Governors of Provinces may not be Electors. 
Article 25: 
When a person is chosen Elector by two or more Parishes, he shall accept the one in which he has received the greater number of votes. 
Article 26: 
The term of office for Electors shall be four years any vacancies or temporary absences which occur shall be filled In those having the next highest number of votes in the respective Parish.
SECTION 3 CANTON ELECTIONS<title>
Article 27: 
Electors chosen in the Parishes of each Canton shall comprise the Electoral Assemblies of the Cantons. 
Article 28: 
The functions of Electoral Assemblies are: 
<list>
(1) In them each Elector shall cast his vote in elections for President or Vice-President of the Republic, and for those Senators and Representatives, both principals and alternates (suplentes), who are chosen in the Province; 
(2) To elect Deputies to the Provincial House, both principals and alternates (suplentes), and to make whatever other elections are prescribed by law.
</list>
Article 29: 
When the time set by law for the meeting of the Assemblies shall have arrived and all the Canton Electors are not present, the competent authority may compel their attendance; but when the time for voting for the President or Vice-President of the Republic, Senators, and Representatives shall arrive, the voting shall take place by those Electors attending, regardless of what number they may be.Article 30: 
The law shall fix the quorum required in these Assemblies for the election of Deputies to the Provincial House and for the other elections assigned by law, as well as the majority of votes by which such election is to be effected. 
Article 31: 
The voting in the elections of President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be executed by each Elector's submitting a slip of paper on which is written the name of the individual for whom he votes. 
Article 32: 
The voting for Senators and their alternates shall be effected by each Elector's submitting a slip of paper on which are written, without making any distinction between principals and alternates, the names of a number of persons double that of the Senators to be elected in the Province. The voting for Representatives shall be effected in the same manner for both principals and alternates. 
Article 33: 
The registers of votes for the President or Vice-President of the Republic shall be forwarded to the Senate, and those for Senators and Representatives to the authority designated by law. 
Article 34: 
The law shall determine the time when and the period within which the Canton Assemblies are to hold elections or to proceed with whatever concerns them, as well as whatever else is required for their due regulation.
SECTION 4 PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH ELECTIONS<title>
Article 35: 
Elections shall be public, and no one bearing arms may attend them. 
Article 36: 
Any act done in parochial elections or in the Electoral Assemblies which is not prescribed by this Constitution or by law, or done after the expiration of the period therein specified, is not only null but contrary to public security.
SECTION 5 CANVASSING ELECTIONS OF SENATORS AND REPRESENTATIVES<title>
Article 37: 
The law shall determine the authority by whom and the manner in which the canvassing and regulation of elections made by Canton Electors for Senators and Representatives shall be done; and how cases of tie votes shall be decided when they occur. 
Article 38: 
The authority in charge of canvassing the votes cast ha Senators and Representatives shall declare elected, from among those who are leading in the balloting, that number of persons qua to the number of Senators and Representatives to which the Province is entitled. An equal number of persons, drawn from those who immediately follow in the balloting, shall be declared alternates. 
TITLE VI THE LEGISLATIVE POWER<title> 
SECTION I CONGRESS<title>
Article 39: 
Congress, composed of two Houses, one of Senators and one of Representatives, shall exercise the legislative power. 
Article 40: 
Congress shall assemble annually on the first of March even when it has not been convoked, and its ordinary sessions shall last sixty days and may be prolonged to ninety days in case of necessity. 
Article 41: 
It shall also assemble in extraordinary session when convoked by the Executive, but when so assembled it shall consider only those matters submitted to it by the Executive. 
Article 42: 
Congress shall meet in joint session to canvass the votes and if necessary to complete the election of President and Vice-President of the Republic; to receive from them the oath of office required by the Constitution; to choose the person who is to act as their substitute in accordance with Article 99; to select the Justices of the Supreme Court; to hear and decide upon the resignations and dismissals of the aforementioned officials; and for other matters prescribed by law; but never shall they so meet in order to exercise the functions provided for in Article 67 of this Constitution.
SECTION 2 SENATE<title>
Article 43: 
The Senate shall be composed of Senators chosen in the Provinces on the basis of one Senator for each seventy thousand persons; but in each Province the population of which is less than seventy thousand one Senator shall nevertheless be chosen. 
Article 44: 
To be a Senator, it is required: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine by birth and in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty-five years of age; 
(3) To be a resident or native of the Province in which the election takes place; 
(4) To be the owner of real property having an unencumbered value of four thousand pesos, or in default of this an annual income of five hundred pesos accruing from landed property, or an income of eight hundred pesos accruing from some employment or from the exercise of a trade or profession. 
</list>
Article 45: 
Granadines naturalized in accordance with Article 5, paragraph 1, may be Senators if, in addition to being in full exercise of the rights of citizenship, they meet the requirements of age, residence, and property or income prescribed in the preceding article, and have resided eight years in the territory of the Republic after submitting to the Constitution of 1821, reckoning as part of the said eight years the time they may have been absent in the service of the Republic or because of their devotion to the independence and liberty of New Granada. 
Article 46: 
The term of office for Senators shall be four years, one half being elected every two years.
SECTION 3 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES<title>
Article 47: 
The House of Representatives shall be composed of the Representatives chosen in each Province on the basis of one Representative for each thirty thousand persons; but in each Province the population of which does not amount to thirty thousand, one Representative shall nevertheless be chosen. 
Article 48: 
In order to be a Representative, one must be a Granadine; and as for those born in New Granada, it is sufficient that they meet the following qualifications: 
<list>
(1) To be in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be twenty-five years of age; 
(3) To be a resident or native of the Province in which the election takes place; 
(4) To be the owner of landed property of an unencumbered value of two thousand pesos, or to have an annual income of three hundred pesos accruing from real property, or in default of this, an annual income of four hundred pesos accruing from some employment or from the exercise of some trade or profession. 
</list>
Article 49: 
Granadines naturalized in accordance with Article 5, paragraph I, may be Representatives provided that in addition to the qualifications prescribed in the preceding article, they have resided eight years in the territory of the Republic after submitting to the Constitution of 1821, reckoning as part of the said eight years the time they may have been absent in the service of the Republic or because of their devotion to the independence and liberty of New Granada. 
Article 50: 
In the case of other naturalized Granadines, in addition to the first, second, and third qualifications required in Article 48, to be Representative it is further required: 
<list>
(1) To be married to a native Granadine; 
(2) To have real property situated in New Granada of an unencumbered value of ten thousand pesos; 
(3) To have resided eight years in the territory of the Republic after naturalization, reckoning as part of the said eight years the time that they may have been absent in the service of the Republic or because of their devotion to the independence and liberty of New Granada. 
</list>
Article 51: 
The term of office of Representatives shall be two years, one half being elected every year.
SECTION 4 PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH HOUSES<title> 
Article 52: 
Both Houses shall be installed and open their session separately from each other upon the day appointed for that purpose; but neither shall do this or exercise any of its functions without the attendance of an absolute majority of all members to be chosen in all the Provinces of the Republic in accordance with the provisions of Articles 43 and 47; nor can either of the Houses be installed or open its sessions on a day different from that on which the other does, or continue its sessions while the other is in recess. 
Article 53: 
When upon the day appointed for the opening of the session the same cannot be effected, or if opened, the session of either of the Houses cannot be continued for lack of the majority required in the preceding article, the assembled members ,of the respective House, whatever may be their number, shall compel the presence of those absent by penalties established by law; they shall open or continue the, session as soon as the said majority shall be obtained. 
Article 54: 
The Presidents of the Houses shall take the constitutional oath in the presence of their respective Houses; and the other members of each House shall take their oaths in the presence of the President of their respective House. 
Article 55: 
Both Houses shall hold their sessions in the same town; for the purpose either of transferring their sessions to another place or of suspending them for more than two consecutive days, the mutual consent of the Houses is necessary. 
Article 56: 
The sessions of both Houses shall be public except when either has reasons for dealing with its business in secret. 
Article 57: 
Each of the Houses has the right to establish the necessary regulations for the direction and ordering of its proceedings well as for whatever else concerns its internal government and procedure. 
Article 58: 
Agreeably to the said regulations, the Houses can punish their respective members when they infringe the same by the infliction of such penalties as they shall provide for that purpose. 
Article 59: 
The Houses may also expel members when they have been greatly lacking in due respect for the House; in this case, however, it is necessary that the decision shall be made by a two-thirds vote of the members present and that forty-eight hours shall have elapsed between the offense and the decision, during which interval the offenders may be forbidden to take their seats in the House. 
Article 60: 
Each House is competent to decide controversies arising out of the election of its members and to decide upon the resignations of members; but those who, because of legal impediment, cannot be present at the sessions of Congress, must submit their excuses to the authority named by law. 
Article 61: 
Vacancies occurring in the Houses shall be filled by the respective alternates; if, due to lack of alternates such vacancies cannot be filled, new alternates shall be chosen, but their terms of office shall last only until the next session of the Houses. 
Article 62: 
Senators and Representatives represent the nation and not the Province in which they are chosen; they shall not receive orders or instructions either from the Assemblies which elected them or from any other authority whatsoever. 
Article 63: 
Senators and Representatives are not responsible at any time or to any authority whatsoever for the opinions they may express or the votes they may cast in the Houses or in the Congress. 
Article 64: 
Senators and Representatives shall not be liable to arrest in any civil action while the sessions last and during the time necessary for proceeding thereto and for returning home, which time shall be fixed by law in proportion to the distances. Nor shall they be imprisoned for any criminal offense without having been previously suspended by their House and placed at the disposition of the competent Judge or Tribunal unless they shall be taken in flagrante delicto for an offense meriting a corporal or infamous punishment, or, unless prior to the said time [of immunity], a sentence of imprisonment has been passed upon them. 
Article 65: 
The offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic, Secretary of State, Justice of the Supreme Court, or Judge of the District Court are incompatible with those of Senator or Representative. No person exercising any one of the above-mentioned offices may be elected to the latter offices; and if, being a Senator or Representative, he should proceed to exercise the functions of any such offices, his seat in the respective House shall become vacant.
Article 66: 
Persons who at the time of any election in a Province are in the exercise of any authority, command, or jurisdiction which extends to the entire territory of such Province may not be elected Senators or Representatives for that Province.
SECTION 5 POWERS OF CONGRESS<title>
Article 67: 
The following are exclusive powers of Congress: 
<list>
(1) To fix at each ordinary session of Congress the sums of money which may be taken from the National Treasury to defray ordinary expenses of the next fiscal year, and in the same sessions or in extraordinary sessions to vote the sums for such extraordinary expenses as may be necessary; 
(2) To establish the national taxes and contributions; 
(3) To decree the alienation of national property and its application to public uses; 
(4) To authorize loans or other contracts for supplying the deficit should there be one in the National Treasury, making the nation liable for the payment thereof, and to permit the national property and revenues to be mortgaged as security for the payment of said loans or contracts; 
(5) To examine at each ordinary session the accounts of the preceding fiscal year which are presented to it by the Executive; said accounts shall exhibit the amount of revenues and the proceeds of the national property as well as the expenses; 
(6) To fix at each ordinary session the maximum number of land and sea forces to be maintained by the Executive in time of peace, and in the same sessions or in extraordinary sessions to fix the number by which said forces may be increased when the Republic is threatened by war with another country or by armed insurrection; 
(7) To approve public treaties and conventions entered into by the Executive with other Governments and Nations in order that they may be ratified and the ratifications exchanged; 
(8) To permit the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic, or to permit warships of another nation to remain in the ports of New Granada for more than two months; 
(9) To authorize the Executive to declare war upon another nation and to instruct him to make peace;(10) To grant personal and honorary rewards to whose who have rendered great and important services to the Republic, and to decree public honors to their memory; 
(11) To grant amnesties or general pardons for grave reasons of public convenience; 
(12) To determine the weight, type, form, and denomination of money, and to establish the legal weights and measures; 
(13) To grant for a limited period exclusive privileges or such advantages and indemnifications as shall be considered expedient for promoting the development and improvement of enterprises or public works which may prove beneficial to the nation, for favoring the establishment of arts or trades not known in New Granada, or for encouraging such as are already there known; 
(14) To create Tribunals and Courts and other functionaries necessary for the national service, and to set forth their powers and their terms of office; 
(15) To enact laws and other legislative measures necessary in all matters requiring legislation or other legislative acts, and to interpret, amend, or annul all legislation which may now be in force. 
</list>
Article 68: 
Congress cannot delegate to one or more of its members, or to any other person, corporation, or authority any of the powers mentioned in the preceding article or any of the functions with which it is invested by this Constitution.
SECTION 6 CONCERNING THE ENACTMENT OF LAWS<title>
Article 69: 
Laws and other legislative acts may originate in either of the two Houses of Congress by introduction by their respective members or by the Secretaries of State. 
Article 70: 
No bill or other legislative act may be approved by the House of origin without having been debated three times on separate days. 
Article 71: 
Bills approved by the House of origin pass to the other House with a notification of the days on which they were debated; and the second House may not approve the same until after the formalities prescribed in the preceding article have been observed. 
Article 72: 
The Houses have the reciprocal right to propose alterations and amendments deemed necessary until there is agreement as to the terms in which the bill shall be presented to the Executive for his sanction. 
Article 73: 
Although passed by both Houses, no bill or other legislative act shall have the force of law without the sanction of the Executive. If the latter agrees, he shall order its publication and execution as law; if the Executive finds the bill unacceptable, he shall return it to the House of origin with his objections. 
Article 74: 
The Executive may object to any bill or other legislative act because it is deemed altogether inexpedient or because it is believed that alterations are necessary, the Executive proposing in this case such alterations as may be thought desirable. 
Article 75: 
When a bill is returned to the House of origin by the Executive because it is deemed entirely inexpedient, the House shall consider his objections; and if it declares them to be well-founded, the bill shall be killed; but if the House declares the objections ill-founded the bill shall pass to the other House. The second House shall take into consideration the Executive's objections and return the bill to the House of origin with its decision on the validity of the Executive's objections. If the decision is that the objections are well-founded, the bill shall be killed; but if the objections are declared unfounded, the progress of the bill shall remain suspended until the next session of Congress. 
Article 76: 
If the objections of the Executive consist in proposing certain changes in the bill and the House of origin should declare them uncalled for, it shall send the bill and the objections to the other House; and if the second House considers them unnecessary, the progress of the bill shall be suspended until the next session of Congress makes some decision concerning it. But if the House of origin declares all the objections to be valid and accedes to the proposed alterations, it shall send the bill together with the objections to the other House; should the latter House also agree that the objections are well-founded and also consent to all the proposed changes, the bill shall be returned to the Executive for his sanction, which cannot, in this case, be refused. 
Article 77: 
Should the House accede to some of the changes proposed by the Executive and not to others, the bill shall again be sent to the Executive, who may sanction or object thereto just as though it were a new bill. But if the two Houses do not agree in declaring all the objections to be invalid, or do not agree in assenting to the same alterations, the bill is killed. 
Article 78: 
Bills which in accordance with the provisions of Articles 75 and 76 have been suspended because the objections offered by the Executive have been declared to be ill-founded shall be published, together with the objections, for the information of the Nation. 
Article 79: 
The Houses in their' next session shall reconsider the objections made by the Executive to bills referred to in the preceding article; if both Houses again declare them unfounded by a two-thirds vote of their respective members, the bill shall be sent to the Executive for his sanction, which, in this case, cannot be refused. 
Article 80: 
The provisions of the preceding articles do not prevent a bill already killed, or one whose progress has been suspended because of Executive objections as already discussed, from being reconsidered by the Houses at any time in order to be once more presented together with the changes considered necessary to be made in it for the sanction of the Executive; but in this case it shall be subject to the formalities established for the approval of every new bill, and as such, to the sanction or objections of the Executive. 
Article 81: 
Bills or other legislative acts which are sent to the Executive for his sanction shall be in duplicate, both copies being signed by the Presidents and Secretaries of the two Houses, and upon their being so sent, the days on which they have been debated conformably to Articles 7o and 75 shall be reported. 
Article 82: 
Should the Executive discover that a bill does not conform to the provisions of Articles 70 and 71, he shall within two days after receipt thereof return both copies to the House of origin in order that the error may be corrected in the House in which it was committed; the bill then continues upon its constitutional course. Such as are free from any error must be sanctioned or objected to by the Executive, who shall return one of the copies of the bill to the House of origin together with his decree within eight days after receipt of the same, at the expiration of which such as have not been returned shall have the force of law and must be sanctioned and ordered published and executed. 
Article 83: 
If within the time fixed in the preceding article, the House to which the bill is to be returned has suspended its session, the days of recess shall not be counted in the time fixed; and if Congress has recessed within this period, the time fixed shall not be considered completed until the fourth day after the session shall have again been opened. 
Article 84: 
The intervention and sanction of the Executive is necessary for all acts and resolutions of Congress except the following: 
<list>
(1) Such as relate to elections to be made, or to the consideration of resignations and excuses; 
(2) The agreements of the two Houses concerning the removal of their sessions to another town, the suspension of their sessions, or the prolonging of their ordinary sessions for the term of thirty days as allowed by Article 40; 
(3) The regulations agreed to by the Houses for their mutual convenience, and for the forms to be observed when the Congress meets in joint session as provided in Article 42. 
</list>
Article 85: 
Congress shall head all laws and legislative acts with this formula: The Senate and House of Representatives of New Granada in Congress assembled. . . . 
TITLE VII THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title> 
SECTION I PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, THEIR ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE<title>
Article 86: 
There shall be in New Granada a President of the Republic who shall be the first chief of the Nation, and a Vice-President who shall be the second chief of the Nation. 
Article 87: 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall serve for four years; the President may not, within the four years next following, again exercise the same office or that of Vice-President of the Republic. 
Article 88: 
To be President or Vice-President of the Republic, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine by birth in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty-five years of age.
</list>
Article 89: 
The election of the President of the Republic shall be made by the Canton Electors by an absolute majority of votes and at the same meeting of the Electoral Assemblies in which the ordinary elections of Senators and Representatives are made. 
Article 90: 
Congress at its ordinary session immediately following that of the Electoral Assemblies in which the voting for the President of the Republic takes place shall, in public session, proceed to canvass the votes of the Canton Electors and shall declare elected to that office the person who obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast by the Electors. In case no one shall obtain such majority, Congress shall complete the election by choosing, by an absolute majority of votes of the Senators and Representatives present, from among the three individuals who have obtained the greatest number of votes in the Electoral Assemblies the person who is to be President of the Republic, and shall declare him elected who shall obtain the said majority.Article 91: 
The election of Vice-President of the Republic shall be made two years after that of the President in precisely the same manner as provided for the latter in the two preceding articles. 
Article 92: 
The person chosen President or Vice-President of the Republic shall, after taking the constitutional oath before Congress, enter upon office the first day of April of the year in which the canvass of the votes cast by the Canton Electors for his election is made. 
Article 93: 
If the person who has been chosen President or Vice-President of the Republic is unable to take the constitutional oath on the day appointed in the preceding article, and if the Congress has recessed in the meantime, he shall take the oath in public before the person exercising the Executive Power. 
Article 94: 
The four years assigned as the term of office for the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be reckoned from the day on which, according to the provision in Article 92, they are to take office; and upon completion of this period their term of office ends. 
Article 95: 
When in consequence of death, resignation, or other cause the office of President or Vice-President of the Republic shall become vacant, an extraordinary election shall be held in those cases determined by law. 
Article 96: 
Persons chosen at such extraordinary elections remain in office until the day on which he who is chosen in the usual manner shall enter upon the exercise of his duties. 
Article 97: 
The salaries of the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be determined by law; any alterations made in said salaries shall affect only persons subsequently elected and not those already elected or in office.
SECTION 2 CONCERNING THOSE CHOSEN TO EXERCISE THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title>
Article 98: 
The exercise of the Executive Power belongs to the President of the Republic as first chief of the Nation. 
Article 99: 
In cases of death, resignation, removal, suspension, or for any other temporary or permanent default of the President, the Executive Power shall be exercised by, the Vice-President of the Republic; and when, for the same causes, neither the President nor the Vice-President can perform such duties, they shall be exercised by the person whom Congress shall choose by an absolute majority of votes; the term of office and the functions of such person shall be determined by law. When none of the above-mentioned three individuals is able to exercise the Executive Power, it shall be administered by those who shall be appointed by law and in the order established thereby. 
Article 100: 
Neither the President nor the Vice-President of the Republic may leave the territory of New Granada during his term of office or for one year thereafter.
SECTION 3 POWERS OF THE EXECUTIVE<title>
Article 101: 
The following are the powers of the Executive: 
<list>
(1) To preserve the internal order and peace of the Republic, repel all foreign attack or aggression, and repress any disturbance of the internal public order; 
(2) To execute and cause to be executed by persons subject to his immediate orders, the Constitution and laws as regards that part of them with which the offices of such agents are concerned; 
(3) To see that other public officials not immediately subordinate to him execute the same in so far as regards that part of them with which the said officials are concerned, requiring the competent authorities to enforce responsibility in cases of failure in this duty; 
(4) To make disposition of the land and sea forces for the defense and security of the Republic, for the maintenance or re-establishment of order and peace therein, and for the other objects required by the public service; but neither the President of the Republic while in office nor the person in charge of the Executive Power may take command in person; 
(5) To suspend or remove at will all political officials as well as persons employed in the political offices or in the administration of public revenues. 
</list>
Article 102: 
The following are the exclusive functions of the Executive: 
<list>
(1) To convoke Congress in ordinary sessions and for extraordinary sessions when that is required by some grave motive of public convenience; 
(2) To direct diplomatic negotiations, enter into treaties and conventions with other governments, and, with the prior consent of Congress, to ratify the same; 
(3) To declare war on another power with the prior authorization of Congress; 
(4) To appoint and remove at will Secretaries of State, Ministers Plenipotentiary, Consuls, and any other diplomatic or commercial agents, and Governors of Provinces;(5) With previous consent of the Senate, to appoint generals and chiefs of the Army and Navy from Lieutenant Colonel to the highest rank in the service; 
(6) To appoint other chiefs and officers of the Army and Navy; 
(7) To appoint all other officials whose appointment is not by law entrusted to some other authority; 
(8) To retire generals, chiefs, and officers of the Army and Navy; and to accept or reject resignations tendered by them; 
(9) To grant letters of naturalization in accordance with law; 
(10) When considered expedient to do so, to grant letters of marque against any country with which this country is at war; 
(11) To grant sailing licenses (patentes de navigacion); 
(12) To commute the death penalty to some less severe one provided such commutation is motivated by reasons of public convenience. 
</list>
Article 103: 
The Executive also has the power to grant amnesties and individual or general pardons for grave reasons of public convenience. 
Article 104: 
Upon the opening of Congress the Executive shall give a written report to both Houses on the political state of the Republic and on the general condition of the branches of administration under his charge, indicating at the same time the public measures which should be adopted. This document shall be countersigned by all the Secretaries of State, and the Houses shall never take into consideration any communication from the Executive which is not made through the medium of or signed by at least one of the said Secretaries.
SECTION 4 RESPONSIBILITY OF THOSE EXERCISING THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title>
Article 105: 
He who exercises the Executive Power shall be held responsible for the following acts: 
<list>
(1) When they have for their object favoring the interest or operations of a foreign nation or an enemy of New Granada against the independence or interests of the latter; 
(2) When they have for their object the obstruction of the elections provided-in this Constitution, or for interference with the freedom of the voters; 
(3) When they have for their object preventing the legislative Houses from meeting or continuing their sessions at the times they are required to do so by this Constitution; or interfering with the liberty and independence which said Houses ought to enjoy in all their acts and deliberations;(4) When he refuses to sanction laws or other legislative acts in those cases in which, according to this Constitution, such consent is not to be withheld; 
(5) When they have for their object preventing Judges or Tribunals from trying cases within the competence of the Judicial Power or coercing the freedom with which such trials should be conducted; 
(6) In all other cases in which, by any act or omission of the Executive, any express law shall be violated; provided always the violation of the law consequent upon such act shall have been made known to the Executive; otherwise, should no such representation have been made, the Secretary of State who has signed said act or has been guilty of the omission shall alone be responsible. 
</list>
Article 106: 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic while in office, as well as he who may have the Executive Power in charge during the time he exercises the same, may not be prosecuted or sentenced for common crimes unless the Senate shall have declared as a result of an accusation brought by the House of Representatives that there are grounds for the indictment.
SECTION 5 SECRETARIES OF STATE<title>
Article 107: 
For the dispatch of whatever business or affairs are entrusted to the Executive by this Constitution and laws, there shall be Ministries of State established by law. 
Article 108: 
Each of the Ministries shall be entrusted to a Secretary of State, but the Executive may, when it is deemed advisable, assign two of them to one Secretary. 
Article 109: 
To be a Secretary of State it is necessary to be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship. 
Article 110: 
All acts of the Executive must be promulgated with the consent of at least one of the Secretaries of State, who thus renders himself responsible for the act. Moreover, no decree or act purporting to emanate from the Executive, of whatever kind or description is may be, which is not countersigned by or communicated through one of the Secretaries of State shall be considered as such or obeyed by any agent, authority, or person whatsoever. 
Article 111: 
The provisions of the preceding article shall not apply, however, to the appointment or removal of said Secretaries, which may be done by the person in charge of the Executive Power without being countersigned by a Secretary of State.
Article 112: 
Secretaries of State must not only consent to the acts issued by the Executive, but must also submit to the Executive acts which should be issued in the interests of their several Ministries. Thus they are responsible for violations of law as well as for anything done to the injury of the public welfare, whether it is in consequence of what they have authorized by their signatures, or failed to do in the management of their Ministries; nor does the circumstance of the Executive's having withheld assent relieve them from responsibility. 
Article 113: 
The Secretaries of State, with the consent of the Executive, shall give the legislative Houses whatever information they may require concerning the business or affairs connected with their respective Ministries except such as in the opinion of the Executive may require secrecy. 
Article 114: 
Each Secretary of State shall present to the legislative Houses during the first six days of the ordinary sessions a written report of the state of affairs in the various branches of his Ministry, suggesting what measures the Congress should take regarding them. 
Article 115: 
The Secretaries of State have the right to present to Congress bills and other legislative measures which they consider expedient, and to take part in the debates on such measures or any others of a similar nature; but they are never to have a deliberative vote in Congress. 
SECTION 6 COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENT<title>
Article 116: 
The Council of Government shall be composed of the Vice-President of the Republic and the Secretaries of State. 
Article 117: 
The person exercising the Executive Power must hear the opinion of the Council of Government, without, however, being obligated to conform thereto: 
<list>
(1) As regards his giving or withholding consent to bills and other legislative acts which may be sent to him by Congress; 
(2) As regards convoking Congress in extraordinary session; 
(3) As regards his request to the Congress for authorization to declare war, and in declaring the same in consequence of such authorization; 
(4) As regards the appointment of Ministers Plenipotentiary, Consuls, and other diplomatic and commercial agents; 
(5) As regards the appointment of Governors of Provinces; 
(6) As regards the appointment of Judges of the Superior District Tribunals; 
(7) As regards the exercise of the power to grant amnesties and general or individual pardons;(8) As regards the commutation of the death penalty; 
(9) As regards other cases prescribed by the Constitution or law. 
</list>
Article 118: 
He may also require the advice of the Council on all other matters respecting which such opinion may be considered necessary, reserving to himself the right to accept or reject the same.
TITLE VIII THE JUDICIAL POWER<title> 
SECTION I SUPREME COURT OF JUSTICE<title>
Article 119: 
The Judicial Power shall be exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice, Superior District Tribunals, and the other Tribunals or Courts created by law. 
Article 120: 
There shall be in New Granada a Supreme Court of Justice composed of such number of Justices as shall be determined by law. 
Article 121: 
The duties of the Supreme Court are: 
<list>
(1) To take cognizance of all cases affecting Ministers Plenipotentiary and diplomatic agents accredited to the Government of the Republic as is permitted by public international law or designated by law or treaty; 
(2) To take cognizance of all cases of responsibility brought against the Ministers Plenipotentiary, Diplomatic Agents, and Consuls of the Republic for malfeasance in office; 
(3) To take cognizance of actions brought against persons entrusted with the Executive Power, Secretaries of State, or Justices of the Supreme Court in such cases as when, after being deprived of their office by the Senate, they are to be tried for a crime to which a serious penalty is assigned in accordance with Article 149; 
(4) To take cognizance of actions against the President, the Vice-President, or the person entrusted with the Executive Power for common crimes, the Senate having previously declared that there are grounds for an indictment in accordance with Article 143; 
(5) To take cognizance of all other cases assigned by law.
</list>
Article 122: 
The Justices of the Supreme Court shall be elected by Congress by an absolute majority, and the vacancies which may occur shall be filled ad interim as the law directs.
SECTION 2 SUPERIOR DISTRICT TRIBUNALS<title>
Article 123: 
The territory of the Republic shall be divided into judicial districts, and in each there shall be a Superior Tribunal of Justice. 
Article 124: 
The law shall determine the number of Judges for each, as well as the duties of such Tribunals. 
Article 125: 
The Judges of these Tribunals shall be appointed by the Executive from a ternary submitted by the Supreme Court.
SECTION 3 PROVISIONS COMMON TO SUPREME COURT AND DISTRICT TRIBUNALS<title>
Article 126: 
To be a Justice of the Supreme Court or Judge of the Superior District Tribunals, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty years of age; 
(3) To meet any other qualifications prescribed by law. 
</list>
Article 127: 
The law shall prescribe the term of office for Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the District Tribunals, which shall be not less than six years; but any changes which the law may make shall have effect only for those who are chosen after such changes and shall in no way apply to those chosen before the enactment of such changes. 
Article 128: 
The Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the Superior District Tribunals may not accept, while in office or throughout the year following their term of office, any appointment which the Executive may freely make.
SECTION 4 OTHER TRIBUNALS AND COURTS<title>
Article 129: 
The law shall create other Tribunals or Courts which may be necessary for the administration of justice, and shall determine the powers of each, the qualifications which their Judges must meet, the authority by whom they shall be chosen, and their term of office.
SECTION 5 PROVISIONS COMMON TO ALL TRIBUNALS AND COURTS<title>
Article 130: 
The Judges of any Tribunals or Courts whatsoever may not be suspended from office except in consequence of an accusation legally brought against them and admitted as valid, nor may they ho removed except by judicial sentence in conformity with law.TITLE IX GOVERNMENT OF PROVINCES, CANTONS, AND PARISHES<title>
Article 131: 
In each Province there shall be a Governor whose appointment and removal shall be freely made by the Executive. 
Article 132: 
The Governors are the immediate political agents of the Executive in their respective Provinces, and as such they are to obey his orders and cause the same to be obeyed by all their subordinates. 
Article 133: 
The Governors are also the political chiefs of their respective Provinces, and as such they are to obey and cause to be obeyed by their subordinates the Constitution and laws in so far as the same are applicable to them; they are also to take care that the officials who are not immediately under their orders fulfill and execute the same, strictly requiring them to do so or else enforcing their responsibility through the competent authorities. 
Article 134: 
The law shall prescribe the qualifications necessary to be Governor, the term of office, the other powers with which such officers are to be invested, and whatever else may be necessary for the government of the Provinces, Cantons, and Parishes. 
TITLE X LOCAL GOVERNMENT OF PROVINCES, CANTONS, AND PARISHES<title>
Article 135: 
For the government of the Province there shall be in each a Provincial House composed of Deputies chosen in the Cantons of the Province. 
Article 136: 
The law shall determine the number of Deputies to be chosen in each Canton; but whatever this number shall be, each Canton shall have at least one Deputy. 
Article 137: 
In each Province at least five Deputies shall be chosen for the Provincial House; and in the Provinces in which, according to the preceding article, such number of Deputies shall not be chosen, the five shall be distributed among their Cantons in proportion to their population. 
Article 138: 
The law shall prescribe the qualifications necessary to be a Deputy in the Provincial Houses, as well as the term of office. 
Article 139: 
The law shall regulate whatever else is required for the government of the Provinces, Cantons, and Parishes.TITLE XI CONCERNING RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND THEIR TRIALS BY THE SENATE<title>
Article 140: 
All public officials are responsible to the authorities designated by the Constitution and laws for any abuse of the powers with which they are entrusted or for nonfulfillment of their official duties. 
Article 141: 
The responsibility of persons invested with the Executive Power, the Secretaries of State, and Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice can be enforced only by means of an accusation brought against them before the Senate by the House of Representatives. 
Article 142: 
The House of Representatives is also empowered to accuse before the Senate all other public officials for the abuse of powers entrusted to them, or for the nonfulfillment of their official duties as well as the power to require the competent authorities to enforce responsibility for the same reason. 
Article 143: 
The House of Representatives also has the power to accuse before the Senate the President or Vice-President of the Republic or any person invested with the Executive Power, conformably to Article 106, for common crimes; the Senate, however, must have previously declared whether there are grounds for such indictment. 
Article 144: 
The Senate shall take cognizance of all cases of responsibility affecting any public officers whatsoever against whom the House of Representatives may bring charges in accordance with Articles 141 and 142. 
Article 145: 
When any accusation is made concerning responsibility by the House of Representatives, the Senate shall decide by a majority vote whether or not such accusation shall be admitted, and in the event the decision is to admit the same, the accused is thereby suspended from office. 
Article 146: 
Upon admitting an accusation, the Senate can itself prosecute or entrust the prosecution to a committee chosen from among its members, reserving to itself the sentence, which must be pronounced in open session. 
Article 147: 
The power to pronounce sentence, which in such trials belongs to the Senate, is limited to depriving the accused of office and, at most, declaring him incapable of again filling that office because of his abuse of powers or the nonfulfillment of duties. 
Article 148:
Sentence in such trials must be passed by a two-thirds vote of the Senators attending.Article 149: 
Those found guilty by the Senate are nevertheless subject to trial and sentence by the competent Tribunal if any of the offenses for which they have been tried are defined by law as a crime incurring a severe penalty. 
Article 150: 
In the cases mentioned in Article 143 for declaring that there exist sufficient grounds for prosecuting for common crime the President, Vice-President, or the person entrusted with the Executive Power, it is necessary that the same shall be decided by a vote of the majority of the Senators attending; and upon declaration that the indictment is valid, the accused shall be suspended from office and placed at the disposition of the Supreme Court to undergo trial. 
Article 151: 
The law shall determine the mode of procedure regarding these trials before the Senate and the formalities to be observed therein. 
TITLE XII SUNDRY PROVISIONS<title>
Article 152: 
To obtain in New Granada any employment to which either political or judicial authority or jurisdiction is attached it is necessary to be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship. 
Article 153: 
The function of the armed forces is to defend the independence and dignity of the Republic against all external force to aggression, and to maintain internally the constitutional and legal order, acting always under the authority and direction of the Executive. The armed forces are, moreover, essentially obedient and never deliberative.
Article 154: 
Generals, chiefs, and officers of the Army and Navy shall be Granadines; but foreign generals, chiefs, and officers may he admitted to the armed services of the Republic with special congressional permission. 
Article 155: 
The National Treasury shall make no expenditure which has not been appropriated by Congress, nor in any amount greater than that which has been appropriated. 
Article 156: 
No person holding public office in New Granada shall accept any title, office, decoration, gift, or favor from any king, government, or foreign power without congressional permission. 
Article 157: 
In New Granada there shall be no titles, denominations, or decorations of nobility or any hereditary distinctions. 
Article 158: 
No Granadine shall be compelled to stand trial except before the competent Tribunals and Courts established by this Constitution or by law, nor may he be sentenced without being heard and found guilty; nor can any sentence be pronounced upon him , except the one assigned to the offense of which he has been convicted by a law enacted prior to the commission of said offense. 
Article 159: 
No Granadine may be arrested, detained, or imprisoned except by the authority and in the cases prescribed by law. 
Article 160: 
No Granadine is obliged to give evidence in any criminal case against himself, his spouse, ascendants, descendants, brothers, or sisters. 
Article 161: 
No crime shall hereafter be punished with the penalty of confiscation, but this provision does not include the forfeitures or fines assigned by law to certain crimes. 
Article 162: 
With the exception of the contributions and taxes established by law, no Granadine shall be deprived of any part of his property for public use without his consent unless it be required by some public necessity recognized as such by law, in which case the party shall be fully indemnified for the value thereof. 
Article 163: 
All Granadines have the right to publish their thoughts in print without previous censorship or permission from any authority; they are, however, subject to the responsibility and penalties prescribed by law for the abuse of this right; trials for such abuses shall always be by jury.
Article 164: 
Every Granadine has the power to claim his rights before the proper public authorities provided it be done with the proper moderation and respect; all have the right to present in writing to Congress or the Executive whatever they may consider expedient for the public benefit, but no individual or private association may petition the authorities in the name of the people, much less arrogate to themselves the name of the People. Those contravening this provision shall be tried according to law. 
Article 165: 
No Granadine's house shall be entered, nor his correspondence or papers intercepted or inspected except by the authority and in the cases and in accordance with the formalities prescribed by law. 
Article 166: 
The entail of estates as well as every other description of entail is prohibited, nor can there exist in New Granada any inalienable landed property. 
Article 167: 
Places which because of their isolated position and distances from other towns cannot form part of any Canton or Province, or because of their sparse population cannot be erected into a Canton or Province, shall be governed by special laws; until they are incorporated into some Canton or Province or erected into such, the constitutional regime may be established therein. 
TITLE XIII CONCERNING THE CONSTITUTIONAL OATH<title>
Article 168: 
No public officer shall enter upon his office or exercise any of the duties attached thereto without taking an oath to defend and sustain the Constitution of the Republic and to fulfill faithfully and exactly the duties of his office. 
TITLE XIV INTERPRETATION AND AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION<title>
Article 169: 
Whatever doubts may occur respecting the true meaning of any of the provisions of this Constitution may be resolved by means of a special and express law. 
Article 170: 
This Constitution or any part thereof may at any time be added to or amended by a legislative act passed in accordance with the formalities prescribed in Section 6 of Title VI; but in order that such legislative act may acquire the force of a constitutional law or become part of this Constitution, it is necessary that it be published at least six months before the day on which the Canton Electors are to hold the next ordinary election of Senators and Representatives, and that the said legislative act be newly considered in both Houses of Congress within the next legislative session and again be approved in each of them without any alteration by at least a two-thirds vote of the members of the respective Houses. 
Article 171: 
Thus approved, the addition or amendment of the Constitution shall be sent to the Executive for his sanction, which cannot be refused in this case; and until such sanction be given, it shall have no legal value or effect whatsoever. 
Article 172: 
The power of Congress to amend this Constitution shall never extend to the articles in Title III, which relates to the form of government.
FINAL DISPOSITIONS<title>
Article 173: 
If the Congress, in accordance with the provisions of Article 216 of the Constitution of 1832, authorizes as necessary this reform of said Constitution in which is included all that is to continue in force, it shall publish and promulgate this as the Constitution of New Granada, and that which is not so included, as well as the Amendment of April 16, 1841, is hereby annulled. In this event, Congress shall set the day on which the provisions of this Constitution shall enter into force. 
Article 174: 
Those who are occupying the offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic on the day on which it is decided that this Constitution shall enter into force shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which they were elected. Done in Bogota on the 20th of April 1843. 