In the Name of God, Legislator of the Universe, and by the Authority of the People, 
The Senate and House of Representatives of New Granada, in Congress assembled 
Considering: 
That the Constitution adopted April 20, 1843, does not fully satisfy the desires or necessities of the Nation; 
By virtue of the power to add to and amend the same Constitution which was granted by it to the Congress, and acting in accordance with the procedure and powers extended by the Additional Act of March 7, 1853, decree the following 
CONSTITUTION OF NEW GRANADA<title> 
TITLE I THE REPUBLIC OF NEW GRANADA AND GRANADINES<title>
Article 1: 
The former Viceroyalty of New Granada, which was part of the former Republic of Colombia and later the Republic of New Granada, is hereby constituted a democratic, free, sovereign Republic independent of all foreign powers, authorities, or domination, and is not and never shall be the patrimony of any family or person. 
Article 2: 
The following are Granadines: 
<list>
(1) All individuals born in New Granada and the children of the same; 
(2) All persons naturalized in accordance with law. 
</list>
Article 3: 
All Granadine inhabitants who are or have been married, or who are more than twenty-one years of age are citizens. 
Article 4: 
Citizenship may not be lost or suspended except as a penalty provided by law; rehabilitation shall be obtainable. 
Article 5: 
The Republic guarantees to all Granadines: 
<list>
(1) Individual liberty which recognizes no other limits than the liberty of another individual according to law; 
(2) Personal security, which consists in the right of not being imprisoned, detained, arrested, or confined except for purely criminal matters in conformity with law; this provision shall have effect with respect to cases arising after this Constitution goes into effect and for acts committed during that time; persons shall not be judged or sentenced by special commissions, but only by regular Judges in accordance with pre-existing laws after hearing and legal sentence; 
(3) Inviolability of property, the least portion of which may not be taken except by a general levy, as a result of a legal penalty, or when needed for some public use, and in the latter case only after a prior and just indemnification has been made. During war such indemnification need not be made prior to the taking; 
(4) The liberty of industry and labor within the restrictions established by law; 
(5) The free profession of religion, whether public or private, so long as it does not disturb the public peace, offend good morals, or obstruct others in their worship; 
(6) Inviolability of the domicile, correspondence, and private papers, which may not be interfered with except by competent authority and in accordance with the formalities prescribed by law; 
(7) The free expression of thought, it being understood that when done by the press it is without any limitation, and when done by word of mouth or any other means it is limited only in those ways established by law; 
(8) The right to assemble publicly or privately without arms for the purposes of petitioning officials or authorities or to discuss any matters of public or private interest, and to express freely and without responsibility opinions upon the same. But any meeting of citizens which makes its petitions or expresses its opinions upon any matters by arrogating unto itself the name or the voice of the People, or pretends to impose upon the authorities its will as the will of the People is seditious; individuals composing such a group shall be tried on the charge of sedition. The will of the People can be expressed only through the representatives of the People by mandate obtained in conformity with this Constitution; 
(9) The right to give or receive any kind of instruction in institutions not supported by public funds; 
(10) Equality of all individual rights; no distinctions based on birth, and no titles of nobility, profession, privilege, or class shall be recognized; 
(11) Jury trial in all cases involving crimes meriting corporal punishment or loss of liberty for more than two years, but the law may except from this requirement cases of responsibility brought against public officials and trials for political offenses. 
</list>
Article 6: 
There is and shall be no slavery in New Granada.Article 7: 
With the exception of the offices of President and Vice-President, for which it is required that the incumbents be native-born Granadines and thirty years of age, no other post of authority or of political or judicial jurisdiction in New Granada shall require any other qualification than that of being a Granadine citizen. 
Article 8: 
Aliens already in as well as those who shall come to New Granada shall enjoy the same civil rights and guarantees as are extended to Granadines, provided they live in submission to the laws and authorities of the country.
Article 9: 
It is the duty of all Granadines to comply with and respect the laws, obey the authorities, contribute to the public expenses, serve the country, and defend the liberty and independence of the Nation. 
TITLE II THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title>
Article 10: 
The Republic of New Granada establishes for its regime and general administration a popular, representative, and responsible government. Full powers of local government are reserved to the Provinces, and the following powers and functions reside in the general government: 
<list>
(1) Maintenance of the general order; the right to decide on peace and war, and consequently the power to maintain an Army and Navy and to legislate on all matters necessary for their organization and administration; 
(2) The organization and administration of the National Treasury; providing the contributions and ordering the national expenses; regulating and amortizing the national debt; 
(3) The control of all foreign commerce, the ports of importation and exportation, canals or navigable rivers which extend to more than one Province, and the canals and roads which may be constructed to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans; 
(4) Enacting civil and penal legislation as well as creating rights and obligations between individuals, defining the punishable actions and providing the proper penalties, and also providing for the organization of the authorities and functionaries who are to make effective these rights and obligations and who are to impose the penalties, and A uniform procedure that is to be observed in these matters throughout the Republic; 
(5) Demarcation of boundaries between the national territory and that of foreign countries, and the determination of Provincial boundaries as well as their alteration and abolition; 
(6) Foreign relations and the power to enter into treaties and conventions; 
(7) The interpretation and amendment of the Constitution and the other powers expressly conferred by the Constitution; 
(8) Taking a periodic census of the population; 
(9) The organization of the electoral system for all elective national offices; 
(10) Doing whatever is necessary for the administration, adjudication, application, and sale of the uncultivated lands and other national property; 
(11) The determination of the type, weight, form, and denomination of money, and the establishment of an official system of weights and measures; 
(12) The control of immigration and naturalization of aliens; 
(13) Granting exclusive privileges and other aids or indemnifications in matters of recognized public utility which do not have a purely provincial character. 
</list>
Article	11: 
The general government also has the power, although not exclusively, to foster public education. 
Article 12: 
Congress enacts all laws concerning matters the control of which is vested in the general government and gives its approval to all public treaties. The President executes them or sees that they are executed. The Supreme Court of Justice and other Tribunals and Courts apply them in particular cases. 
TITLE III ELECTIONS<title> 
Article 13: 
Every Granadine citizen has the right to vote directly by secret ballot and at the proper times for: 
<list>
(1) the President and Vice-President of the Republic, 
(2) Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Attorney-General of the Nation, 
(3) the Governor of his Province, 
(4) the Senator or Senators and the Representative or Representatives of his Province. 
</list>
The law shall determine the time and formalities of these elections. 
Article 14:
All elections referred to in the preceding article shall be determined by a majority of votes. In case of a tie, the election shall be decided by lot. 
Article 15: 
The President and Vice-President, Secretaries of State, Justices of the Supreme Court, the Attorney-General of the Nation, and the Governors of Provinces may not be elected Senators or Representatives. The Judges and Attorneys (Fiscales) of the Courts established by law, and other officers who exercise jurisdiction or authority in more than one Parish may not be elected Senators or Representatives for the Provinces in which they officiate. 
TITLE IV THE LEGISLATIVE POWER<title>
Article 16: 
The people delegate the legislative power of the general government to a Congress composed of two Houses: a Senate composed of one Senator for each Province provided such number exceeds twenty-one, and a House of Representatives chosen on the basis of one Representative for each forty thousand persons and an additional Representative for each remainder amounting to at least twenty thousand persons in the several Provinces, it being always understood that each Province has the right to elect one Representative even though its population does not meet the required number. 
Article 17: 
The term of office for Senators and Representatives shall be two years; they are eligible for re-election indefinitely. 
Article 18: 
The members of Congress are absolutely not responsible for their opinions and votes, and they enjoy immunity of person during the sessions and while they journey thereto and therefrom from and to their homes. The law shall determine the method of procedure against them in criminal cases during this period. 
Article 19: 
The Congress shall meet in its own right on February of each year in the capital of the Republic with an absolute majority of the members of each House in attendance; it shall continue in session for sixty days, which session may be prolonged for thirty days more should the Congress deem it necessary; Congress also has the right to meet in extraordinary session for one or more determined purposes. In none of these actions is the intervention of the Executive necessary. 
Article 20: 
During the term for which they are elected, members of Congress may not accept any office to which the Executive may freely appoint. They may be appointed only Secretary of State or diplomatic officer, which appointment vacates their congressional seats. Those officials who may be freely appointed and removed by the Executive automatically vacate their offices when they accept election to the legislative body.Article 21: 
It is the exclusive power of the Senate to take cognizance of all actions brought by the House of Representatives against the person exercising the Executive Power, Secretaries of State, the Attorney-General of the Nation, and the Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice for misconduct in the exercise of their duties. 
Article 22: 
The law shall determine precisely the formalities of such trials as well as any others in which the legislative Houses may be permitted to intervene, and it shall also determine the penalties which may be imposed.
Article 23: 
Congress shall vote annually the national public expenses in accordance with the budget drawn up as directed by law and presented by the Executive; it shall examine and approve the budgetary and treasury accounts as presented by the Executive; it shall fix the size of the military force to be under arms the following year; it shall grant amnesties and general pardons for reasons of public convenience. Congress also has power to consent to or withhold consent to promotions in the Army from Lieutenant Colonel to General inclusive when such consent is requested by the Executive; and it has power to accept the resignations of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Presidential Alternate (Designado) when performing the executive function, the Attorney-General of the Nation, and the Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
The authority who is to accept the resignations of the AttorneyGeneral of the Nation and of the Justices of the Supreme Court during the recess of Congress shall be determined by law. 
Article 24: 
Each House is competent to hear and decide questions concerning the election of its members, to provide whatever may be necessary for the policing of the building in which it meets, and to judge and punish in accordance with its own regulations all persons who express their approval or disapproval of the speeches or opinions expressed by the Senators or Representatives. 
Article 25: 
Each House is also competent to judge and punish those who, violate the police rules enacted by each House; and each House is competent to accept the resignations of its respective members. 
TITLE V THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title>
Article 26: 
The people delegate the exercise of the Executive Power to an officer known as the President of New Granada, who is chief of the national public administration.Article 27: 
The President of New Granada shall remain in office four years, and he shall be elected by a direct secret vote of the citizens of the Republic; Congress shall have the power to canvass the vote and declare the election in favor of the one who obtains the majority of votes. 
Article 28: 
To fill the temporary or permanent vacancy of the presidency there shall be a Vice-President, whose term of office shall be four years and who shall be elected in the same manner as the President. 
Article 29: 
In case of a temporary or permanent vacancy of the vice-presidency, the Executive Power shall be exercised by a citizen who shall be annually chosen by Congress. 
Article 30: 
When none of the three officers mentioned above is able to take charge of the Executive Power, it shall be exercised by such other persons as the law may designate and in the order established thereby. 
Article 31: 
When the President and Vice-President are permanently incapable of functioning and the Presidential Alternate (Designado) takes charge of the executive office, the citizens shall be called upon to elect a new President. 
Article 32: 
The term of office for the President and Vice-President of New Granada shall be reckoned from the first of April immediately following election. No one shall be eligible for re-election without the intervening of a full term. 
Article 33: 
On assuming office, the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take an oath before Congress to support the Constitution and laws of the Republic. 
Article 34: 
In addition to executing the laws, the Executive shall have the following powers: 
<list>
(1) To appoint all national public officials whose appointment has not been assigned to some other authority by the Constitution or law; 
(2) To remove freely those officials in the executive branch whose appointment he freely made; 
(3) To negotiate and conclude public treaties and conventions with foreign nations and to see to their exact and faithful enforcement after ratifications have been exchanged; 
(4) To enter into all kinds of public contracts or agreements relating to matters within the competence of the general government, submitting them to the legislative body for approval if they contain stipulations not provided for in, the laws; 
(5) To declare war when it has been decreed by the legislative body and to direct the defense of the country in case of foreign invasion; 
(6) To direct military operations at home and abroad as Commander-in-Chief of the land and sea forces, but in no case may he be permitted to take command in person; 
(7) To see that the national revenues are properly and faithfully collected and expended; 
(8) To present to Congress annually for its approval estimates of the revenues and expenses for the coming year and a general account of the treasury for the preceding year; 
(9) To see that justice is fully and promptly administered throughout the Republic and, acting through the Attorney-General and Prosecuting Attorneys (Fiscales), bring all delinquents before the Supreme Court or other Tribunals and Courts; 
(10) To call Congress into regular session, and, with the consent of the Council of Government and the Attorney-General, call it into extraordinary session when necessary; 
(11) To grant amnesties and general or individual pardons for reasons of public convenience; but in no case shall he grant pardons for common crimes, or grant such to public officers for misconduct in office. 
</list>
Article 35: 
For the dispatch of all administrative business there may be as many as four Secretaries of State freely chosen by the person exercising the Executive Power and removable at his will. All the acts of the President, with the exception of those appointing or removing Secretaries of State, shall be authorized by one of the said Secretaries, without which requisite they shall not be obeyed. 
Article 36:
The Vice-President, the Secretaries of State, and the Attorney-General shall form the Council of Government, which shall function as an advisory body to the President and shall be presided over by the Vice-President. 
TITLE VI CONCERNING THE ENACTMENT OF LAWS<title>
Article 37: 
Laws may originate in either of the two Houses by virtue of a bill presented by one of its members or by a Secretary of State. Bills must be discussed in three debates held on different days; after both Houses agree to a bill in its entirety and as to its details, it shall be sent to the Executive for examination. 
Article 38: 
The President may complete the legislative process by a decree of execution; or he may return the bill to the Congress for reconsideration if he deems it to be unconstitutional, prejudicial, or defective. In any event he shall send the bill within six days to the House of origin signed or with his objections if he vetoes it. Every bill not returned within six days after the President has received it shall be considered law provided the Congress has not adjourned in the meantime. 
Article 39: 
After receiving the President's objections to a bill, the Houses shall debate it de novo, and the results of such action shall be sent to the Executive for his sanction, which under these circumstances may not be denied. In this debate no provisions which were not considered in the President's objections may be debated. 
Article 40: 
In all cases of continued disagreement between the two Houses after the House of origin has insisted upon its text, there shall be a joint session which shall decide by a majority vote whatever may be necessary. The bill thus agreed to shall be sent to the Executive. 
TITLE VII THE JUDICIAL POWER<title>
Article 41: 
The Judicial Power is delegated by the people to the Supreme Court of the Nation and to the other Tribunals and Courts which may be established by law. 
Article 42: 
The Supreme Court of the Nation shall be composed of three Justices popularly elected for terms of four years, and appointed by the Executive in cases of temporary vacancy. The Supreme Court shall have the following powers: 
<list>
(1) To take cognizance of actions brought against the President and Vice-President of New Granada and against the Presidential Alternate (Designado) while in the exercise of the Executive Power for common criminal offenses, their suspension from office having been decreed by the Senate on petition from the House of Representatives; 
(2) To take cognizance of actions brought against foreign Diplomatic Agents where it is permitted by international law; 
(3) To take cognizance of all cases of responsibility which may be instituted against Secretaries of State, Diplomatic Agents, Consuls, Judges, and Governors of Provinces for misconduct in office; 
(4) To decide controversies between two or more Provinces; 
(5) To take cognizance of prize and maritime cases; 
(6) To decide upon the nullification of municipal ordinances for repugnance to the Constitution and laws of the Republic;(7) To commute for important reasons the death sentence upon previous report of the trial court or judge; 
(8) To perform all other functions assigned by law. 
</list>
Article 43: 
Inferior Tribunals and Courts shall be organized by law, which shall also determine their powers. 
Article 44: 
The Judges and Prosecuting Attorneys (Fiscales) shall be popularly elected by the citizens of the several judicial districts for a term of four years. Temporary vacancies shall be filled by the Governor of the Province wherein the court sits. 
Article 45: 
The Attorney-General of the Nation shall remain in office four years and shall be eligible for re-election; he shall represent the Republic in all cases before the Supreme Court. 
Article 46: 
The Justices and Judges of any Tribunal or Court may not be suspended from duty except for an accusation legally made and admitted, and they may not be removed except by a judicial sentence handed down in conformity with law. 
TITLE VIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT<title>
Article 47:
The territory of the Republic shall continue to be divided into Provinces for the general administration of national affairs; and the Provinces shall be divided into Parishes. Such division may be varied for fiscal, political, and judicial purposes by the general laws of the Republic; and for the purposes of municipal administration by the municipal ordinances of each Province. The territorial divisions of Goajira, Caqueta, and others not inhabited by civilized persons may be organized and governed by special laws. 
Article 48: 
Each Province has the constitutional power to do whatever it may deem necessary for its own organization and administration so long as it does not invade those fields within the competency of the general government with respect to which it is under an absolute obligation to conform to the provisions of this Constitution and the laws. 
Article 49: 
No Province may subject the Granadines of another Province or their property to any obligations or charges to which its own inhabitants are not subjected, or deprive them of any rights or protection granted to its own inhabitants. 
Article 50: 
The government or local regime of each Province shall be vested in a Provincial Legislature for legislative matters; for executive matters it shall be vested in a Governor, who shall also be the agent of the national Executive, and in any other offices which may be established. 
Article 51: 
The Provincial Legislature, the form and functions of which shall be determined by the Provincial Constitution, shall necessarily be popularly elected and may not contain less than seven members. 
Article 52: 
The Governor as agent of the national Executive shall enforce and cause to be enforced within his Province the Constitution and national laws as well as the orders of the President of the Republic. As head of the local executive power he shall fulfill all duties and exercise all powers granted him by the various local institutions. The term of office for Governor shall be two years, and he may be re-elected for the term immediately following. 
Article 53: 
The President of the Republic may suspend Governors of Provinces from office when he deems it necessary, making a report of his reasons for such action to the Supreme Court in order that the court may fix the duration of such suspension. If said period is for as much as a year, or if the Governor is permanently suspended, a new election for a full term shall be held. The Constitution establishes the manner whereby substitutions shall be made in cases of temporary suspension, it being understood that such power shall be exercised by the President unless contrary provision be made prior to the exercise of such power in any given instances. 
Article 54: 
The person exercising the Executive Power may, through the proper officer of the Public Ministry (Ministerio Ptiblico) and in default of him through a Prosecuting Attorney (Fiscal) named for the purpose, bring charges before the competent judicial authority against Governors of Provinces and all other national or municipal administrative and judicial officials for violation of the Constitution or national laws. 
Article 55: 
The members of the Provincial Legislatures enjoy the same privileges and immunities which, by this Constitution, are granted the Senators and Representatives of the people.
TITLE IX SUNDRY PROVISIONS<title>
Article 56: 
No disbursement shall be made from the National Treasury of any sum not appropriated by Congress, or for a larger amount than that appropriated.Article 57: 
The present Constitution may be interpreted by means of a law, and it may be added to or amended by any of the following methods: 
<list>
(1) By a law debated according to the procedure prescribed by this Constitution which, before being sent to the Executive, is accepted by a four-fifths vote of the members of both Houses. In this instance the Executive may not refuse to sanction said law; 
(2) By a constituent assembly elected for the purpose and convoked by law; said assembly shall be composed of as many delegates from each Province as is equal to the number of Senators and Representatives to which the Province is entitled. The assembly shall, during its sessions and until the new constitutional provision is adopted, enjoy whatever rights and powers the Congress has; 
(3) By a law passed according to ordinary procedure during one session and approved without any important variations by the Congress at its next ordinary session. 
</list>
Article 58: 
Existing general laws and municipal ordinances which are not contrary to this Constitution or laws passed in pursuance thereof shall continue in force as long as they are not derogated by competent authority. 
Article 59: 
This Constitution does not require any change in the presidency or vice-presidency; the present incumbents shall continue in office until the end of the terms for which they were chosen at the time of their election. 
Article 60: 
The present members of Congress shall continue in office only until their successors are elected under the new election laws. 
Article 61: 
All functionaries and public corporations are prohibited from exercising any function or authority which has not been expressly delegated to them. 
Article 62: 
In every law or decree amending previous acts there shall be carefully inserted those provisions of the amended act which are to continue in force. 
Article 63: 
The present Constitution shall be published in the capital of the Republic six days after being sanctioned, and on that day the provisions dealing with the passage of legislation, Congress, and the Executive shall enter into force in the capital.
Article 64: 
It shall be published and go into effect next September in all districts, territories, and villages of the Republic. 
Transitory Article: 
The Executive is empowered to enter into treaties with the Republics of Venezuela and Ecuador for the re-establishment of the Colombian Union under a federal system of fifteen or more States which shall be definitively organized by a Constituent Convention convoked in accordance with the stipulations of said treaties. Done in Bogota on the 10th of May 1853. 