In the Name of God, Creator and Supreme Legislator of the Universe: 
We, the Representatives of New Granada in convention assembled, being desirous of meeting the wishes of our constituents, the People, to secure national independence, consolidate the union, promote domestic peace and security, establish justice, and to give the person, life, honor, liberty, property, and equality of Granadines the most solid guarantees, order and decree the following CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW GRANADA<title> 
TITLE I NEW GRANADA AND GRANADINES<title> 
SECTION I THE STATE OF NEW GRANADA<title>
Article 1: 
The State of New Granada is composed of all Granadines united under a compact of political association for their common benefit. 
Article 2: 
The boundaries of this State are the same as those which in 1810 separated the territory of New Granada from the Captaincies General of Venezuela and Guatemala and from the Portuguese possessions in Brazil; the southern boundary shall be definitively established south of the Province of Pasto. 
Article 3: 
The Granadine Nation shall be forever essentially and irrevocably sovereign, free, and independent of all foreign power or domination, and it is not and never shall be the patrimony of any family or person. The public functionaries, whatever may be the nature of their authority, shall be agents of the Nation and shall be responsible to it for their public conduct.
SECTION 2 GRANADINES<title>
Article 4: 
Granadines are such either by birth or naturalization. 
Article 5: 
The following are Granadines by birth: 
<list>
(1) All free persons born in the territory of New Granada before the Provinces wherein they were born were independent of Spain;(2) Other persons born in the territory of New Granada of parents who were Granadines by birth or naturalization; 
(3) Those born abroad of Granadine parents absent in the service of the Republic or absent because of their devotion to the cause of independence and liberty, who have, or shall hereafter establish, their residence in New Granada; 
(4) Those persons born in the territory of New Granada of alien parents, provided such persons establish their residence here; 
(5) Emancipated slaves born in the territory of New Granada; 
(6) Children of slaves born free by virtue of law in the territory of New Granada. 
</list>
Article 6: 
The following are Granadines by naturalization: 
<list>
(1) All persons who, although born outside the territory of New Granada, were domiciled therein at the time the place of their domicile was declared independent of Spain, and who have lived in submission to the Constitution of 1821; 
(2) Children of a Granadine father or mother who were born outside the territory of New Granada and who have returned and declared that they wish to be considered Granadines in accordance with law; 
(3) Aliens who have obtained letters of naturalization as well as those who, having already obtained them from the government of Colombia, are at present domiciled or hereafter may become domiciled in New Granada, provided that they have remained faithful to the cause of liberty; 
(4) Persons born in any part of the territory of Colombia which outside that of New Granada, provided they are already or shall is hereafter become domiciled in the territory of New Granada. 
</list>
Article 7: 
The duties of Granadines are: 
<list>
(1) To live in submission to the Constitution and laws and to respect and obey the authorities established by them; 
(2) To contribute to the public expenses; 
(3) To serve and defend the country, even at the sacrifice of life if necessary; 
(4) To watch over the preservation of public liberties.
</list>
TITLE II CITIZENS OF NEW GRANADA<title>
Article 8: 
All Granadines possessing the following qualifications are citizens:
<list>(1) Those who are married or twenty-one years of age; 
(2) Those who know how to read and write; however, this qualification shall not be enforced until 1850; 
(3) Those having an assured income who are not employed by another as a domestic servant or as a day laborer. 
</list>
Article 9: 
Citizenship is forfeited: 
<list>
(1) For accepting employment from another country without the permission of the Granadine Government; 
(2) For entering the service of an enemy of New Granada, or for serving against New Granada; 
(3) For having been condemned to suffer corporal punishment, until restored to citizenship; 
(4) For selling one's vote or buying that of another; 
(5) For fraudulent bankruptcy. 
</list>
Article 10: 
Citizenship is suspended: 
<list>
(1) For obtaining letters of naturalization in a foreign country; 
(2) For mental derangement; 
(3) For serving as a domestic or day laborer; 
(4) For nonpayment of sums due the National Treasury or any of the other public funds; 
(5) For being declared a vagabond; 
(6) While on trial for a criminal offense meriting corporal or infamous punishment from the time of arrest until acquitted or sentenced to a punishment of a different character; 
(7) By a judicial decree to that effect. 
</list>
Article 11: 
All citizens shall have the right to elect and to be elected to the various public offices provided they have the qualifications required by the Constitution and laws. 
TITLE III GOVERNMENT OF NEW GRANADA<title>
Article 12: 
The Government of New Granada is republican, popular, representative, elective, and responsible. 
Article 13: 
For administration the Supreme Power is divided into the legislative, executive, and judicial branches, and none of these may exercise the powers granted by this Constitution to either of the other two, each branch being restricted to its own function. 
Article 14: 
It is the duty of the Government to protect the liberty, security, property, and equality of Granadines.
Article 15: 
It is also the duty of the Government to protect Granadines the exercise of the Apostolic Roman Catholic religion. 
TITLE IV ELECTIONS<title> 
SECTION I PARISH ELECTIONS<title>
Article 16: 
Parish elections shall be held in each of the Parishes of the Republic, regardless of the size of its population, every two years on the day appointed by law. 
Article 17: 
Without the necessity of awaiting orders, Parish Judges give the parochial voters eight days' notice of elections. 
Article 18: 
Parochial voters are those inhabitants of the Parish District possessing the full rights of citizenship, it being understood that for voting purposes an inhabitant is one who has resided in the district for at least a year preceding the election, or has declared before the competent legal authority his intention to reside therein. 
Article 19: 
Parish elections shall be presided over by the parochial authority designated by law, assisted by at least four persons chosen according to law, who must also be parochial voters. 
Article 20: 
The object of Parish elections is: 
<list>
(1) To vote for the Elector or Electors to which the Parish is entitled; 
(2) To make any other elections required by law. 
</list>
Article 21: 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic, Secretaries of State, Councilors of State, and Governors may not be Electors. 
Article 22: 
Those receiving the greatest number of votes shall be considered constitutionally elected; in case of tie, it shall be decided by lot. 
Article 23: 
In each Parish one Elector shall be chosen for every one thousand persons, and an additional Elector for a remainder of five hundred; but in a Parish the population of which does not number one thousand, one Elector nevertheless shall be chosen. 
Article 24: 
Parish elections shall be open for a period of eight days, at the expiration of which they shall be considered closed.
SECTION 2 CANTON ELECTIONS<title>
Article 25: 
The Electoral Assembly shall be composed of the Electors chosen in the Parishes of each Canton.Article 26: 
To be an Elector, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizen ship; 
(2) To be married or twenty-five years of age; 
(3) To be a resident of one of the Parishes of the Canton; 
(4) To be able to read and write. 
</list>
Article 27: 
When a person is chosen Elector by several Parishes he shall accept the one in which he has received the greatest number of votes; in the event the votes should be equal in number, he shall accept election in the Parish in which he is domiciled; and if he does not reside in any of them, [the parish he is to represent] shall be decided by lot. 
Article 28: 
Every year on the day appointed by law the Electoral Assembly shall meet in the main town of the Canton with at least two thirds of the Electors attending. 
Article 29: 
As soon as the Assembly shall have been opened by the chief of the Canton, it shall elect a presiding officer from among it membership. 
Article 30: 
The functions of Electoral Assemblies are: 
<list>
(1) To vote for the President and Vice-President of the Republic; 
(2) To vote for the Senator or Senators of the Province and their alternates (suplentes); 
(3) To vote for the Representative or Representatives of the Province and their alternates (suplentes); 
(4) To vote for the Deputy or Deputies to the Provincial House and their alternates (suplentes); 
(5) To make whatever other elections are prescribed by law. 
</list>
Article 31: 
The election of each of the officers mentioned above shall be canvassed in a single sitting of the Assembly, which session shall continue until such canvass is completed. 
Article 32: 
The term of office for Electors shall be two years. Vacancies caused by withdrawal as well as those arising from temporary causes shall be filled when necessary by those having the most votes in the election registers. 
Article 33: 
The register of votes cast for the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be sent, after scrutiny, to the Senate, and that for Senators and Representatives to the Provincial House. 
Article 34: 
The election of Deputies to the Provincial House shall be completed by the Electoral Assembly itself, information thereof being sent to those elected.Article 35: 
The Electoral Assemblies shall not continue in session for more than eight days.
SECTION 3 REGULATIONS COMMON TO BOTH ELECTIONS<title>
Article 36: 
Elections shall be public, and no one carrying arms may attend them. 
Article 37: 
Any act done in Parish elections or in the Electoral Assemblies which is not prescribed by this Constitution or by law, or done after the expiration of the period therein specified, is not only void, but contrary to public security. 
Article 38: 
A special law shall regulate these elections and determine the formalities to be observed in them.
TITLE V THE LEGISLATIVE POWER<title> 
SECTION I CONGRESS<title>
Article 39: 
The Legislative Power is exercised by a Congress composed of two Houses, one of Senators and the other of Representatives. 
Article 40: 
Congress shall assemble annually on the first of March even when it has not been convoked, and its ordinary sessions shall last sixty days and may be prolonged to ninety days in case of necessity.
SECTION 2 THE SENATE<title>
Article 41: 
The Senate of New Granada shall be composed of Senators elected on the basis of one for every sixty thousand persons, and an additional one for any remainder of thirty thousand. A Province lacking the requisite population shall nevertheless elect one Senator. Should the population increase to the point where the number of Senators shall exceed forty, the ratio provided in this article shall from time to time be changed by law in order that the size of the Senate may never exceed this number; but should the population diminish so that the number of Senators would be less than twenty-five, the ratio shall be proportionately diminished so that the membership shall never be below this number. 
Article 42: 
Should an individual be chosen Senator by the Province in which he resides as well as by the Province in which he was born, he shall accept the election of the former. The term of office for Senators shall be four years, one half of the membership being renewed every two years. 
Article 43:
To be Senator, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine by birth and in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty-five years of age; 
(3) To be a resident or a native of the Province where the election takes place; 
(4) To have resided in the Republic for the four years immediately preceding the election; however, this requirement shall not apply to those who have been absent in the service of the Republic or absent on account of their devotion to the liberty and independence of the country; 
(5) To be the owner of real property having an unencumbered value of four thousand pesos, or in default of this, an annual income of five hundred pesos accruing from landed property, or an income of eight hundred pesos accruing from some employment or from the exercise of a trade or profession. 
</list>
Article 44: 
Those Granadines who were settled in any of the towns of New Granada at the time the towns declared their independence of Spain shall not be required to be Granadines by birth to be elected Senators provided they have remained faithful to the cause of independence and liberty, and provided they have been continuously domiciled in the territory of the country for the ten years immediately preceding the election; this last condition, however, shall not extend to those who have been absent in the service of the Republic or on account of their devotion to the independence and liberty of the country. 
Article 45: 
The Senate shall take cognizance only of accusations brought by the House of Representatives. If the accusation concerns official conduct, the Senate may not impose any penalties on the accused other than suspension or removal from office, or at most to declare him temporarily or permanently incapable of holding any office of confidence in the Republic; however, the accused shall be subject to indictment, trial, and sentence by competent Tribunals should his act entail other penalties prescribed by law. 
Article 46: 
When the accusation does not refer to the official conduct of the accused, the Senate shall restrict itself to deciding whether the accusation made by the House of Representatives is or is not well founded, and should the decision be in the affirmative, the accused shall be handed over to the competent Tribunal for trial.Article 47: 
The Senate may entrust the prosecution to a committee composed of its own members, reserving to itself the sentence, which must be pronounced in open session; no one shall be condemned in these trials without a two-thirds vote of the Senators present. 
Article 48: 
An accusation may be admitted to the Senate by a majority vote of the Senators present; whenever an accusation shall be admitted, the accused shall, by that act, be suspended from office. 
Article 49: 
The process and formalities of these trials shall be regulated by a law which shall also point out the cases in which the punishments provided in Article 45 shall be inflicted.
SECTION 3 THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES<title>
Article 50: 
The House shall be composed of Representatives elected in each Province by the Electoral Assemblies on the basis of one for every twenty-five thousand persons, and an additional one for any remainder of twelve thousand. Should the population increase to the point where the number of Representatives shall exceed eighty, the ratio provided in this article shall from time to time be changed by law in order that the number of Representatives shall never exceed this number; but should the population diminish so that the number of Representatives be less than forty, the ratio shall be proportionately diminished so that there shall never be fewer than this number. 
Article 51: 
A Province whose population does not entitle it to one Representative on the basis of the ratio designated shall nevertheless elect one Representative. 
Article 52: 
The term of office for Representatives shall be two years, one half being elected every year. 
Article 53: 
Should any person be elected Representative by two Provinces at the same time, he shall accept the election of the Province in which he resides. 
Article 54: 
To be elected Representative, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship;
(2) To be a native or resident of the Province in which the election takes place;
(3) To be twenty-five years of age; 
(4) To be owner of landed property of an unencumbered value of two thousand pesos, or have an annual income of three hundred pesos accruing from real property, or in default of this, an annual income of four hundred pesos accruing from some employment or from the exercise of some trade or profession; 
(5) To have resided in the Republic for three years immediately preceding the election; but this requirement shall not exclude those who have been absent in the service of the Republic, or as a consequence of their devotion to the independence and liberty of the country. 
</list>
Article 55: 
To be elected Representative, persons not natives of New Granada must: 
<list>
(1) Be married to a native-born Granadine; 
(2) Possess real property valued at ten thousand pesos; 
(3) Have resided in the country for eight years immediately preceding the election; this requirement shall not exclude those who have been absent in the service of the Republic, or as a consequence of their devotion to the independence and liberty of the country. 
</list>
Article 56: 
Persons not natives of New Granada but who were domiciled therein at the time the town in which they resided effected its political emancipation from Spain may be elected Representatives provided that after the revolution they submitted to the Constitution of 1821, that they possess the qualifications required of native Granadines, and that they have remained constantly faithful to the cause of liberty and independence. 
Article 57: 
Functions peculiar to the House of Representatives are: 
<list>
(1) To accuse before the Senate on its own initiative or at the instance of any citizen the President of the Republic or the person who may be exercising the executive function in all cases of misconduct in the exercise of his duties, or of any crime meriting corporal or ignominious penalty;
(2) To accuse in like manner Secretaries of State and Justices of the Supreme Court for ,any misconduct in the discharge of their respective duties; 
(3) To accuse in like manner all public officials for any misconduct in the exercise of their duties, provided that there is no accusation for any delinquency pending before the ordinary Tribunals; or to require the competent authorities and Tribunals to proceed in the discharge of their duties in such cases. 
</list>
SECTION 4 PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH HOUSES<title>
Article 58: 
The Senate and House of Representatives shall not open their sessions without the attendance of two thirds of their respective members; but in any case, those attending, whatever their number may be, shall meet and compel the attendance of absent members by fines and in the manner provided by law. 
Article 59: 
The Houses shall not continue their sessions without the attendance of two thirds of the members present in the place of meeting, provided that those two thirds are not less than the absolute majority of all the members. 
Article 60: 
The Houses shall not meet in joint session except to canvass and confirm the elections of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, to receive their oaths of office, to accept or reject their resignations, and to grant or refuse their leaves of absence; to elect Councilors of State, to accept or reject resignations of Councilors of State and of Justices of the Supreme Court, and for all other purposes which the Constitution and laws prescribe. They shall never meet in joint session for the purpose of deliberating or resolving upon those matters enumerated in Article 74. 
Article 61: 
The Houses shall hold their sessions in the same town, and neither shall suspend its sessions for more than two days, or repair to any other place without the consent of the other. 
Article 62: 
Vacancies which may occur in the Houses from death, resignation, expulsion, or any other cause shall be filled by the proper alternates (suplentes); and when the latter are vacated for similar causes, the Governor of the Province, upon demand of the House concerned, shall call an extraordinary meeting of the Electoral Assemblies to elect persons to fill the vacancies. 
Article 63: 
The declinations of persons elected Senator or Representative shall be heard by the proper Provincial House, which shall pass upon them; but if the said House is not in session, they shall be heard and decided upon by the Governor of the Province; retirements from the post of Senator and Representative, after such posts have been accepted, shall be heard and disposed of by the respective Houses of Congress. 
Article 64: 
The Houses shall have the power of expelling members for those offenses which according to law deserve that penalty; but at least two thirds of the members present shall agree before it is enforced. 
Article 65: 
The sessions of both Houses shall be public, but they may be secret when the Houses deem it necessary. 
Article 66: 
Each House shall be installed and open its sessions separately, each shall decide questions concerning the qualifications of its members, and each shall draw up the regulations for the governance of the House and the dispatch of its business. The Houses shall have power to punish such of their members as infringe the regulations by whatever penalties the Houses may establish; however, they shall deliver members who have committed any of the ordinary crimes over to the competent Judge. 
Article 67: 
The following may not be elected Senators or Representatives: the President and Vice-President of the Republic, Secretaries and Councilors of State, Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the District Tribunals, or any other person exercising jurisdiction or authority in any of the Provinces at the time the election is held. 
Article 68: 
Public officials who are removable at the pleasure of the Executive are eligible to the Senate or House of Representatives; but if they accept election, their former office is thereby vacated. 
Article 69: 
While the sessions last and during the time necessary for proceeding thereto and for returning home, Senators and Representatives may not be accused or arrested for any civil action, or prosecuted or imprisoned for any criminal action until the House to which they belong has suspended them from office and delivered them to the competent Tribunal, unless they have been taken in flagrant delicto for an offense meriting corporal punishment. 
Article 70: 
Senators and Representatives shall not be responsible at any time or to any authority for the speeches and opinions they may have delivered in the Houses. 
Article 71: 
Senators and Representatives are representatives of the Nation and not of the Province which elects them; they shall receive neither orders nor instructions from the Electoral Assemblies or from any other body.
Article 72: 
During their incumbency Senators and Representatives shall not accept any position or office which is within the power of the Executive to grant. 
Article 73: 
When the same person is elected both Senator and Representative, he shall accept the office of Senator.
SECTION 5 POWERS OF CONGRESS<title>
Article 74: 
The following are the exclusive powers of Congress: 
<list>
(1) To vote appropriations in each annual session after studying the estimates submitted at the beginning of the session by the Executive through the Secretary of the Treasury; 
(2) To levy the national imposts, duties, and taxes; 
(3) To enact necessary measures for the preservation, administration, and alienation of the national property;(4) To contract debts on the credit of New Granada; 
(5) To determine and make uniform the weight, value, type, and denomination of money; 
(6) To fix uniform weights and measures;
(7) To establish necessary Tribunals and Courts; 
(8) To create or abolish public offices and to determine, diminish, or augment their salaries; 
(9) To grant personal rewards to those who have performed great services for the Republic; 
(10) To enact naturalization laws; 
(11) To decree public honors to the memory of great men; 
(12) To fix annually the size of the land and sea forces and the manner of raising them, determining their numbers in time of peace and any increases which may be necessary in time of war; or in case of armed insurrection or sudden invasion, to decree the organization and recruitment of the armed forces and also the building and equipment of the fleet; 
(13) To declare war and make peace upon information submitted by the Executive; 
(14) To give consent and approval to public treaties and conventions entered into by the Executive; 
(15) To foster and promote public instruction, advancement of arts and sciences, and institutions of public utility, and to grant for a limited time exclusive privileges for their support and encouragement; 
(16) To grant general pardons for any grave reason of public convenience; 
(17) To select the seat of government and change it when necessary; 
(18) To create new Provinces and Cantons, abolish existing ones to form others from those already established, and to fix their boundaries in any manner conducive to better administration for reasons submitted by the Executive after granting a hearing to the Provincial Houses; 
(19) To permit or refuse the passage of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic; 
(20) To grant or refuse permission to fleets or squadrons of another nation to remain in the ports of the Republic for more than two months; 
(21) To decree the enlistment and organization of the National Guard, and to order it on active duty when necessary;(22) To watch over the collection and expenditure of the national revenue, and to examine each year the accounting thereof submitted by the Executive through the Secretary of the Treasury to the Congress for its approval or rejection; 
(23) To organize the national credit; 
(24) To draw up codes of all kinds, and to enact laws and decrees necessary for the regulation of the different branches of the administration; 
(25) To interpret, amend, and repeal existing legislation. 
</list>
Article 75: 
It is also a power of Congress to canvass and if found valid to confirm the elections of President and Vice-President of the Republic; to elect Councilors of State and to accept or reject the resignations offered by them as well as those of the Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
Article 76: 
Congress shall not delegate to one or more of its members or to any other officer, functionary, or person any of the powers given it by this Constitution except in those cases where the Constitution expressly permits the delegation of such powers.
SECTION 6 CONCERNING THE ENACTMENT OF LAWS<title>
Article 77: 
Laws and decrees of Congress may originate in either of the two Houses on the proposal of its members or by the Council of State. 
Article 78: 
Every bill or decree admitted to debate shall be debated in three separate sittings with an interval of one day at least between each of them. 
Article 79: 
If the bill is declared urgent, this last formality may be dispensed with. The declaration of urgency and the reasons offered to justify it shall be sent to the other House along with the bill or decree in order that it may be examined. If the second House does not believe the declaration of urgency is justified, it shall return the bill to the first House to go through the regular legal procedure there. 
Article 80: 
A bill or decree which has been rejected in either of the two Houses shall not again be brought before them until the following session of Congress; this regulation, however, shall not prevent one or more of the provisions from forming part of another bill. 
Article 81: 
Bills or decrees approved in one House according to the procedure prescribed by this Constitution shall pass to the other House with an account of the days in which they were discussed; and the second House, observing the same formalities, shall give or refuse its consent thereto, or introduce such amendments, additions, or modifications as it shall judge necessary. 
Article 82: 
If the House in which the bill originated believes that the proposed amendments, additions, or modifications are not well founded, it may insist a second time with new arguments upon the admission of the bill in its original form. 
Article 83: 
Although approved by both Houses, no bill or decree shall have the force of law unless sanctioned by the Executive. If the latter approves it, it shall be published as law; if he objects to, it, he shall return it to the House of origin along with his objections within eight days after receiving it. 
Article 84: 
Bills having been passed as urgent business by both Houses shall be sanctioned or objected to by the Executive within two days, and he may not pass upon the question of urgency. 
Article 85: 
The respective House shall examine the objections of the Executive and shall reconsider the bill; if the objections are well founded and affect the whole bill, it shall be placed in the archives and shall not be again brought up for discussion until the next session of Congress; but if the objections are limited only to certain parts, they shall be taken into consideration and measures respecting them shall be deliberated upon. 
Article 86: 
If two thirds of the members present in said House consider that the objections do not affect the bill in toto, such decision shall be sent to the other House. If the latter House shall find the Executive's objections well founded, it shall communicate the same to the House of origin and the bill shall be placed in the archives under the same conditions as set forth in the preceding article; but if two thirds of the members present in the second House also do not find the objections well founded, the bill shall be returned to the Executive for his sanction, which may not be denied under these circumstances. 
Article 87: 
If after the expiration of the time provided in Article 83, and also under conditions of urgency in Article 84, the Executive shall not have returned the bill or decree accompanied by his objections, it shall have the force of law and shall be promulgated as such unless Congress shall in the meantime have suspended its sessions or adjourned, in which case it shall be presented during the first eight days of the next session. 
Article 88: 
The participation of the Executive in the manner provided in the preceding articles shall be necessary for all acts and resolutions of Congress; the following are, however, excepted:
<list>(1) Those deferring sessions until another time, or those moving the sessions to another place; 
(2) Those relating to elections, resignations, and leaves of absence; 
(3) The rules and regulations of the two Houses; 
(4) And any other acts in which the concurrence of both Houses is not necessary. 
</list>
Article 89: 
Upon forwarding a bill or decree to the Executive, the number of days on which it was discussed shall be specified; should the Executive find that the requirements for discussion have not been observed, he shall return the bill to the House in which the omission occurred, or to the House of origin if such omission has been noted in both. 
Article 90: 
When a bill is sent to the Executive for his sanction, there shall be two copies signed by the Presidents and Secretaries of the two Houses, and it shall be presented to him by a committee. 
Article 91: 
When a bill is agreed to or objected to by the Executive in accordance with Articles 83 and 84, a copy along with his decision shall be returned to each House through its Secretary, and in case he sanctions the bill, it shall be registered and placed in the archives of the House of origin, and in the event the Executive disapproves, the bill shall take the course prescribed in Articles 85 and 86. 
Article 92: 
Congress shall head all legislative acts which it enacts with this formula: The Senate and House of Representatives of New Granada, in Congress assembled, etc. 
TITLE VI THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title> 
SECTION I ELECTION, TERM, AND QUALIFICATIONS OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title>
Article 93: 
The Executive Power of the Republic shall be entrusted to a person known as the President of New Granada. 
Article 94: 
There shall be a Vice-President who shall exercise the functions of President in case of death, removal, or resignation until a successor shall be chosen, which shall take place at the next meeting of the Electoral Assemblies. He shall also exercise the same functions in case of absence, illness, or any other temporary incapacity of the President. 
Article 95: 
The President of the Republic shall be elected by the Electoral Assemblies. When no one obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast by the Electoral Assemblies, Congress shall take from the registers the three candidates who have the greatest number of votes and from among them choose a President of the Republic. 
Article 96: 
This election shall be made in a public continuous sitting and by secret balloting. If on the first ballot none of the candidates obtains the required two-thirds vote of the members present, subsequent balloting shall be confined to the two who on the first ballot obtained the most votes; and if the said majority is not then obtained, the voting shall be repeated until such majority is had. 
Article 97: 
The election of the Vice-President shall be made two years after that of the President, and it shall be made in the same manner. 
Article 98: 
Should the Vice-President, while exercising the power of President, vacate said office because of death, removal, or resignation, the President of the Council of State, with congressional approval, shall fill the vacancy until another election of President and Vice-President, which election shall be immediately ordered by Congress. Those chosen at such election shall remain in office until the next regular election. The President of the Council shall also fill the place of the Vice-President when exercising the Executive Power in case of the latter's absence, illness, or other temporary incapacity. 
Article 99: 
To be President or Vice-President, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To have been born in one of the Provinces and to be in the full exercise of the rights of Granadine citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty-five years of age; 
(3) To have resided in the Republic for four years immediately preceding the election; this does not exclude those who have been absent in the service of the Republic, or as a result of their devotion to the independence and liberty of the country; 
(4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of four thousand pesos, or have an annual income of five hundred pesos accruing from real property, or an annual income of eight hundred pesos accruing from some employment or from the exercise of some business or profession. 
</list>
Article 100: 
The President- and Vice-President-elect shall assume office on April 1, taking the customary oath, which shall be administered by the President of the Congress in the presence of that body; if Congress is not in session, the oath shall be administered by the President of the Council of State in the presence of that body.Article 101: 
Should the new President not have taken the oath on the first of April, the former President's incumbency shall nevertheless cease on that day; and the person designated in Articles 94 and 98 shall enter upon the exercise of the Executive Power. 
Article 102: 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall continue in office for four years, reckoning from the day on which, according to Article 100, they took the required oath; and they may not be re-elected to the same offices until the expiration of an intervening term. 
Article 103: 
Those who have been exercising the Executive Power for at least two years immediately preceding an ordinary election are not eligible for election to the offices of President or Vice-President of the Republic for the term immediately following such election. 
Article 104: 
The President and Vice-President shall receive for their services such compensation as shall be provided by law, which shall be neither increased nor diminished during their tenure.
SECTION 2 FUNCTIONS, DUTIES AND PREROGATIVES OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title>
Article 105: 
The President is the administrative head of the Republic, and as such it is his duty to maintain internal order and peace and to protect the country against foreign attack. 
Article 106: 
The duties of the Executive shall be: 
<list>
(1) To sanction the laws and decrees of Congress and to issue all rules and regulations necessary for their execution; 
(2) To see to the strict observance of the laws and Constitution, and to take care that all public functionaries fully discharge their duties; 
(3) To convoke Congress at the times prescribed by the Constitution, and, on the advice or petition of the Council of State, to convene it in extraordinary session whenever the welfare of the Republic requires it; 
(4) To direct the land and sea forces, and to distribute them for the defense and security of the country; but never to command them in person; 
(5) To declare war with the previous authorization of Congress; 
(6) To appoint and remove freely the Secretaries of State; 
(7) To appoint, with the previous consent of the Senate, Army chiefs from the rank of Lieutenant Colonel to the highest in the service;(8) To appoint other Army officers according to law; 
(9) To appoint, with the advice of the Council of State, Ministers Plenipotentiary, Envoys, and all other Diplomatic Agents and Consuls-General; 
(10) To direct diplomatic negotiations, enter into treaties and conventions, and, with the previous consent of Congress, ratify the same; 
(11) To appoint Judges of the District Courts with the advice of the Council of State from ternaries submitted by the Supreme Court of Justice; 
(12) To appoint all other officers whose appointment is not assigned by law to some other authority;
(13) To appoint Governors of Provinces from among persons recommended by the Provincial Houses; 
(14) To grant retirement and leaves of absence to the military, and to accept or reject resignations of officers from the rank of Ensign to officers of highest rank as determined by law; 
(15) To grant letters of marque in accordance with congressional determination; 
(16) To grant sailing licenses; 
(17) To see that justice is administered by the Tribunals and Courts and that their sentences are executed; 
(18) To commute sentences of capital punishment with the advice of the Council of State, provided always that it be done for some special reason of public expediency or on the recommendation of the Court which handed down such sentence; 
(19) To see to the collection and expenditure of public taxes and revenues as provided by law, and to present annually to Congress through the Secretary of the Treasury detailed accounts thereof; 
(20) To remove from office with the advice of the Council of State those employed in the executive branch, whether they be political or finance officers, all of whom shall be considered as holding commissions; 
(21) To suspend from office those employed in the executive branch, whether they be political or finance officers, should they violate the laws, decrees, or orders of the Executive, provided they are placed at the disposition of the competent authority within forty-eight hours with a statement and the documents explaining the reasons for their suspension in order that they may be put on trial; this, however, shall not invalidate the power of removal given by law to other officials and to the Courts for the removal of their own officials.
</list>Article 107: 
The President of the Republic may not: 
<list>
(1) Banish any Granadine from the country, deprive him of his liberty, or impose any penalty whatever; 
(2) Obstruct the course of judicial proceedings, or impede the progress of cases being tried according to procedure prescribed by law; 
(3) Prevent elections provided for by this Constitution, or prevent persons elected from entering upon their duties; 
(4) Dissolve the Houses or suspend their sessions; 
(5) Leave the country while in the exercise of the Executive Power or for one year thereafter; 
(6) Exercise the Executive Power while absent from the capital in some other part of the country; 
(7) Admit aliens to military service with the rank of officer or chief without the consent of Congress. 
</list>
Article 108: 
In case of grave danger arising from internal disorder or foreign attack which menaces the security of the Republic, the Executive shall meet with Congress, or, if it is not in session, with the Council of State, to consider the urgency of the situation as reported by the Executive and to grant him in whole or in part the following powers with such limitations as are deemed necessary: 
<list>
(1) To call into active service such part of the National Guard as may be necessary; 
(2) To collect in advance at a fair discount as much of the national taxes and revenues as may be deemed necessary, or to raise a sufficient sum by a loan if the ordinary revenues are inadequate to cover expenses, designating at the same time the funds from which and the time within which repayment shall be made; 
(3) Upon receipt of information that plots are being made against the peace and security of the Republic, to issue orders for the appearance or arrest of suspected persons in order to interrogate them or have them interrogated and to turn them over within seventy-two hours to the competent Judge, to whom shall be forwarded the documents setting forth the reasons for the arrest together with an account of the proceedings which have taken place; 
(4) To grant amnesties and individual or general pardons. 
</list>
Article 109: 
The powers that may be granted to the Executive according to the foregoing article shall be limited solely to the time and objects indispensably necessary for the re-establishment of the peace and security of the Republic, and the, Executive shall render to Congress at its next session an account of the manner in which they were exercised.Article 110: 
The President of the Republic shall be responsible for all infractions of the Constitution and laws and for the abuse of powers entrusted to him by Article 108 of this Constitution, as well as any other misconduct in the exercise of his functions. 
Article 111: 
On the opening of the annual session of Congress, the President of the Republic shall send to both Houses a report of the political and military state of the Republic, and of its revenues, expenses, and resources, pointing out improvements and reforms which should be made in each branch.
SECTION 3 SECRETARIES OF STATE<title>
Article 112: 
To handle all administrative business there shall be at most three Secretaries: 
<list>
(1) One for Home and Foreign Affairs; 
(2) One for Finance; 
(3) One for War and Marine. 
</list>
These Ministries shall be organized and regulated by law. 
Article 113: 
The office of Secretary of State is purely civil. The Executive shall be able to assign temporarily two Ministries to one Secretary.
Article 114: 
The Secretaries of State shall be the medium for the communication of all executive orders relating to their several Ministries. No order except those issued in this manner and no decree, provision, or regulation not authorized by the proper Secretary shall be obeyed by any public functionary or private person. 
Article 115: 
With the consent of the Executive, the Secretaries of State shall give the Houses of Congress whatever information they may require concerning the business of their respective Ministries except that which should not be made public. They may attend and participate in the debates, and they shall attend when called by either House, but they shall not be allowed to vote. 
Article 116: 
The Secretaries of State shall inform each House of Congress annually within the first six days of each session of the condition of affairs in their respective Ministries. 
Article 117: 
The Secretaries of State shall be responsible for any misconduct in the exercise of their functions, and for authorizing a decree or resolution or signing an order contrary to the Constitution or laws; nor shall any verbal or written instruction of the Executive exempt them from responsibility.Article 118: 
Congress may make such reductions in the number of Ministries as experience may recommend or circumstances require. 
Article 119: 
To be Secretary of State, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine by birth and in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To have been a resident of the Republic for the four years immediately preceding appointment; however, this requirement shall not exclude those who have been absent in the service of the Republic or because of their devotion to liberty.
</list>
SECTION 4 COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENT<title>
Article 120: 
The Vice-President of the Republic and the Secretaries of State shall form the Council of Government, which shall advise the President of the Republic on all administrative matters; such advice shall not be binding upon the President of the Republic.
SECTION 5 COUNCIL OF STATE<title>
Article 121: 
There shall be a Council of State composed of seven Councilors chosen by the Congress by an absolute majority; but in no case shall Congress choose more than one Councilor born in any given Province. Secretaries of State shall have the right to attend and take part in the discussions and shall attend when called by the Council, but they shall have no vote. 
Article 122: 
Congress shall indicate by an absolute majority which one shall preside over the Council; the Council itself shall by an absolute majority vote decide who shall be the presiding officer in the absence of the President chosen by Congress. 
Article 123: 
The term of office for the members of the Council of State chosen by Congress shall be four years, one half being chosen every two years. 
Article 124: 
The Council shall keep an accurate record of its opinions and resolutions, and it shall send to Congress each year during the first ten days of the session an exact copy thereof, withholding only such matters as require secrecy so long as secrecy shall be necessary. 
Article 125: 
The members of the Council shall be responsible for the opinions of the Council and for any misconduct in office. 
Article 126: 
During their incumbency the members of the Council shall not receive for themselves nor solicit for others any employment, commission, pension, or reward whatsoever from the Executive. Their compensation shall be determined by law. 
Article 127: 
To be a Councilor of State it is necessary to be a native-born Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship and to have all the other qualifications required to be a Senator. 
Article 128: 
The Council of State shall have power: 
<list>
(1) To give its opinion concerning the sanctioning of laws and all important and general business of public administration; 
(2) To prepare bills and codes for presentation to Congress; 
(3) To deliberate, give its opinion, and grant or withhold its consent in those matters provided for by this Constitution; 
(4) To present to the House of Representatives ternaries for the appointment of Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, which ternaries shall be composed from those received from the Provincial Houses. 
</list>
Article 129: 
The Executive shall not be obliged to follow the advice of the Council of State.
TITLE VII THE JUDICIAL POWER<title>
Article 130: 
Justice shall be administered by a Supreme Court of Justice and such other Tribunals and Courts as may be established by law.
SECTION I SUPREME COURT OF JUSTICE<title>
Article 131: 
In the capital of the Republic there shall be a Supreme Court of Justice whose powers shall be: 
<list>
(1) To take cognizance of all cases involving Ministers Plenipotentiary and Diplomatic Agents accredited to the Government of the Republic as may be permitted by international law, or provided for by laws and treaties; 
(2) To take cognizance of all cases involving the question of responsibility brought against the Ministers Plenipotentiary, Diplomatic Agents, and Consuls of the Republic for misconduct in office; 
(3) To take cognizance of disputes arising out of contracts or engagements which the Executive entered into either directly or through his agents by special order; 
(4) To take cognizance of actions brought against the President and Vice-President of the Republic for common crimes after suspension from office in accordance with the provisions of Article 45;(5) To take cognizance of all charges of responsibility brought against public functionaries who have been suspended from office by the Senate, regard being had for the procedure provided in Article 45 of this Constitution; 
(6) To hear questions concerning the interpretation of any law which may be directed to it by the Superior Tribunals and, acting through the Executive, to advise Congress of its opinion thereon. 
</list>
Article 132: 
The law shall establish the instance, form, and cases in which the Supreme Court of Justice shall take cognizance of the above-mentioned matters and of any others which may be referred to it. 
Article 133: 
The Council of State shall propose directly to the House of Representatives three names for each seat on the Supreme Court of Justice. The House shall reduce this number to two and present them to the Senate, and the Senate shall choose a Justice from these two. The Council of State shall formulate its ternaries from among individuals proposed in the ternaries submitted by the Provincial Houses. 
Article 134: 
When a vacancy occurs on the Supreme Court of Justice, the Executive shall notify the Provincial Houses so that at their next ordinary session they may remit said ternaries, which shall be printed. 
Article 135: 
Until the vacancies are filled in accordance with the preceding article, the Executive shall appoint substitutes with the consent of the Council of State. 
Article 136: 
The Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice so long as they are in office and for one year thereafter shall not accept for themselves nor solicit for others any employment, office, commission, pension, or favor whatsoever from the Executive.
Article 137: 
The Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be responsible and subject to trial before the Senate in accordance with Article 45 for any misconduct in the exercise of their functions. 
Article 138: 
To be a Justice on the Supreme Court of Justice, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty-five years of age; 
(3) To have been a Judge in one of the Courts of the Republic for not less than four years; or to have practiced law creditably for not less than eight years.
</list>SECTION 2 OTHER TRIBUNALS AND COURTS<title>
Article 139: 
To facilitate the most prompt administration of justice the territory of the State shall be divided into judicial districts in which shall be established Tribunals whose powers and membership shall be determined by law. 
Article 140: 
To be a member of these Tribunals, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be a lawyer in good standing; 
(3) To have been a Judge of first instance or court assistant (Asesor) for at least three years, or to have practiced law creditably for at least four years. 
</list>
Article 141: 
The members of these Tribunals shall be appointed by the Executive with the consent of the Council of State from recommendations in ternary by the Supreme Court of Justice, which lists shall be made from ternaries forwarded by the respective Provincial Houses. 
Article 142: 
The members of these Tribunals shall be responsible before the Supreme Court of Justice for misconduct in office and in the manner determined by law. 
Article 143: 
The law shall organize inferior Courts and prescribe their duties and the qualifications requisite for their members.
SECTION 3 REGULATIONS COMMON TO THE SUPREME COURT AND OTHER TRIBUNALS AND COURTS<title>
Article 144: 
Justices and Judges shall not be suspended from office except for an accusation legally preferred and admitted, or removed except in consequence of a sentence pronounced against them in accordance with law. 
Article 145: 
Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice and Judges of the District Tribunals shall remain in office for four years; one half of them shall be selected every two years, and they shall not be eligible for reappointment. 
Article 146: 
The Tribunals and Courts shall exercise no other function than that of judging and seeing that their sentences are executed. 
Article 147: 
In their decisions, all Tribunals and Courts are obliged to cite the law under which they pronounce judgment or the principles on which their decisions are founded. 
Article 148: 
There shall be no more than three instances in any case. 
Article 149: 
The sessions of the Tribunals shall be public and the voting shall be open and oral. 
TITLE VIII INTERNAL GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title> 
SECTION I GOVERNORS AND CHIEFS OF CANTONS<title>
Article 150: 
The territory of the Republic shall be divided into Provinces, the Provinces into Cantons, and the Cantons into Parishes. 
Article 151: 
The head of the government in each Province shall be an official known as Governor, who shall be a subordinate of the Executive and his immediate constitutional agent, and he shall communicate with the Executive through the proper Secretary of State. 
Article 152: 
In all that concerns the order and security of the Province and its political and economic governance, all the public functionaries of whatever class and denomination residing within the same Province shall be subordinate to the Governor. 
Article 153: 
To be Governor, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty years of age; 
(3) To have resided in the territory of the Republic for the three years immediately preceding appointment; but this requirement shall not exclude those who have been absent in the service of the Republic or because of their devotion to the independence and liberty of the country. 
</list>
Article 154: 
The term of office for Governor shall be four years. 
Article 155: 
Each Canton shall be governed by an official subordinate to the Governor whose title and term of office shall be fixed by law, in which law shall also be determined the duties of the functionaries comprehended in this section.
SECTION 2 PROVINCIAL HOUSES AND MUNICIPAL COUNCILS<title>
Article 156: 
In each Province there shall be a Provincial House composed of Deputies from all the Cantons in the Province. The law shall fix the number of Deputies of which each House shall be composed so that no Province shall have less than nine or more than twenty-one.
Article 157: 
The term of office for Deputies shall be two years, one half being elected every year. 
Article 158: 
To be a member of a Provincial House, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be twenty-five years of age; 
(3) To be a native or resident of the Canton in which elected. 
</list>
Article 159: 
Those ineligible to be Representatives and Senators in accordance with Article 67 of this Constitution shall also be ineligible for membership in the Provincial Houses, nor shall Judges of first instance (Jueces letraclos) be eligible during their term of office. 
Article 160: 
The functions of the Provincial Houses are: 
<list>
(1) To complete the elections of Senators and Representatives when no candidate receives an absolute majority of the votes cast by the Electoral Assemblies, after the registers of such elections have been submitted to them, by taking from said registers the names of the three persons who have obtained the greatest number of votes and choosing one from this number. Such an election shall take place in a public and continuous session and by secret ballot; if on the first ballot no one has two thirds of the votes of the members present, this number being necessary for election, the balloting shall then be confined to the two highest and shall continue until the requisite majority is obtained; 
(2) To propose to the Council of State three individuals for each nomination to membership on the Supreme Court of Justice; 
(3) To submit to the Supreme Court of Justice nominations in ternary for Judges of the Tribunals of the several judicial districts; 
(4) To submit to the Executive a list of six persons from whom one shall be selected Governor; 
(5) To determine the contingent of men which each Province should contribute to the Army and Navy; 
(6) To report infractions of the Constitution and laws committed by any of the authorities; 
(7) To levy taxes and contributions necessary for the provincial services; but said taxes and contributions shall not go into effect until approved by Congress; 
(8) To fix annually the estimates of expenses needed for the services (servicio economico) of the Province;(9) To promote the advancement and prosperity of the Province, its policies, public works, and any other establishments of utility, charity, and convenience paid for and sustained by its own revenues; 
(10) To see to the proper collection, custody, and distribution of provincial revenues, and to examine and approve definitively each year the accounts of collection and disbursement of the same; 
(11) To examine and approve definitively each year the accounts of collection and disbursement of the municipal revenues of the Cantons; 
(12) To discharge any other duties assigned by law. 
</list>
Article 161: 
The Provincial Houses shall not have the power to suspend, modify, or interpret the laws and resolutions of Congress, or to perform any executive or judicial act or any other function not given them by the Constitution or law. Their deliberative resolutions shall be annually submitted to Congress through the President of the Republic, and they shall be valid unless expressly disapproved. Any other procedure shall be considered contrary to public order and security. 
Article 162: 
Congress shall have power to annul all acts and resolutions of Provincial Houses; the Executive may suspend them when they are contrary to the Constitution or laws or not within the competency of the Houses; but he shall make a report to the next Congress for its definitive resolution; the Governor of the Province shall also have the power to suspend them, but he shall immediately advise the President of the Republic of having done so in order that the President may take measures deemed proper. 
Article 163: 
The Provincial Houses shall meet at least once a year at times stated by law. The ordinary sessions shall continue for twenty days, which period may be prolonged for ten days more when necessary. 
Article 164: 
The sessions of the Provincial Houses shall be from day to day and public; however, they may be held in secret when the Houses consider it expedient. 
Article 165: 
The organic law of these Houses shall designate the place of meeting in their respective Provinces and the compensation of their members. 
Article 166: 
Congress shall grant a certain amount of uncultivated land for the benefit of the funds and revenues of each Province. 
Article 167: 
The provisions of Article 66 shall also apply to the Provincial Houses. 
Article 168: 
There shall be Municipal Councils in the capitals of the Provinces and in such towns in the Cantons as the Provincial Houses may judge proper. The law shall provide all regulations relative to their organization and functions. 
TITLE IX THE ARMED FORCES<title>
Article 169: 
The essential duty of the armed forces is obedience; they shall not have the power to deliberate. 
Article 170: 
The function of the armed forces is to defend the liberty and independence of the country, maintain public order, and secure the observance of the Constitution and laws. 
Article 171: 
There shall not be a larger permanent armed force than is indispensably necessary. 
Article 172: 
Individuals composing the armed forces, both land and sea, when on campaign shall be regulated by military ordinances; but when in garrison, they shall be subject to such ordinances only for offenses purely military. 
Article 173: 
When persons in the National Guard are in actual service, they are subject to military ordinances in the same manner as provided in the preceding article; they are to be considered in actual service when they are in quarters and receive pay from the State, although some may be serving gratuitously. 
Article 174: 
The National Guard of each Province shall be under the orders of its respective Governor, who shall call it into service in such cases as are determined by law, or when the Executive orders him to do so with the consent of Congress, or the Council of State if the Congress is in recess; or without such authorization when needed in the Province to quell a sudden disturbance or repel an unexpected hostile invasion. 
Article 175: 
The officers of the Army and Navy shall be Granadines, and the general officers shall be Granadines by birth. 
Article 176: 
Military orders shall affect the country in no way except for those persons exclusively military and on actual duty. 
Article 177: 
The law shall not create any other military offices than are indispensably necessary and shall grant no rank or promotion except for filling posts created by law.
TITLE X GENERAL PROVISIONS<title>
Article 178:
All public functionaries are responsible for their conduct in the exercise of their functions conformably to the provisions of this Constitution and the laws.
Article 179: 
Every functionary and public corporation is prohibited to exercise any function or authority whatsoever other than that expressly delegated by this Constitution or laws. 
Article 180: 
No one may be a public functionary in New Granada unless he is a Granadine in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship. 
Article 181: 
Granadines are equal before the law, whatever may be their condition or employment. 
Article 182: 
No Granadine shall be deprived of his rightful Judges, or tried by special commissions or extraordinary tribunals. 
Article 183: 
No Granadine shall be arrested or committed to prison without sufficient cause founded upon the testimony of a creditable witness or upon other worthy evidence. When any person is discovered in flagrante delicto, he may be seized by anyone and taken immediately before a Judge.
Article 184: 
With the exception of cases of imprisonment resulting from a legal sentence or of correctional punishment, no one shall be imprisoned except for crimes carrying corporal punishment. 
Article 185: 
The accused shall be put at liberty upon , giving sufficient bail at any stage in the legal proceedings when it appears that corporal punishment shall not be applicable to his case. 
Article 186: 
Within at least twelve hours after arrest or imprisonment, the Judge shall issue a signed order in which shall be stated the cause of such arrest or imprisonment, and whether or not the person shall be held incommunicado; the prisoner shall be given a copy of this order. The Judge who fails to do this, or the jailer who shall not demand such an order before the expiration of the twelve hours, shall be punished for arbitrary arrest. Neither shall use greater restraints or restrictions than are necessary for the detention of the person arrested or imprisoned. 
Article 187: 
The warden or jailer shall not prohibit the person arrested from having communication with any other person without an express order from the Judge; such incommunicado shall continue only for the time indispensably necessary to prevent collusion with witnesses or accomplices. 
Article 188: 
No Granadine shall bear testimony in any criminal case against his wife, his ascendants or descendants, and brothers and sisters, nor shall he be compelled on oath or under compulsion to give testimony against himself. 
Article 189: 
No punishment shall be extended to an innocent person, however close may be his relationship to the guilty.Article 190: 
No one shall be confined in any place which is not publicly and legally recognized as a prison. 
Article 191: 
No Granadine shall be tried or punished except for violation of a law enacted prior to the commission of the crime, nor until after he has been summoned, heard, and, legally convicted. 
Article 192: 
No crime shall hereafter be punished by the penalty of confiscation; this shall not apply, however, to the forfeitures and fines imposed by law for certain crimes. 
Article 193: 
Except for the contributions established by this Constitution and the laws, no Granadine shall be deprived of any of his property, nor shall it be applied to any public use without his personal consent. Should any public necessity, legally determined, require that the property of any Granadine be applied to such uses, a just compensation shall be made prior to such seizure. 
Article 194: 
The military may not be quartered or lodged in the houses of other Granadines without the consent of the latter. The civil authorities shall, in accordance with law, provide lodgings for the officers and quarters for the troops. 
Article 195: 
No kind of work, trade, or commerce which is not contrary to good morals shall be forbidden to Granadines, and all shall be able to employ themselves as they will, except in such occupations as may be necessary for the support of the State; consequently, they shall not be able to establish any body or corporation of trade, art, or business which may be an obstacle to the freedom of invention, instruction, or industry. 
Article 196: 
The right of primogeniture and every species of entail is prohibited. 
Article 197: 
No landed property of an inalienable character shall be allowed to exist in the State. 
Article 198: 
All Granadines shall have the right to publish freely their thoughts and opinions through the press without previous examination, revision, or censorship of any kind, being responsible, however, before the law for that which is published. 
Article 199: 
Trial for abuse of freedom of the press shall always be by jury. 
Article 200: 
All Granadines shall have the right to settle their differences by arbitration at any stage of the proceedings, to change their residence, and to leave the Republic and return thereto provided they observe the formalities prescribed by law. 
Article 201: 
The dwelling of a Granadine shall not be entered except in cases and in accordance with the formalities prescribed by law. 
Article 202: 
Correspondence and other papers shall not be intercepted at any time or opened except by competent authority and only in cases provided by law. 
Article 203: 
All Granadines shall be entitled to demand their rights before persons entrusted with public authority provided their claims are urged with due respect and propriety; they shall be at liberty to communicate in writing with the Congress or the Executive concerning anything considered conducive to the public good; but no private individual or association may petition the authorities in the name of the People or arrogate to themselves the name of the People. Those who violate this provision shall be tried according to law. 
Article 204: 
No one shall draw money from the public treasury for uses other than those determined by law and in conformity with the budget approved by Congress, which shall be published annually. 
Article 205: 
No titles, appellations, or decorations of nobility or other hereditary distinctions or honors shall be allowed in New Granada. 
Article 206: 
There shall not be in New Granada any sinecures or purely honorary positions. Public offices shall not be venal, inalienable, or hereditary; nor shall those holding office continue in them longer than during good behavior. 
Article 207: 
No Granadine shall wear insignia, decorations, or distinctions which are not expressly allowed by law, or assume titles or appellations not established by it. 
Article 208: 
Persons holding any office of confidence or honor in the Republic shall accept no title, gift, or emolument from any foreign king, prince, or nation without the consent of Congress. 
Article 209: 
All aliens of whatever nationality shall be admitted to New Granada; they shall be entitled to the same protection of person and property as is extended to Granadines provided they respect the laws of the Republic. 
Article 210: 
In all cases in which ternary lists are required by the Constitution or laws for the nomination of persons to public office, it shall be understood that the name of each candidate shall be placed upon a separate piece of paper with an account of his merits, past service, and qualifications.
TITLE XI THE OATH FOR PUBLIC OFFICERS<title>
Article 211: 
No public functionary or employee, whether civil, political, ecclesiastical, or military, shall enter upon the exercise of his office without previously taking an oath to maintain and defend the Constitution and to execute faithfully and correctly the duties of his office. 
Article 212: 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take the oath in the manner prescribed in Article I 100. The Presidents of the Houses of Congress shall take the oath in the presence of their respective Houses; the members of the Houses shall take their oaths before their Presidents; other functionaries and employees shall take theirs at the hands of the Executive or of the person charged by him with the duty of administering such oaths. 
TITLE XII CONCERNING THE INTERPRETATION OR REFORM OF THIS CONSTITUTION AND THE OBSERVANCE OF THE LAWS<title>
Article 213: 
Congress shall resolve whatever doubts may arise concerning the interpretation of the laws or of any article or articles of this Constitution. 
Article 214: 
Amendments of or additions to any article or articles of this Constitution may be proposed in either of the two legislative Houses. If the proposal is supported by at least one fifth of the members present and is admitted to debate by an absolute majority of votes, it shall follow the same procedure provided for ordinary bills. If the amendment or addition is accepted by a two-thirds vote of those present, it shall be sent to the other House. 
Article 215: 
If the other House approves the amendment or addition in the same manner and by the same formalities prescribed in the preceding article, it shall be sent to the Executive for the sole purpose of being published and circulated. 
Article 216: 
The Congress in the ordinary session of the succeeding year shall take into consideration the amendment or addition approved in the preceding session; if it is accepted by a two-thirds vote of the members present in accordance with the formalities provided in Article 214, it shall be considered a part of this Constitution and sent to the Executive for publication and execution. 
Article 217: 
The Executive may make his own observations upon the doubtful meaning, modification, or interpretation of any of the articles of the Constitution. 
Article 218: 
The power of Congress to amend this Constitution shall never extend to the articles in Title III, which concerns the form of government. 
Article 219: 
All laws and decrees registered in the Republic which were in force at the time of the publication of the Fundamental Law of New Granada are declared to be in full force and vigor, provided always that said laws and decrees are not contrary to this Constitution or to the decrees and laws which the present Convention has already established or shall hereafter establish.
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS<title>
a. 
This Convention shall enact a special decree setting forth for the Executive and subsequent Legislatures the regulations and details which are to be followed for the celebration of pacts of alliance or of other kinds which may be entered into with other sections of Colombia. 
b. 
This Convention shall elect the President and Vice-President of the Republic, who shall continue in office until their successors are chosen by the Electoral Assemblies in accordance with this Constitution. 
c. 
The individuals so chosen shall be eligible for election to those offices for the first constitutional term in accordance with the regulations established in this Constitution. 
d. 
During the opening days of the first congressional session lots shall be cast to determine which Senators' and Representatives' terms of office shall expire in order that the membership may be renewed by halves or by a lesser fraction as directed by this Constitution. In a similar manner the Council of State, the Supreme Court of Justice, the District Tribunals, and the Provincial Houses shall cast lots for the same purpose. 
e. 
For the time being this Convention shall choose the Councilors of State, the Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, and the Judges of the District Tribunals by a majority vote; those so chosen shall continue in office until successors are chosen in accordance with the regulations herein established. 
f. 
The Vice-President of the Republic, who shall be chosen at the same time the Electoral Assemblies choose the first President, shall continue in office only two years. 
g. 
The requirement in this Constitution that Army Generals must be native-born Granadines does not apply to those Generals now in New Granada who are inscribed as such on the military lists. 
h. 
Notwithstanding the promulgation of this Constitution, the present Convention shall enact whatever laws it considers most necessary for the establishment of the Constitution as well as on other important matters. Done in the Constituent Convention of New Granada in Bogota on the 29th of February, 1832, and of Independence the twenty-second. 