CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF THE

CONGO
(BRAZZAVILLE)
by JESWALD W. SALACUSE

Updated by Mark P. Tarantino Translated by Haidee Celaya
Issued July 1980

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1980 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO PART I Fundamental Principles Title I People's Republic of the Congo Article 1 - The Congo, a Sovereign and Independent State is a People's Republic, indivisible and secular in which all power emanates from the people and belongs to the people. Article 2 - Sovereignty dwells in the people and all public power emanates from the people through a single party, the Congolese Labour Party, the supreme form of political and social organization of our people. Its organization is defined in its statutes. Article 3 - Apart from the agency of the Party, the popular masses exercise their power by means of the spokesmen representing the State's power constituted by the People's Assemblies. The spokesmen from the People's Council of Communes and Regions to those of the National Assembly are elected freely by the people. Article 4 - All spokesmen representative of the State's power are elected by the citizens through equal direct universal suffrage and by secret ballot. Article 5 - In all the organs of power of the State, the representatives of the people are responsible to the agents of the Party. They are known to rely on the people, to hold a close liaison with the people, to listen to their opinions and to submit themselves to their control. Article 6 - The motto of the People's Republic of the Congo is: Work - Democracy - Peace. Its principle is government of the people, by the people and for the people. The national anthem is: "Les Trois Glorieuses." The flag is rectangular, of a bright red field, in the upper left corner there are two green palm fronds forming a wreath but separated at the top by a golden pentagram and at the bottom by a crossed golden hoe and hammer. The law specifies the dimensions, the shades of color and other details of the flag. The State seal and emblem are defined by law.

Title II Public liberties and the person Article 7 - The individual is sacred. The State has the obligation to respect and protect individuals. Each citizen has the right to freely develop his personality while respecting others' rights and the public order. Liberty of the person is inviolable. Nobody can be accused, arrested, or detained except in cases determined by a law promulgated prior to the infraction which it penalizes. Article 8 - The home is inviolable. It can only be searched under the forms and conditions established by law. Article 9 - The secrecy of letters and of all other forms of correspondence cannot be violated except in the case of criminal investigation, of mobilization, of state of war. Article 10 - No citizen can be confined to the national territory except in cases established by the law. Article 11 - All congolese citizens have equal rights. All acts granting privileges to nationalities or limiting their rights as a result of ethnic differences or origin or of religion are contrary to the Constitution and are punished by penalties established by law. All acts of provocation or all action aiming at sowing hatred and discord amongst the nationalities are contrary to the Constitution and punished by penalties established by law. Article 12 - All congolese citizens of at least 18 years of age have judicial and political capacity and should take part in the elections and may be elected into any component organs of the State, except when they are forbidden to do so by law. Article 13 - All congolese citizens have the duty of conforming to the Constitution and other laws of the Republic, of paying their taxes and of fulfilling their social obligations. Article 14 - The People's Republic of the Congo provides asylum in its territory to foreign nationals pursued as a result of their actions in favor of democracy, of their struggle for national liberation, for liberty in cultural and scientific work and for the defense of the rights of the working people. Article 15 - Defense of the homeland is the sacred duty of all citizens of the People's Republic of the Congo. National military service is an honor and a responsibility that all congolese citizens should assure. Treason against the people constitutes the greatest crime.

2

Article 16 - The citizens of the People's Republic of the Congo enjoy liberties of expression, of the press, of association, of procession and of manifestations under the conditions determined by law. Article 17 - Women have rights equal to men in the domains of private, political and social life. To provide equal employment, women have the right to salaries equal to those of men. They enjoy the same rights in matters of social security. Article 18 - The People's Republic of the Congo guarantees liberty of thought and religion within the framework established by law. It is forbidden to use religion for political purposes. Article 19 - Marriage and family are under the protection of the law. A legal marriage cannot be contracted unless in the pressence of authorized agents of the State. The law establishes the legal conditions for marriage and the family. Parents owe equal obligations and rights to their children born outside of marriage as to their legitimate children. Article 20 - In the People's Republic of the Congo, work is an honor, a right and a sacred duty. Every citizen has the right to be remunerated according to his work and his capacity. Article 21 - Conditions of access to government employment are established by law and are identical for all congolese citizens. Citizens appointed to public office or elected to public office have the duty of serving conscientiously. Article 22 - Every worker participates through his shop steward in the collective determination of working conditions. Union liberties are exercised within the framework of the laws which regulate them. Article 23 - The State looks after public health by organizing and controlling all sanitary services. Article 24 - The State looks after the physical education of the people, particularly that of the young for improving their health and thus increasing the people's strength at work and in the defense of the homeland.

3

Article 25 - Liberty in scientific work is guaranteed. The State assists the sciences and the arts for the purpose of developing the well-being of the people. Article 26 - In order to raise the general cultural level of the people, the State assures all strata of society the possibility of pursuing their studies in the schools and other cultural institutions. Article 27 - The congolese citizens have the right to petition the appropriate organs of the State. Article 28 - Every citizen has the right to bring to a court of justice complaints against any organ of power of State or against any civil servant who may have caused him any harm. Article 29 - Congolese citizens cannot make use of any rights conferred on them by the Constitution to modify the constitutional order of the People's Republic of the Congo for antidemocratic goals. Every act of that nature is considered a crime and involves the application of penalties established by the law.

Title III Economic and Social Order Article 30 - In the People's Republic of the Congo the principal means of production are the property of the people. The State, in the name of the people regulates as needed the collective or individual enjoyment of the means of production. Article 31 - Along the entire of the Congo, the land is the land claims and common rights titles and rights is contrary ized by the law. length of the People's Republic property of the people. All are abolished. All use of these to the Constitution and penal-

However, every citizen may freely dispose of the land's products, which are the fruits of his own labor. Article 32 - In order to protect the vital interests of the people, to raise their standard of living and to exploit their economic power the State controls life and economic development according to a general plan. Relying on the economic sector of the State and on that of the cooperatives, it exercises a general control of the private sector of the economy. In order to accomplish its general plan, the State relies on the unions of workers and employees, on the cooperatives and eventually on other organizations of the working masses. 4

Article 33 - Private property as well as the right of inheritance of goods and chattels, other than land, are guaranteed. Nobody can make use of his right to private property to the detriment of the community. Limits to property can, when the general interest demands it, be established by Government decisions. Expropriation cannot intervene except by virtue of law. Article 34 - Individual property of the citizens and the right to inherit are guaranteed and protected by law. Individual property is based on the revenues derived from work and concern personal property and real estate other than land, and is constituted essentially of commodity items and items of personal consumption. Article 35 - Through economic measures, the State promotes the union and organization of the working masses against the exploitation of man by man. Article 36 - The working masses lead by their vanguard, the Congolese Labour Party, constitute with it the dominant force of the State and of society's activities.

Title IV Foreign Policy Article 37 - The foreign policy of the People's Republic of the Congo rests on the principle of national independence, peace, non-alignment, solidarity, friendship and cooperation with all the peace and justice-loving peoples and governments. Article 38 - The People's Republic of the Congo entertains relations of privileged cooperation with progressive and socialist countries for the triumph of the socialist system in the world. Article 39 - The People's Republic of the Congo subscribes to the fundamental principles and objectives contained in the charter of the United Nations and of the Organization of African Unity (O.A.U.). PART II The People's Power Title I The Supreme Organs of the Power of the State The People's National Assembly Article 40 - The People's National Assembly is the supreme organ of the power of the State. It represents and expresses the sovereign will of the entire working people.

5

Article 41 - The People's National Assembly is composed of deputies elected through universal suffrage for a period of five years from a national list decided upon by the Central Committee of the Congolese Labour Party under the conditions and propositions determined by law. This list is comprised of representatives from the Party, representatives from organizations of the masses, representatives from the People's National Army, of workers' delegates, peasants, artists and artisans. Article 42 - The law determines the number of deputies, the conditions for their election, the rules for ineligibility and of incompatibility. In the case of a vacant seat or of incompatibility, partial elections will be organized according to the dispositions of the electoral law. Article 43 - The office of deputy in the People's National Assembly is free. However, the right is given for reimbursement of transportation expenses and for indemnities for each session, the rate being determined by presidential decree. Article 44 - Thirty days after the elections, the People's National Assembly meets in its own right under the chairmanship of the oldest deputy, assisted by the two youngest deputies, who will assume secretarial functions. In the course of this first session, the People's National Assembly procedes with the verification, then the validation of the mandates of representatives of the people. In the case of a dispute the Supreme Court decrees conforming to the electoral law. The People's National Assembly then elects its board comprising: -- a President; -- two Vice-Presidents; -- two Secretaries who immediately begin their functions. Article 45 - The interior regulations of the People's National Assembly determine legislative procedures. Article 46 - Only the People's National Assembly enacts the law. It sets the taxes and votes on the State's budget and controls its implementation. It is in charge of the budget from the opening of the session in November.

6

It is equally assigned to: -- approving the general issues of internal and foreign policy. -- approving the establishment and the modifications of territorial constituencies: -- constituting the commissions of the People's National Assembly: - annuling the election or the designation of persons elected or assigned by it: -- exercising control over the organs of State and of Government: -- organizing referendums in cases foreseen by the Constitution and in those cases where the Assembly will find it appropriate, after consulting the Central Committee of the Congolese Labour Party: -- editing its internal regulations. Article 47 - In the domain of the law there are regulations concerning: -- civic rights and fundamental guarantees accorded to the citizens for the exercising of public liberties: - subjections imposed by the national defense upon the citizens on their person and on their belongings: -- the nationality, the state and the capacity of people, marriage systems, successions and liberalities: -- the determination of crimes and misdemeanours as well as the penalties which accompany them, amnesty, and the creation of the magistrate's status: -- the basis, the rate and the modality of collecting taxation of all kinds, the system of issuing currency: -- the electoral system of the People's Assemblies: -- the creation of public establishment categories: -- guarantees accorded to the State's civil servants: -- nationalization of enterprises and the conveyance of enterprise property: -- the establishment and the modification of territorial constituencies: -- the law equally determines the fundamental principles of the general organization of defense, of education, of the right to employment, the right to unionize, of social security: -- alienation of the private domain and the administration of State matters: -- the transportation and telecommunication systems: -- the plan for economic and social development is approved by law.

7

All matters other than those in the domain of the law are of a regulatory character. Article 48 - The power to initiate law belongs to deputies and to the government. Deputies and government members hold the right to amendment during the period of legislative operation. Law proposals attempting to augment expenditures may not be presented without being accompanied by a proposal for financing and corresponding savings. Article its own Tuesday ing day 49 - The People's National Assembly will convene by right for two regular sessions dated for the second in May and the first Tuesday in November or the followif Tuesday is a holiday.

The duration of each session may not exceed two months. The People's National Assembly will meet in a special session under convocation by the President of the Re p ublic or by the request of 2/3 of its members to convene over a precise agenda. The duration of each session may not exceed two weeks. Article 50 - Debates in open sessions at the People's National Assembly are open to the public. However, the People's National Assembly can, when needed, order a closed door session. Article 51 - The People's National Assembly offices are elected for the duration of the entire legislature. However, the offices may be renewed upon the request of the Central Committee or upon the request of 2/3 cf the members of the People's National Assembly. Article 52 - The People's National Assembly plans its agenda except in special sessions. Article 53 - The necessary quorum for the sessions of the People's National Assembly is two thirds of the number of deputies. However, the People's National Assembly may not make any decisions unless an absolute majority of its members is convened. Article 54 - The members of the Council of Ministers have access to the debates and may ask to be assisted or represented by the experts of their choice. Article 55 - An urgent vote on a law may be requested by one of the organs mentioned in article 48 of the Constitution. When this is requested, the Assembly will decide upon the urgent issue by a simple majority vote.

8

Article 56 - The People's National Assembly's means of informing about government decisions are: ----oral in writing Committee hearings Committee of inquiry

Article 57 - In the People's National Assembly a deputy serves a mandatory term. He may cease to perform his duties upon request of his electors and according to procedures established by law. Article 58 - No deputy shall be prosecuted, searched or arrested, detained or judged as a result of his opinions expressed while performing his duties. The deputy will not, while in session, be prosecuted for criminal or correctional matters without the Assembly's authorization, except when caught in the act of breaking the law. No deputy may, while out of session, be arrested without the Assembly's authorization, except when caught in the act of breaking the law, of authorized prosecution, or of definitive conviction. The detention or the prosecution of a deputy of the People's National Assembly is suspended if the Assembly requires it. Article 59 - The President of the Republic, President of the Council of Ministers, promulgates the laws within twenty days of their descent from the President of the People's National Assembly. They will be published in the official journal of the People's Republic of the Congo. The promulgation made by the President of the Republic will be known at Brazzaville the following day and in every other region two weeks after the promulgation date. Article 60 - The President of the Republic, President of the Council of Ministers opens the sessions at the People's National Assembly. He declares the closing of regular sessions upon the proposal of the Assembly's office and that of special sessions after the Assembly has completed its agenda. Title II The President of the Republic Article 61 - The President of the Central Committee of the Congolese Labour Party, President of the Republic is elected for five years by the Congress of the Congolese Labor Party. He is invested with the powers of the President of the Republic, Chief of State, President of the Council of Ministers by the People's National Assembly.

9

Article 62 - The President of the Republic represents national unity and looks after the Constitution and the regular functioning of public institutions. He assures the State's continuity. He guarantees national independence, territorial integrity and respect for international treaties. Article 63 - The President of the Republic, with the advise of the Central Committee of the Congolese Labour Party, appoints the Prime Minister and presents him to the People's National Assembly. He may also terminate his duties. Article 64 - The President of the Republic, upon the Prime Minister's proposal, and after the advise of the Central Committee nominates other members of the Council of Ministers and may terminate their duties. Article 65 - In the case of vacancy to the Presidency of the Republic for whatever the reason may be or of prevention established by a plenum convening the members of the Central Committee and of the People's National Assembly, the duties of the President of the Republic, Chief of State, President of the Council of Ministers, with the exception of the powers seen in articles 63, 64, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72 and 73 are exercised temporarily by the President of the People's National Assembly. The President of the People's National Assembly during the vacancy period may not be elected President of the Republic. The Congolese Labour Party will be convened within 45 days following the vacancy. Article 66 - Upon acceptance of his duties, the President of the Republic will solemnly take in the presence of the plenum of the Central Committee and the People's National Assembly, the following oath: "I swear loyalty to the congolese people, to the revolu. tion and to the Congolese Labour Party. I will apply with the guidance of Marxist-Leninist principles in the consecration of all my abilities to the triumph of the proletarian ideals of the congolese people concerning work, democracy and peace." Article 67 - The People's National Assembly will record the taking of the oath and will make up the proces-verbal. Article 68 - The President of the Republic accredits the Ambassadors and the Special Correspondents to other States and International Organizations. The Ambassadors and Special Correspondents of foreign countries are accredited to him. Article 69 - The President of the Republic has the right to pardon.

10

Article 70 - The President of the Republic may, when circumstances demand it, and after the authorization by the Central Committee, declare by decree issued by the Council of Ministers, a state of emergency or a state of siege, which will confer upon him special powers under the conditions established by law. Article 71 - Only after twelve days of the state of siege may a prorogation be authorized by the Central Committee of the Congolese Labour Party. Article 72 - The President of the Republic is the supreme chief of the Armed Forces. He appoints the civil and military posts of State. The law determines civil and military posts as provided by a decree issued by the Council of Ministers as well as the conditions under which the power of appointment of the President of the Republic may be delegated by him to be exercised in his name. Article 73 - The President of the Republic after the advice of the Central Committee, establishes in the Council of Ministers the date of elections for the renewal of the People's National Assembly. Article 74 - The President of the Republic awards decorations and confers honorary titles.

Title III The Council of Ministers

Article 75 - The Council of Ministers is the superior executive organ. It is charged with the execution of political, economic, social and cultural tasks which are entrusted to it by law. It exercises regulatory power. Article 76 - The Council of Ministers is comprised of: — The President of the Republic, who presides: — The Prime Minister, chief of government: — The Ministers. Article 77 - The orders, controls the President of responsible. The Minister. Prime Minister, chief of government, directs, the actions of the Ministers and reports to the Council of Ministers to whom he is Ministers are responsible to the Prime

The Prime Minister, chief of government is invested with regulatory powers.

He handles decrees and arrests under the framework of the application of laws. By delegation of the President of the Republic he makes appointments to civil posts of State. Article 78 - The Council of Ministers establishes the internal organization of the ministries and of institutions of its jurisdiction. Article 79 - Each minister is responsible for the good functioning of his ministry. He exercises regulatory powers and carries out appointments and assignment of agents of his department under the provisions indicated in article 72. Article 80 - The functions of a Member of government are incongruous with the exercising of all parliamentary duties and of all remunerated activities. Article 81 - In the framework of the duties mentioned in article 75 the Council of Ministers is particularly in charge of: -- Organizing and directing the execution of political, economic, cultural, scientific, social acts and acts of defense adopted by the People's National Assembly: -- Proposing projects of general plans for economic and social development of the State and after the People's National Assembly's approval, organizing, directing and coordinating their execution: —Directing the Republic's foreign policy and relations with other governments: -- Approving international treaties and submitting them to ratification procedures: -- Directing and controlling internal and external commerce: -- Elaborating the State's budget and once it is approved by the People's National Assembly, proceed with its execution: -- Assuring the National Defense, maintenance of order, and security in the country, protection of citizen's rights as well as the safeguarding of human lives and property in case of natural disaster: -- Directing the administration of the State in uniting and in coordinating the activities of ministers and of other central organs of the administration: -- Executing of laws and treaties: -- Giving rights to asylum: -- Applying the Party's directives to the general organization of the revolutionary armed forces: -- Exercising the direction and the political and technical control of administrative functions and of corresponding central organisms:

12

-- Requesting the Supreme Court's cancellation of rules adopted by the Assemblies and local organs of the people's power in violation of laws and effective regulation: -- Creating committees when it feels it is necessary for the execution of the tasks assigned to it: -- Appointing to divers civil and military posts: -- Dismiss from their duties those officials responsible for gross mistakes in the performance of their duties after advice from an appropriate democratic body: -- Carrying out all other functions assigned to it by the People's National Assembly: -- Taking the necessary dispositions for the organization of referendums decided upon by the Central Committee of theC.L.P. Article 82 - Acts of the Council of Ministers are signed by the President of the Republic, President of the Council of Ministers and are countersigned by the Prime Minister as well as by the Ministers in charge of their execution. Article 83 - The government reports its activities to the People's National Assembly. It carries out all other functions assigned to it by the People's National Assembly.

Title IV Local Organs and People's Power

Article 84 - In the People's Republic of the Congo regions and communes are local and decentralized collectivities equipped as a corporate body and with financial autonomy. Article 85 - The local collectivities as defined in article 82 are administered by the representative organs of power of the State called popular Councils. Article 86 - The organization and the functioning of popular Councils are determined by law. Article 87 - Special laws otherwise determine the judicial statutes of power, the manner of election and the duties of the popular Council.

13

Title V National jurisdictions Article 88 - The Supreme Court, the Audit Office, the court of appeal, the local popular tribunals, the Military court and the tribunals instituted by law constitute the judicial organs of the People's Republic of the Congo. Article 89 - The Statutes of the magistrates, the organization, the functioning, the competence of the Courts and Tribunals are determined by law. Article 90 - The Courts and Tribunals function in a collegiate manner. Article 91 - Justice is rendered by these jurisdictions composed of professional magistrates assisted by judges elected by the local Assemblies. Article 92 - At the moment of rendering their decision, the judges only obey the law. Article 93 - The Supreme Court is the high judicial body of the People's Republic of the Congo. Its decisions are definitive. It controls judicial activities of the Courts and Tribunals. It gives advice and controls the constitutionality of laws. Article 94 - The role of the public Ministry by each jurisdiction is assumed by the Public Prosecutor's Office. The organization of the Public Prosecutor's Office is established by law. Article 95 - The placed under the of higher levels general attorney public prosecutors of different levels are exclusive direction of public prosecutors and under the centralized direction of the of the Supreme Court.

Article 96 - The Audit Office decides the accounts of the nation and decrees on the accounting of public and para-public enterprises. Article 97 - The organization and the functioning of the Audit Office are determined by law. Article 98 - The law guarantees the right to defense. Title VI The People's National Army Article 99 - The People's National Army, the instrument of the congolese Revolution, has the mission of safeguarding national independence and sovereignty.

14

It is in charge of the security of the Revolution, of the defense of unity and of territorial integrity. The People's National Army participates in the economic, cultural and social development of the country in the building of a socialist society. Article 100 - The law establishes the organization and the functioning of the People's National Army. Title VII International Treaties Article 101 - The People's Republic of the Congo has the total authority to conclude international treaties. Article 102 - The President of the Republic has the leadership in international negotiations. He signs and ratifies all treaties. Ratification may not occur until authorized by the People's National Assembly. Article 103 - The law determines the methods of the ratification procedure. Article 104 - Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties relating to international organizations, treaties engaging the State's finances, those which modify the dispositions of legislative nature which relate to the State of the persons, or which include transfers, exchange, or adjunction of territories, may not be ratified except by virtue of a law. No transfer, no exchange, no adjunction of national territory is valid without the consent of the people who are called to express themselves by referendum. Article 105 - With the exception of the President of the Republic and the Chief of Government, every representative of the congolese State involved in the adoption or the authentification of an international commitment must exhibit full appropriate powers. Article 106 - If the Supreme Court, called upon by one of the superior organs of State mentioned in article 48 declares that a treaty commitment includes a clause violating a constitutional norm, it may issue a warning of non ratification or if already effective, establish the unconstitutionality of the commitment.

15

Article 107 - The People's Republic of the Congo may conclude agreements for cooperation of association with other States. It may agree to create international organizations with common administration, coordination and free cooperation with other states. Article 108 - Treaties regularly ratified are laws without reservation for treaty application by the other party. Title VIII Revision of the Constitution Article 109 - The initiative for revising the Constitution rests on the Central Committee of the C.L.P. The revision will be definitive when it is approved by the People's National Assembly. Article 110 - Laws, ordinances, regulations, presently in effect will remain when not contrary to the present Constitution. Article 111 - The present Constitution which will annul all previous constitutional dispositions will be submitted for approval by the people through a referendum, appearing in the Official Journal as Supreme Law of the State. It will become effective with its promulgation.

JULY 8, 1979 CONSTITUTIONAL REFERENDUM -- Elections to the People's National Assembly -- Elections to the People's Council of Regions and Communes -- Elections to the People's Council of Districts July 8, 1979 VOTE RED! LONG LIVE THE PEOPLE'S POWER:

16

