
CONSTITUTION

of the Republic of Costa Rica. June 8,1917

WE , the representatives of the people of Costa Rica, having legitimately assembled to revise the political constitution and to proceed to the total reformation thereof, in order to secure upon solid bases the common welfare and the benefits of liberty, and of a Government adapted to the general necessities and conveniences, decree and sanction the following political constitution: 

CHAPTER I. The Republic and the Government in General. 

ART. 1. Costa Rica is and shall remain a free and independent Republic. It may, however, form a single political unit with one, several, or all of the other Republics of Central America. The treaties of union which may be concluded for this purpose shall be submitted to Congress at the next ordinary session; should Congress approve said treaties by a vote of two-thirds of the members present, it shall issue a call to the towns of the Republic to elect a Constituent Assembly for the sole purpose of ratifying or rejecting them. 

Should the Assembly ratify said treaties by a vote of three-fourths of the total number of its members, they shall become final and binding on the Republic. In this event it belongs to the Assembly to dictate the necessary laws for executing and carrying out said treaties. 
2. The sovereignty resides essentially and exclusively in the nation, from whom public powers emanate, which powers are limited and must be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this constitution. 3. No public authority shall validly enter into compacts, agreements, or treaties which may jeopardise the sovereignty and independence of the Republic. Whoever is guilty of this attempt shall be held as a traitor. The foregoing provision shall not prevent public treaties from being concluded and approved for a political union as provided for in article 1; nor treaties to modify the boundaries of the national territory; nor those providing for the construction of any inter-oceanic canal which may affect the sovereignty over a part of the territory; nor treaties for the alienation of any island belonging to the State, situated at a distance of over 100 miles from the coast. In order that the treaties which may be concluded for any of the last three mentioned purposes may become valid, they shall be submitted to Congress at two different terms of session, whether ordinary or extraordinary, with an interval of 2 months at least between each term, and must be approved by a vote of three-fourths of the total number of its members. Railways and tramways belonging to the State and devoted to the public service cannot be alienated. Neither can they be leased out unless a law should provide so in each case by a vote of two-thirds of the respective Chamber. 4. The Government of the Republic is popular, representative, alternative and responsible. It shall be vested in three different powers independent of each other, to be known as the legislative, the executive and the judicial powers. The legislative power shall never grant omnimodous powers to the executive, or delegate to it the power to legislate; nor shall the legislative or the executive power in any case exercise judicial functions (except as provided for in the case of the Senate sitting as a court for political trials), nor take jurisdiction on pending cases or ask for these to be brought before them ad effectum videndi, nor cause the re-opening of finished cases. 

5. The territory of the Republic, which is situated between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, is bounded on the north-west by the Republic of Nicaragua, from which it is

separated by the line established in the Treaty of Cañas-Jerez of the 15th April, 1858, and by Cleveland's award of the 22nd March, 1888. It is bounded on the southeast by the Republic of Panama , from which it is separated by the line established by Loubet's award of the 11th September, 1900, the Anderson-Porras Treaty of the 17th March, 1910, and by White's award of the 12th September, 1914. (6) 6. No one shall assume the title of sovereign, and whoever should do so shall be prosecuted in accordance with the Penal Code. No authority shall assume powers not granted to it by law. Public officials are not owners, but mere depositories of authority. They are subject to the laws; they shall never be considered or held as superior to them, and they are directly and immediately responsible for the acts they may execute in the exercise of their functions. The action to accuse them shall be popular. No venal employments are recognised. 7. All orders emanating from the legislative or executive powers which are contrary to the constitution shall be null and void and without effect, whatever be the form in which they may be issued. Courts of justice shall not obey or apply the m in any case. All acts of those usurping public powers, and all employments given without the requirements demanded by the constitution, or in default thereof, without the requirements provided by law, shall also be null and void. 8. The Roman Catholic apostolic religion is the religion of the State. The State shall contribute to its support without thereby preventing the free exercise of any other form of worship which does not oppose universal morals or good customs. The declaration referred to in this article does not affect existing legislation, nor hinder in any way the freedom of action of public powers in regard to any national interests. 9. Primary education shall be obligatory and gratuitous. The State shall take charge of the public primary schools as well as of normal schools. Primary schools which are supported by private individuals shall be under the supervision of the Government. The State shall maintain the institutions for secondary education now in existence, and has the power to create other centres of the same character and to contribute to their support and to that of professional schools which may 

be established either by public or private initiative. It has likewise the power to re-establish the university. All Costa Ricans or foreigners are free to give or receive the instruction which they may deem convenient in those establishments which are not supported by public funds. 10. It is the duty of the State to look after the welfare of the working classes, and for this purpose it shall enact all necessary laws; in default of social initiative it shall promote, and in all cases it shall support to the extent of its resources, such institutions as may have for their object to harmonise, on the basis of justice, the relations between patrons and workmen, and those which tend to meliorate the financial status of the latter and to assist them in case of illness, old age or accident, cessation of work or other misfortunes independent of their will. 11. Every public official shall take an oath in accordance with the following formula : Do you swear before God, and do you promise to your country to observe and defend the constitution and the laws of the Republic, and to faithfully fulfil the duties of your office?" " I do." " If you do so, may God help you; if not, may He and the country demand it from you." 12. The military force is subordinated to the civil power; it is essentially passive and must never deliberate.

CHAPTER II. Individual

Guarantees.

13. All men are equal before the law. The State does not grant nobility titles or hereditary prerogatives or honours, nor does it recognise those granted by another nation. It does not admit in any form the institution of slavery. The slave who arrives at Costa Rican territory shall, by that very fact, be held and treated as a free man. 14. No law shall be given retroactive effect to the prejudice of any person or of his vested rights. 15. The right of property is inviolable, and no one shall be deprived of his property except by virtue of a judicial decree, and for reasons of public utility judicially declared, and after payment of the actual value of both the property and the resulting damages which may be proved, all as appraised by experts. In case of war or of internal disturbances, and only for the purpose of attending to the national defence or to the restoration of public order, the administrative authority shall declare the need of expropriation without previous indemnity. In this event real property shall be temporarily

occupied only for military purposes or to devote the proceeds thereof to the needs of the army. The State is always liable for the expropriations which the executive may make, either by himself or through his agents. No law shall provide that private property shall become the property of the State in case that the owner thereof should have given it an inexact value for the purpose of taxation, and that the State, either by itself or through a third party, may offer to take it for the appraised value and a premium. Mines may be claimed even on private land, but they shall not be worked or adjudicated without previous payment to the owner of the surface for the value of the land to be occupied and the damages resulting therefrom, as the authorities may order and experts may appraise. 16. No one shall .be prevented from engaging in any profession, industry, commerce or work he may desire, provided they are lawful. This right shall only be restricted by a judicial decree whenever the rights of a third party are impaired or by an administrative order issued in accordance with the law, whenever the public security or health or the interests of the nation demand it. The law shall determine what professions require a degree and what conditions must be fulfilled in order to obtain said degree. Foreigners may engage in the liberal professions provided Costa Ricans enjoy the same rights in their respective countries. 17. No person shall be imprisoned for debts of purely civil character. 18. Private actions which do not affect public order or morals or which do not result to the injury of a third party are beyond the pale of law. 19. No one shall be molested or prosecuted for any act which does not violate the law, nor for any written or spoken statement of his political opinions. Nevertheless, neither clergymen nor laymen shall in any manner make political propaganda invoking motives of religion or making use, as a means for such propaganda, of the religious beliefs of the people. 20. No one shall do justice by himself, or execute any acts of violence to enforce his rights. The power to judge civil and criminal cases belongs exclusively to the tribunals of justice. 21. All Costa Ricans or foreigners must apply to law to seek redress for the injuries or damages which they may have suffered in their person, property, or honour. Prompt and full justice must be dealt in strict conformity with the laws.


Courts of justice shall not be excused from exercising their authority on the ground of lack of legal provision, which may settle the litigation or conclude the case submitted to their decision. If there is no law applicable, they shall apply the general principles of law and of eternal justice. 

22. All Costa Ricans or foreigners have the right to terminate their civil suits by means of arbiters before or after having started legal proceedings. 23. The same judge shall not sit in different stages (instancias) in the same case. 24. No penalty shall be imposed which has not been provided previously for the crime or misdemeanour of which one may be guilty. All penalties are personal. No torture, infamous penalties or confiscation of property shall be imposed. The latter provision does not prevent confiscation of the instruments or objects used in the commission of the crime. 25. No one shall be tried by a specially appointed commission, court or judge, except by the court designated and previously established by law. Only those who are guilty of the crime of sedition and rebellion and the members of the army who are in active service shall be subject to military jurisdiction for crimes of any kind which they may commit. Those armed bodies which, according to the law, are militarily regulated are to be considered as military bodies. Ordinary courts shall take cognisance of appeals and writs of error which may be taken or bought in military cases. Any judgment or order dismissing a case can always be taken up in consultation. 26. No one shall be compelled to testify against himself in a criminal case brought against him. Nor shall his spouse, descendants, ascendants, brothers by blood or affinity be compelled to testify against the accused. 27. No penalty shall be imposed without the accused having been heard and convicted by a court, and until the judgment rendered by a competent judge or authority imposing such penalty has become final. Physical constraint in civil matters is excepted. 28. Criminal procedure laws must secure in an efficient manner the right of defence of the accused, and consequently, the right to have his plea heard, to have his proofs admitted and to be defended by the person he may choose, and in default thereof, by a person appointed by the court. 29. Human life is inviolable. 30. No one shall be arrested without information that he has committed an offence and without written order from a judge or authority entrusted with the preservation of

public order, except when the accused has been declared a fugitive from justice. A person caught in the act may be arrested without previous order by any person for the sole purpose of bringing him before the competent authority. No person shall be kept under arrest for more than 3 days without a formal warrant of arrest stating the crime which is imputed to the person arrested and the place, time and circumstances thereof, and all the facts brought out by the summary investigation. Wardens of prisons shall not receive any one as a prisoner without noting down in the register book the warrant of arrest emanating from the official who has the power to issue it. They may, however, receive as detention prisoners those who are brought in to be presented to the judge or competent authority, but they are obliged to report to the latter within 24 hours. 31. Every in habitant of the Republic is entitled to the writ of habeas corpus. 32. All persons may, in times of peace, enter or leave the Republic, travel through its territory and change their residence. The exercise of this right of free locomotion is subject to the powers of the authority in cases of criminal, civil or police liability, and to the provisions of the law, in so far as it relates to emigration, immigration and general health or the administrative expulsion of non-desirable foreigners. 33. The dwelling of the inhabitants of the Republic is an inviolable asylum which shall only be entered in the special cases designated by law, and by virtue of an order emanating from the proper authority. 34. Postal and telegraphic correspondence is inviolable. Private letters and papers shall only be intercepted, taken or registered by public officials through an order emanating from the proper authority in such cases and under such formalities as are established by law, and for the sole purpose of procuring legal evidence to be presented in criminal cases which are not of a political nature. Papers or private letters which are procured by any other means shall not constitute valid proof. 35. Anyone may communicate his thoughts by spoken or written words or through the agency of the press without previous censoring, but shall be liable for any offence committed in the exercise of this right in such cases and manner as the law may provide. 36. All the inhabitants of the Republic have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms, for the: purpose of engaging in private business or to discuss political matters, and examine the public conduct of Government officials. In order to assemble in the streets, squares, and other public places, it shall be necessary to give notice to the political authorities of the place, for the purpose of preserving order. 37. The right of petition may be exercised individually or collectively. But no person or number of persons may take up the representation of the people, assume its rights, or make petitions on its behalf. Anyone doing so shall be guilty of sedition. 38. The individual guarantees set forth in the six foregoing articles shall be suspended when the Republic is in imminent peril, either by foreign aggression or by internal upheaval. The suspension shall extend to all these guarantees or to one or more of them, either throughout the whole territory of the Republic or only in a part thereof, and shall last not more than 30 days. The suspension shall be decreed by Congress at the request of the executive, by two-thirds of the votes of the members present. The executive shall, in regard to persons, only order their detention in a place not set apart for common culprits, or decree their confinement in inhabited and healthy places. In no case shall the executive tormentor vex them. He shall report to Congress at its next session all measures taken to preserve public order or maintain the security of the State. These measures shall cease immediately after the guarantees are restored. During the recess of Congress, the executive shall, in the Council of Ministers, decree this suspension under the terms and with the limitations aforesaid, and shall immediately report to the legislative power. The decree of suspension in the latter case shall amount to a call to Congress to convene at 12 o'clock on the day following that in which the order has been published. Should Congress not confirm this measure by a vote of two-thirds of the members present, the guarantees shall be considered re-established. 

Chapter III. Nationality and Citizenship. 39. The following are Costa Ricans, by birth or origin : (1) The legitimate children of a Costa Rican father, and the illegitimate children of u Costa Rican mother, wherever they may be born. (2) The illegitimate children of a foreign mother, born in Costa Rica, and under 21 years of age, acknowledged by a Costa Rican father with the consent of the mother. (3) A child born or found in Costa Rican territory whose parents or nationality are unknown.

(4) The legitimate children of a foreign father and the illegitimate children of a foreign mother born in Costa Rica, who, by their own will, register in the civil registry after reaching the age of 21 years, or before reaching this age, with the consent of their father or mother. (5) The inhabitants of the Republic who have acquired the Costa Rican nationality of origin in accordance with former laws, and who have not lost this nationality afterwards in accordance with the law. 40. The following are naturalised Costa Ricans : (1) Costa Ricans who, after having lost their nationality, recover it in accordance with the law. (2) Foreigners who heretofore should have acquired the status of naturalised Costa Ricans in accordance with the law, and have not lost it. (3) A foreign woman who marries a Costa Rican. She shall retain her status even if she becomes a widow. (4) Foreigners of good conduct and with known business and means of living, who after having resided 5 years in the country should obtain naturalisation papers in accordance with the law. The period of residence shall be reduced to 1 year for natives of any of the Republics of Central America. (5) Foreigners who render or have rendered important services to the State, or who are people of great ability or of great scientific or artistic culture, or who bring with themselves interesting inventions or open great establishments of positive benefit to the country, shall obtain from the executive power the Costa Rican nationality, after having resided 1 year in Costa Rica. Naturalisation of a foreigner carries with it that of his wife and minor children under 21 years. The latter may, however, on reaching their 21st year, choose the nationality of origin. 

41. The following lose their Costa Rican nationality: (1) Costa Ricans who become naturalised in a foreign country. (2) Those who, without the consent of the Government, accept titles or decorations conferred by a foreign Government, unless said titles are literary or scientific, in which case they may be freely accepted. (3) Those who, without special permission from the Government, enter the military service of a foreign nation or enlist in a foreign military body. (4) The illegitimate child of a Costa Rican mother, on being acknowledged, with her consent, by his foreign father, provided that by the law of the respective country said child acquires that nationality. (5) Any Costa Rican woman who marries a foreigner.
She shall preserve her foreign nationality unless according to the law of her husband's country she does not acquire the latter's nationality, since in such case she shall continue to be a Costa Rican, (6) He who in any manner and for any reason asks for or provokes the intervention of any foreign Power against the Republic, or takes refuge in a Legation or in a warship of a foreign nation or in any other place protected by the privilege of extra-territoriality, in order to elude the national laws or authorities. Costa Ricans who lose their nationality by the first of the causes enumerated in this paragraph can never recover it. 42. No citizen or subject of a nation with which Costa Rica may be at war, nor those who have been declared in other countries to be pirates, slave traders, guilty of incendiarism, counterfeiters of coin, of bank notes, of Treasury notes or of other documents of public credit, murderers, plagiarists or robbers, shall be granted Costa Rican nationality. 48. The naturalisation of a foreigner shall become void by residence in his country of origin for 2 consecutive years, unless he resides therein in the discharge of an official commission of the Costa Rican Government or with the permission of the latter. 44. The law shall determine the means and the manner by which Costa Rican nationality may be recovered. 45. The following are the duties of Costa Ricans: to obey the constitution and the laws, to serve and defend the country and to contribute to the public expenses. They are furthermore obliged to cause their children or wards to attend public or private schools in order to obtain primary elementary education, during the time which the law may designate. 46. Costa Rican citizens are all male persons who, besides having the status of Costa Ricans, have the following requisites: (1) To have reached the age of 21 years, or of 20 years if they have a professional title recognised by the State. (2) To own some property or to have some honest trade, the proceeds or profits of which may be sufficient to support them in relation to their social standing. (3) To be registered in the civil registry of the district where they are domiciled. (4) Beginning from the 1st January, 1927, in order to be a Costa Rican citizen, it shall be required furthermore to know how to read and write, or to have registered property to the value, at least, of 500 colons, or to be over 50 years of age. 47. Citizenship is lost together with Costa Rican

nationality. The exercise of citizens' rights may be suspended, lost and recovered for the causes designated by law. 48. Those who have lost their citizenship, except in case of treason to the country, may have their rights restored by the executive, when a petition for this grace is legally founded. 49. Foreigners enjoy in the territory of the nation the same civil rights as the citizens, and they may exercise them as the nationals. They are under obligation to contribute to the public expenses in the manner provided by law, but not to pay extraordinary obligatory taxes. They are exempt from military duty. Those who are domiciled in the country are obliged, however, to do police duty in abnormal cases, when the security of the property or the preservation of order in the same town where they live so demand it, subject to the exceptions in regard to this provision stipulated in the treaties which Costa Rica may have concluded with the respective countries. Foreigners must obey and respect the institutions, laws and authorities of the country, and submit themselves to the findings and judgments of the courts, without making use of any other recourses than those granted to citizens by the laws. They do not enjoy political rights, and must, on the contrary, refrain from participating in any manner in the political matters of the country. Notwithstanding the aforesaid provisions, the Government may expel, in accordance with the law, any foreigner whose permanent residence in the country may be deemed inadvisable.

CHAPTER IV. Suffrage.

50. Suffrage is an essentially political function and belongs exclusively to the citizens in the exercise of their rights; the act of voting, being personal, may only be executed by a citizen who has himself the right to do so. 
51. Direct suffrage shall be exercised- (1) By citizens domiciled in each district, to elect a municipal syndic and substitute. (2) By citizens domiciled in each district, to elect an intendant and municipal alderman, as well as their respective substitutes. (3) By citizens domiciled in each province, to elect deputies and senators and their substitutes. The election which embraces three or more functionaries

of the same kind shall be made by the system of proportional representation. 52. Popular elections shall be held on the first Sunday in March, every 3 years, beginning from 1922 inclusive. At these elections one-half of the senators, one-half of the deputies and one-half of the aldermen, as well as the municipal syndics and intendants, shall be elected. 53. To exercise the right to vote it is required that the citizen be provided with a personal certificate which shall be given to him free of cost. On casting his vote it must be noted in this certificate that the citizen to whom it belongs has already voted in the corresponding election. 54. No authority shall arrest any citizen or elector during the hours of voting, except in case of flagrante delicto. Nor shall he be required to render military service. The public official, who shall dictate or attempt to dictate to his subordinates or to any voter the manner in which he is to vote, shall lose his position and his rights as citizen and shall be punished according to law. No military forces shall be located at the polls or near them. Only the president of the board shall have the right to arrange for the police service in the voting precinct and its immediate surroundings, for the maintenance of order. 

55. The election of deputies, senators, municipal officers, intendants, vice-intendants and syndics shall be made by direct vote in accordance with the system in force. The election of President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be made by a secret ballot by an electoral college composed of the deputies and senators both sitting and substitutes, of the sitting aldermen of all the municipalities of the Republic and of all those persons who have occupied for a period not less than 6 months, the office of President of the Republic, Secretary or Under-Secretary of State, deputy, senator or justice. 

The election of justices of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be made by the Senate, choosing from among the lists of three candidates which the Chamber of Deputies and the executive power shall each present. 

There shall be a quorum for election if three-fourths of the members of the college meet ; and the person receiving the absolute majority of the votes present shall be considered elected. The President of the Senate shall preside over these electoral acts ; in his absence, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, and in the absence of both, the senior senator present. If, after two ballots, no one should be elected and more than 3 candidates should have been voted for, the President shall order a new balloting with the understanding that, if

on this third ballot an absolute majority in favour of a candidate is not obtained, the balloting shall be continued, limited only to the 3 candidates who have obtained the greatest number of votes, and thus the election shall proceed for two consecutive times. For this purpose, and if by reason of a tie, it should be impossible to determine who are the 3 candidates with the highest number of votes, the necessary name or names shall be eliminated by lot in order to leave only 3 candidates on whom the election shall proceed. If after two ballots limited to 3 specified names no election should have been made, the President shall order a new voting turn with the understanding that if an absolute majority does not result in favour of one of the candidates, the voting shall continue only as to the two highest candidates. Should it be impossible to determine who are the two candidates obtaining the greatest number of votes, either for the reason that all three of them are tied, or because two of the m have the same number of votes, one of the names of the 3 candidates in the first case, and of the two candidates tied in the second case, shall be eliminated by lot. In the event that the voting being proceeded with only on specified candidates, as provided for in the foregoing paragraphs, there should appear on a ballot an absolute majority in favour of a different candidate, the college shall declare elected the one who under such conditions obtained said majority. But if such majority should not appear, the President shall require the voters to proceed to vote exclusively between the two or three names which are being discussed, and shall apply to the candidate obtaining the greater number of votes those votes given to candidates not authorised, as well as blank ballots. After the balloting has been limited to two names, the college shall continue in permanent session until one of them is elected. After the election of the President has been completed, the election of the Vice-President shall be proceeded with without delay in accordance with the same principles heretofore explained. 56. The election of the President and of the Vice-President shall take place on the first Sunday in April of the year in which the presidential term expires. The college shall convene for that purpose at the capital of the Republic, even without previous convocation. Should there be no quorum on that day, the election shall be postponed to the following day. At this second meeting one-half of the members of the college shall be sufficient to constitute a quorum. Should no quorum be present at that second

meeting, the President shall order that the election be proceeded with on the following day with any number of persons present. 57. The members of the electoral college shall enjoy immunity from 15 days before that on which the election of the President is to take place, and while said election has not been terminated, except in cases of flagrante delicto. 58. A special law shall regulate the elections upon the bases hereinbefore outlined so as to secure liberty and the order in the voting.

CHAPTER V. The Legislative Power.

59. The legislative power shall be vested in a Congress composed of two Chambers, one of senators, and the other of deputies, whose members, in both, are elected directly by the citizens, and may be re-elected indefinitely. Each province shall be considered for this purpose as an electoral district, and shall elect a sitting deputy for every 15,000 inhabitants or fraction thereof over 7,500; one substitute deputy for every three and fraction of three sitting deputies, and a substitute senator for every three or remainder of three sitting senators corresponding to it. Even if the number of deputies and senators of a province does not reach the number of three, a substitute shall always be elected. In order to determine the number of sitting deputies, attention shall be paid to the result of the last official census, and the most recent figures given out by the Department of National Statistics, correcting or enlarging the census. There shall be no elections by reason of the increase in population except every 10 years. Senators and deputies, although elected by provinces, represent the whole nation, and they must consult only justice and the common welfare. They cannot compromise their votes prematurely. Deputies and senators shall, upon assuming office, take the constitutional oath. The President shall take his oath before the Chamber, and the deputies and senators before the President of the respective Chamber. 60. To be a deputy or a senator the following requisites must be filled : (1) To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. (2) To be a native of the Republic, or naturalised therein, and have resided 10 years after having obtained naturalisation papers. (3) To know how to read and write. (4) To be the owner of property of a value of not less

than 3,000 colons, or to have a professional degree recognised by the State, or a n annual income of 1,200 colons, at least. To be a deputy it shall also be necessary to be over 25 years of age, and to be a senator, over 40 years of age. 61. The following may not be elected deputies or senators : (1) The President of the Republic or anyone who exercises the executive power at the time of election. (2) The Ministers of State. (3) The justices of the Supreme Court of Justice. (4) Those who exercise jurisdiction or authority over the whole province making the election. No one can hold the office of deputy and senator at the same time. Should the same person be elected for both offices, the election for senator shall prevail. Should the same citizen be elected deputy or senator of two or more provinces, he shall represent the province which he may choose. A deputy may be elected senator, but a senator shall not be elected deputy. 62. Deputies and senators shall hold office for a period of 6 years. The members of each one of the Chambers shall be renewed by halves every 3 years. The first renewal shall be made by lot in 1922. Whenever the exact one-half cannot be renewed because the number of sitting or substitute deputies or senators is odd, the half of the inferior even number shall first be renewed, and the renewal of the odd senator or deputy shall be left for the following term. 63. In order to fill up the temporary or absolute vacancy of a sitting deputy, the substitutes of the respective provinces shall be called in the order of their appointment, appearing in the act corresponding to the election of the person whom they are to replace. Should there be no substitute at that time, those elected in the other 3-year period shall be called in the same order. This principle shall also be observed when the vacancy of a senator is to be filled. In none of the foregoing cases shall the fact of calling a substitute to replace a sitting member imply that his term of office shall exceed the period of 6 years. Whenever the number of substitutes is exhausted, the respective Chamber may order that new substitutes be elected at the next renewal election. 64. The office of deputy or senator, either sitting or substitute, is incompatible with that of alderman or municipal employee, or with any other salaried public office, function or commission of the same character. As an exception, however, the office of professor in any school


supported or subsidised by the State shall not be incompatible, if the appointment is made by the board of directors of the school. No sitting deputy or senator or substitute who is discharging the duties of the sitting member may, during ordinary or extraordinary sessions, accept from the executive any salaried commission or any employment dependent upon, or by appointment of the executive, except the office of Minister of State, or chief of a diplomatic mission. Whenever the Chambers are not in session the deputy or senator may accept employment by appointment of, or dependent upon the executive power. Both during sessions and in recess, a deputy or senator may freely accept judicial offices. But in any case in which he should accept employment or office from any other branch of the Government in the foregoing terms, he shall lose his seat in the Chamber, except when he is appointed head of a diplomatic mission. 65. No deputy or senator, either sitting or substitute, shall enter, directly or indirectly, into any contract with the public administration by virtue of which he may enjoy some privilege or concession. Nor shall it be lawful for him to receive any amount from the public Treasury, except that allotted to the office which he discharges, and in its proper case, the value of the contracts which are published in the " Diario Oficial," or of services, the payment of which is ordered in the same public manner, A deputy or senator violating this prohibition shall ipso facto lose his seat in the Chamber, and must return the sums unlawfully received. 66. Deputies and senators are immune for the opinions which they may express, or the votes they may give in the discharge of their duties. During the sessions their property shall not be attached to further legal civil proceedings except upon the deputy's or senator's own consent. They shall not be accused, prosecuted or arrested from the time they are declared elected either as sitting or as substitute members until the expiration of their legal term of office, except in cases of flagrante delicto, and unless the Chamber of Deputies previously authorises the accusation, and declares that there is cause for an action against them. A deputy or senator who is arrested in flagrante delicto shall be placed immediately at the disposal of the Chamber of Deputies, with a summary record of the case, so that he may be suspended from his legislative duties and be delivered to the proper judge or be set free, as the case may be. Should the Chambers not be in session, the deputy or senator shall be set free, upon furnishing bond of from 1,000 to 5,000 colons, according to the importance of the offence.

67. The Legislative Chambers shall meet every year on the 1st May without need of previous convocation. The ordinary sessions shall last until the 31st July inclusive. They shall convene in extraordinary session whenever, by reason of high national interests, they are convoked by the executive power, and they must also convene in the case provided for in article 38. If, on the 1st May, Congress should be assembled in extraordinary session, the latter shall cease, and it shall continue to consider in ordinary session the business for which it should have been convoked. 68. The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall open their ordinary and extraordinary sessions at the same time. The Senate, however, may meet without the presence of the Chamber of Deputies for the exercise of the powers given to it in the first paragraph of article 78. If, after the expiration of the ordinary period, there should remain some accusations pending against the officials designated in article 77, the Chamber of Deputies shall continue its sessions without the presence of the Senate for the exclusive purpose of declaring whether or not the charges shall be filed. Neither of the Chambers, while working simultaneously, shall, without the consent of the other, suspend its sessions for more than 3 days. 69. The Chambers shall not open their sessions or exercise their legal functions without the concurrence of two-thirds of their members. When, upon the arrival of the day appointed to open their sessions, they cannot do so, or in case that, after the sessions have been opened, they cannot continue on account of a lack of quorum, the members present, whatever be their number, shall exert pressure on the absent members in accordance with their respective regulations. The sessions of the Chambers shall be public, except when, for reasons of general convenience, it is agreed to consider some special matter in secret session. 70. The seat of Congress shall be in the capital of the Republic Notwithstanding, it may move to another place if so decided by two-thirds of the votes. In case of disturbance of the public order, the Chambers shall meet at the place designated by the President of the Senate. Any meeting of the members of Congress which takes place outside of the constitutional requirements, for the purpose of exercising the legislative power, shall be illegal,

and all acts executed in that manner shall be considered null and void. The persons who take part in those deliberations shall be punished according to law. 71. Each Chamber shall draw up its own convenient regulations for the order and direction of its work and for all matters pertaining to its internal policing. The regulations shall not contain any provision contrary to the constitution; and once adopted they shall not be modified unless upon compliance with the procedure required for all laws, excepting the sanction of the executive. In accordance with its regulations, it may correct its members and impose on them correctional penalties including the forfeiture of their salary and suspension up to the period of 8 days. 72. Each Chamber shall pass upon the credentials of its members, and shall accept the resignations which the latter may present, if the reasons given are just. It shall elect yearly its board of directors. The President must possess the qualifications required for the office of President of the Republic. In case of absolute vacancy of one of the members of the board of directors, the respective Chamber shall designate a substitute to fill his place for the remainder of the year. 73. The regulations of each Chamber or of Congress in joint session shall be passed by an absolute majority of the votes present, unless the constitution requires a superior number. For the latter case, and for any other case wherein an absolute majority is required, this majority shall be constituted by one-half plus one, if the total number is even; should this number be odd, a unit shall be added, and one half of the resulting number shall constitute the absolute majority. In order to fix, in the proper case, the two-thirds or the three-fourths, the exact arithmetical calculation shall be made. Should the result be a whole number and a fraction, the majority shall be formed by adding a complete unit instead of a fraction to the whole number of the arithmetical result. The Presidents of the Chambers shall vote only in case of a tie. 74. Each Chamber, and Congress in the proper case, may call for the Ministers of State to give the explanations and information which it may be convenient to demand from them. 75. It is forbidden to Congress and to each one of its Chambers (1) To address any exhortative communication to public officials.

(2) To interfere, either through resolutions or laws, in matters which are of the exclusive competence of the other powers. (3) To pass resolutions lauding or disapproving official acts. (4) To demand from the Government information on the instructions given to the diplomatic Ministers, or a report on negotiations of a secret nature. (5) To delegate in one or several of its members the powers conferred upon it by this constitution. 76. Congress shall meet as a single body to exercise the following powers, which are within its exclusive jurisdiction: (1) To install the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and the justices of the Supreme Court, except in the case provided for in article 96. (2) To decide upon, the resignations or the excuses which may be presented by said officials. (3) To decide upon any doubts which may arise in regard to the incapacity of the President, according to article 91 . (4) To approve or disapprove the treaties and public agreements which the executive power may conclude. (5) To decide upon a declaration of war at the request of the executive power, or to demand from him in due time the opening up of negotiations for peace. (6) To decide whether or not the sessions are to be removed to another place, and to designate such place. (7) To give or refuse its consent to the entry of foreign troops into national territory, or the stationing of fleets in its ports. (8) To suspend the individual guarantees, and to take cognisance of the suspension decreed by the executive power in the case provided for in article 38. (9) To deliberate upon the revision of the constitution as explained in article 124. (10) To approve or disapprove the laws which may determine, declare or order director indirect taxes. In these cases, the President of the Senate and that of the Chamber of Deputies shall act as President and Vice-President of Congress respectively. 77. The following are the attributions of the Chamber of Deputies:   (1) To enact, interpret, modify and repeal the laws which it may dictate. (2) To authorise the municipalities, either by a general or a special law, to establish local taxes or imposts, fixing specifically in the law what property may be taxed, and the maximum to be reached in each case; to arrange for the manner in which the municipal budget is to be formed and

liquidated, and to designate the powers of the municipalities, which may be more extensive for the senatorial districts of the provinces; and in general, to publish municipal ordinances in accordance with bases laid down in this constitution. (3) To fix in each legislative period the budget of expenditures of the public administration for the ensuing year, and wherever necessary, the budget for extraordinary expenditures. In the budget law shall be stated the amount of the floating debt which may be created during the fiscal year; and the executive may within that limit carry out any credit transaction. He may also do so in order to cover the expenditures authorised, in case the revenues are not sufficient for that purpose. In other cases, a legislative authorisation shall be necessary to pledge the national credit; this principle, however, shall not impair the rights of third parties acting in good faith. (4) To fix at each legislative period the maximum limit of the armed forces which may be placed on duty in times of peace, as well as the increase" which the executive may decree in case of foreign war, or of armed insurrection. (5) To create new districts upon the fulfilment of the condition required in article 116, and to point out their limits and the limits of the provinces. (6) To decree the alienation of the property of the nation, or the application thereof for public uses. (7) To empower specially the executive to negotiate loans or to enter into other contracts upon mortgage security of the national revenue. The contracts which may be approved by the Chambers without alteration shall not be vetoed by the executive, but they shall be so vetoed if they are amended. The amendments introduced by Congress shall be subject to acceptance by the interested party. (8) To fix the alloy, weight and standard and denomination of the coin, and to arrange for a system of weights and measures as well as to enact the laws which must regulate banking institutions of all kinds. (9) To confer military degrees from colonel upwards. (10) To grant personal and honorary prizes to those who have rendered great and important services to the Republic, and to decree memorial honours. (11) To examine the annual reports of the Ministers of State, and the general account of the expenses of the Treasury. The latter shall first be examined by a committee of two of its members selected one by each Chamber; said Chamber may demand from the proper party all kinds of explanations and vouchers. (12) To promote whatever may form the prosperity of

321

the State, to care especially for the health and hygiene of the towns, and to encourage the study of science, arts and trades as well as immigration, agriculture, industry and commerce. (13) To take jurisdiction on the accusations which may be brought against the President of the Republic or the person acting as such, against the: deputies, senators, justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, or Ministers of State, for common offences committed by them; and to declare by a two-thirds vote whether or not there is ground to institute proceedings against them. In the affirmative case, it shall suspend the accused official and shall place him at the disposal of the Supreme Court of Justice for trial. (14) To take cognisance of the accusations which may be filed against the aforesaid officials for offences involving liability, committed during the exercise of their duties, and likewise to declare whether or not there is ground to institute proceedings against them. In the affirmative case, to place the accused official at the disposal of the Senate for trial. (15) To take cognisance of the accusations which may be filed within the legal term against the ex-President of the Republic or the person who has acted as such, or against the Ministers of State, for offences involving political or official liability, in accordance with article 102, and likewise to declare whether or not there is ground to institute proceedings against them. In the affirmative case, it shall place the accused official at the disposal of the Senate for trial. (16) All the other powers enumerated in this constitution. 78. The following are the attributions of the Senate: (1) To judge the functionaries enumerated in the foregoing article whenever they are accused by the Chamber of Deputies of offences involving political or official liability. Two-thirds of the votes shall be necessary to declare the accused guilty. No penalty shall be imposed by the Senate other than dismissal from office, temporary or absolute deprivation of political rights, or inability to hold public office. This provision shall not prevent ordinary courts of justice from enforcing against them any other civil or criminal liability which they might have incurred. (2) To pass upon the nullity of the elections and the other irregularities of the popular suffrage and of the electoral college. (3) To enact and order the publication of the Codes lacking, and to decree the amendments of the existing Codes. (4) To approve or disapprove the loan contracts which may be entered into outside the country, after the contract has been approved by the Chamber of Deputies. 

(5) To approve or disapprove the contracts which the Government may enter into, when on account of the nature and importance of the subject matter the executive power or the Chamber of Deputies, at the request of one-third of the votes of the members present, considers necessary the sanction of the Senate. (6) To approve or disapprove any bill passed by the Chamber of Deputies, either in the event that the latter should consider it convenient to refer the bill by the vote of one-third of the members present, or that the executive, before sanctioning said bill, should refer it to the Senate for review. (7) All the other powers enumerated in other places in this constitution. 79. During the ordinary sessions of Congress the bills shall originate in either of the Chambers according to their respective attributions, at the proposal of the respective members, or in the executive power through the Ministers of State. The Supreme Court of Justice, sitting in bench, shall by a majority of votes also propose the enactment, amendment, or abrogation of civil, penal, and procedure laws, and of the organic laws of the courts of justice; and for this purpose submit to the Senate the respective bill. The bills submitted to the Chambers may not be signed by more than two of their members. Only the executive power, through the Ministers, shall submit bills during the extraordinary sessions provided they refer to matters which are included in the decree of convocation, or in the decree of extension. 80. No bill shall become a law unless the following requisites have been fulfilled:   (1) To have undergone in the Chamber, or in the latter and in the Senate as the case may be, three different debates on three different days. (2) To have been approved in the Chamber, or in the latter and the Senate, or in Congress, as the case may be. (3) To have obtained the sanction of the executive power, or be within one of the cases in which, according to this constitution, said, sanction may be taken for granted, or is not necessary. 81. After the bill has been approved by the Chamber, following three debates, without any amendment, it shall be sent to the Senate for review in the proper case, or to the executive power for sanction. Should the bill be disapproved in- whole in the Chamber, it shall not be presented again until the following legislative period. 

The Chambers have the reciprocal right to propose the amendments and alterations which they may deem

convenient to the bills under consideration, until they come to a final agreement as to the terms in which said bills are to be drafted when submitted to the approval of the executive. Should both Chambers consider it proper, they may meet in joint session, to discuss the points of disagreement ; but the voting on the bill shall be made by each Chamber separately. 82. Should the executive power also approve the bill passed by one or both Chambers, as the case may be, he shall affix thereto the formula, " Let it be executed," and shall cause the same to be published as a law of the Republic. In the contrary case, and if he does not consider proper that the Senate should revise it, he shall return the bill to the respective Chamber. The order of return shall be written at the foot of the bill and signed by the President of the Republic, and by the corresponding Minister of State, who shall furthermore send a detached statement of the reasons on which the executive bases his disapproval, or the changes, suppressions or additions which he desires to be made. In order that a bill be considered objected to by the executive power, it is indispensable that it be returned in the manner specified within the precise term of 10 days (exclusive of Sundays and holidays), beginning from that in which the Bill has been received by the respective Ministry. Should it not be done within that time, the executive shall not refuse his approval or refrain from publishing it. If, during the said period of 10 days, the Chambers should adjourn, and the executive should veto the bill, said' bill must be published, together with his veto, in the official journal, at the latest 3 days after the expiration of the time granted for the veto. Should it not be done, the bill shall be considered as a law of the Republic. 83. After a bill has been vetoed by the executive power within the legal term, it shall again be discussed in three debates in case the bill should have been objected to as a whole, or in two debates if the executive should have offered some amendments. Should the Chamber agree by a majority of votes to the refusal of the executive, the bill shall be placed on file, and shall not be presented again until the following legislative term. Should the Chamber accept by a majority of votes the suggestions made by the executive, or if by a two-thirds vote it should reject the opposition or suggestions of the aforesaid power, and ratify the bill as it was passed, said bill shall be referred again to the Senate if the ratification of the latter is needed, where it shall undergo the same procedure indicated in this article. Should the Senate, in its turn, agree by a majority of 

votes to the refusal of the executive, the bill shall be placed on file, and shall not be presented again until the following legislative period. Should the suggestions of the executive be approved by a majority of votes, or if the opposition or the suggestions made by the executive should be rejected by a two-thirds vote, and the bill should be ratified as it was passed originally, it shall be returned to the executive, who shall not then withhold his approval. 84. If the opposition of the executive is based on the fact that the law is unconstitutional, and the Chambers should re-enact it, it shall be referred to the Supreme Court of Justice to decide the matter within 10 working days. Should the majority of all the justices of the Supreme Court decide that the bill is constitutional, it shall be the duty of the executive to give it his approval. In the contrary case, the bill shall be considered disapproved, and shall be placed on file. 85. Should the executive fail to comply with his duty to approve the laws within the time and in accordance with the manner provided in this constitution, the President of the Senate shall approve the same and cause them to be published in the official journal. If in spite of the order of this official the law should not be published within 48 hours in the official journal, the publication shall be made in any of the newspapers of the country. 86. The bills remaining pending at the end of a legislative period of the Chamber shall be considered as new bills in the following ordinary sessions in case that at this second legislative period there should have been a renewal of deputies. Otherwise, the interrupted debate may be continued. Those which at the end of the legislative period should be left pending in the Senate shall likewise be considered as new bills in the same case of renewal of Senators. 87. The following resolutions shall not require the approval of the executive, and shall be published without need thereof:  (1) Those regarding the elections, which must be made in accordance with this constitution or with the international treaties, or with their respective regulations, or those with regard to the resignations or excuses which may be presented. (2) Those that decree the removal of their seat to another place. (3) Those regarding whether or not there is ground to institute proceedings against public officials, as provided in article 77, or those suspending or sentencing said officials. (4) The regulations which they might adopt for the conduct of their internal affairs.

88. Every law or decree of Congress shall be headed as follows: " The Senate, the Chamber of Deputies, or the Congress of Costa Rica, in the use of the powers granted to it by the constitution of the Republic, decrees: . . . . " The President and the secretaries shall sign on behalf of each Chamber. " The President of the Republic of Costa Rica whereas the Chamber of Deputies, the Senate, or Congress, has decreed as follows: . . . . Therefore, I command that the foregoing law be published and obeyed." The President and the respective Ministers of State shall sign. 

CHAPTER VI. The Executive Power.

89. The executive power shall be exercised by a citizen whose title shall be "President of the Republic," with the indispensable collaboration of the Ministers of State, the number of whom shall be fixed by law. The President shall despatch with each Minister the current matters of public business pertaining, according to law, to that particular Ministry. Bills to be presented to the Legislature, those received from it for sanction, the budget bill, matters for which this constitution requires presidential sanction, and in general all matters of great weight and importance shall be considered and decided by the President in the Council of Ministers. 

90. There shall be a Vice-President of the Republic, elected for the same term as the President, who will serve during the absence, temporary or permanent, of the President. In case of the permanent absence of the Vice-President of the Republic, the President, of the Senate or, failing him, the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall replace the President during the temporary or permanent absence of the latter, and until he returns to office or the pending presidential term ends, as the case may be. If the President of the Chamber of Deputies is called to act as President, during the temporary absence of the President of the Senate, and there be occasion to replace the President of the Republic by reason of his permanent absence, he shall hand over the presidency to the President of the Senate as soon as the cause for the latter's absence ceases. If the absence of the Vice-President be temporary and should temporary or permanent absence of the President occur, the President of the Senate shall assume the presidency, or, failing him the President of the Chamber of Deputies; but when the occasion for the absence of the Vice-President ceases, the latter shall be President. The President of the Senate or the President of the Chamber of Deputies, when, called to the presidency by law, shall continue therein for the time herein-before stated, even though their respective appointments shall have terminated. If the term of each as senator or deputy shall not have expired at the time they give up the office, they shall recover their seats in the Senate or in the Chamber, as the case may be, until their terms end. 91. Should the President die, the Vice-President, or, failing him, his lawful successor, shall by right become President. Should the President resign his office and his resignation be accepted, the Congress shall call the Vice-President or his lawful successor to the presidency. Should the President be suspended or deprived of his office, according to this constitution, the Chamber of Deputies when suspending him, or the Senate when depriving him of office, shall call to the presidency the Vice-President or his lawful successor. "When the President shall have become morally or physically unfit for the office, the Congress, if it be in session, or, if it be adjourned, then as soon as it be called in session by the Minister of the Interior, within the fixed term of 3 days, shall consider the circumstances of the case and decide whether the presidency is to be regarded as vacant. Should it decide in the affirmative, it shall call to the presidency the Vice-President or his lawful successor. In default of such a resolution, the Council of Ministers, presided over by the Minister of the Interior, shall govern. 92. If the President shall become so ill as to make it difficult for him to discharge his duties, he may turn over the presidency to the Vice-President or his lawful successor. When the President shall decide to direct military operations in time of war outside of the capital, he shall call upon the Vice-President or, failing him, his lawful successor, to take charge of the other branches of the Government. In no case may the President relinquish his office without permission of the Senate, which shall then call the Vice-President or his lawful successor to the presidency. 93. To be President or Vice-President of the Republic it is required  (1) That one be a born Costa Rican and a citizen in the exercise of his rights. (2) To be over 30 years of age. (3) To be a layman.

(4) To be the owner of property worth 5,000 colons, or to have an annual income of 3,000 colons, or a professional title recognised by the State. (5) To know how to read and write. 94. He is ineligible for the office either of President or Vice-President who is  (1) The ascendant or descendant or brother, by blood or affinity, of whoever shall be in exercise of the functions of President of the Republic at the time of the election, or who shall have exercised them within the year previous. (2) The titular or temporary Vice-President who may be in power at the time of the election or who shall have been in power within the year previous. Equally ineligible for the office of President is  (1) He who may be Minister of State at the time of the election or shall have been such within the year previous. (2) The officer having military command of a city or district at the t i m e of the election, or anyone who by blood or affinity shall be his ascendant, descendant or brother. The President of the Republic shall not be re-elected for the term following his own, even though he may have resigned or in any other way lost his office. Neither shall the Vice-President be elected for the term following his own. Any deputy or senator may be elected Vice-President and does not thereby lose his seat in the Chamber, save only for the time he may fill the office. The President and Vice-President shall not be related to each other by blood or affinity, as ascendant, descendant or brother. 95. The President shall be in office 6 years. At the end of such period he ceases by that very fact to exercise his functions. 96. The office of President and that of Vice-President are obligatory, and the President and Vice-President elect shall assume office on the 8th day of May. On taking office they shall take the oath required by law. If for any grave reason the President be unable to take the oath on the day named, the Vice-President shall act as President. In such case the President elect shall take the oath during the ordinary session of Congress; but should the impediment continue and the Chambers adjourn, he shall take the oath as President before the Vice-President who is acting in his stead, with the ceremonies prescribed for the occasion. 97. The salary of the President shall not be increased or diminished except for the following term. 98. The President shall not leave the territory of the nation while in office, nor for a year after the day he has 

ceased therefrom, without securing the permission of the Senate in both cases. This prohibition applies to the titular or temporary Vice-President during the time he is in office and for the following year. 99. The following are the duties and attributions of the President of the Republic, outside of those enumerated in the other articles of this constitution:   (1) Freely to appoint and remove the Ministers of State and Governors of provinces, and other employees depending upon him. To appoint and remove in the Council of Ministers the diplomatic Ministers and the consuls-general of the Republic. (2) To maintain public order throughout the territory, and to restore it wherever it has been disturbed, and to provide for the internal security of the Republic, defend the independence and the honour of the nation and the inviolability of its territory. (3) To declare war upon another nation with the consent of Congress, without prejudice to the right of repelling any foreign aggression when urgently required. (4) To conclude and ratify treaties of peace which have been submitted to the approval of Congress. (5) To assume the command of the army as commander-in-chief thereof, or to delegate these functions when he should deem it convenient; and to direct, whenever he may deem it proper, the war operations as such commander-in-chief. (6) To grant military grades up to and including that of lieutenant-colonel, and to issue corresponding certificates for grades conferred by himself or by Congress. (7) To comply with and execute the constitution and the laws, and cause others through its agents and subordinate employees to do likewise; and to see that the public officials who are not subordinate to it shall also comply with and execute the said constitution and laws, applying for that purpose to their immediate superiors. (8) To take care of the exact collection and administration of public revenues and wealth, and to decree the disbursement thereof, in strict accordance with the law. (9) To conduct the relations with other nations; to receive diplomatic Ministers and to admit the consuls of other nations; to conclude treaties and agreements with the Governments of the other countries, and to exchange them after ratification, which must be given by Congress. (10) To grant naturalisation papers in the cases authorised by law. (11) To grant pardons, commutation and reduction of
sentences in accordance with the law, likewise to reinstate delinquents in their rights. (12) To grant amnesties and general or special pardons for political offences. (13) To emancipate minors in accordance with the laws. (14) To supply the consent to contract marriage to those who need such consent by law. He shall not supply the consent of the father or that of the mother. (15) To convene Congress in ordinary session, and, in. accord with the Council of Ministers, to call for extraordinary sessions whenever the serious interests of the State demand it. The decree in the latter case shall explain the reasons of the convocation of the Chambers. After the latter have convened, he may submit new matters to their consideration. (16) To issue the instructions and regulations which may be necessary and convenient for the prompt and proper execution of the laws, without, however, contradicting or altering the spirit thereof. These regulations and instructions must be discussed in the Council of Ministers. (17) To issue regulations for the internal government of the offices and departments of the Government. (18) To look to the prompt and complete administration of justice, lending the courts, in accordance with the law, all the necessary support and assistance to have their orders obeyed and executed. (19) To call upon the citizens and the electoral college to hold the elections which may be necessary at the time fixed by the constitution and by law. 100. The President must present to Congress at the opening of the ordinary sessions a written message rendering an account of the political situation of the Republic and of the general situation of the several branches of the administration. He shall recommend, furthermore, the adoption of measures which he may consider important for the good conduct of the affairs of the nation and for its progress and welfare. These documents, being essentially of a political nature, must be approved by the Council of Ministers. 101. The President of the Republic during his term of office, and the titular or temporary Vice-President, while in the discharge of that office, shall not be prosecuted or tried for common offences, except after the Chamber of Deputies has declared that there is ground for prosecution upon charges filed against them. 102. The President, or the person who replaces him, and the Ministers of State are responsible for the offences which they may commit in their conduct  (1) "When they favour the interests of a foreign nation
against the independence, liberty and integrity of Costa Rica. (2) When they interfere directly or indirectly with the elections ordered by this constitution, or restrict the freedom to which all electors are entitled. (3) When they prevent the Chambers from assembling or holding their meetings at the time appointed by the constitution, or restrict the liberty and independence which they should enjoy in all their acts and deliberations. (4) When they refuse to publish or execute the laws in those cases in which, according to this constitution, they may not refuse. (5) When they impede or hinder the courts from taking cognisance of cases falling under their jurisdiction, or when they restrict the freedom which said courts should enjoy, or disobey their orders. (6) When in any other manner they attempt to violate the constitution or the laws, or the lawful enjoyment and exercise of political or individual rights or the constitutional custody and use of the public wealth. For these acts they shall be tried by the Senate after the Chamber of Deputies, in accordance with the provisions of article 77, has declared that there is ground to institute proceedings. The Ministers are liable for the acts of the administration in their respective branches jointly with the President. The liability for the acts agreed upon in the Council of Ministers shall extend to all Ministers jointly with the President. The Ministers shall not be released from liability by a verbal or written order of the President, nor shall they save their vote at the Council sessions. The liability of the President or of the person acting as substitute shall only be demanded when he is in power, and during the year following the date of his separation from office. The liability of the Ministers shall last while they are in office and for 6 months after their separation therefrom. 103. All decrees, acts, regulations or orders of the President must be signed by the respective Minister, and shall not be valid or obeyed without this requisite. Only those decrees whereby Ministers are appointed or removed shall be signed by the President alone. The Ministers shall not issue any decree, resolution or order by themselves, and shall be held guilty of fraudulent alteration if they communicate any act of the President without being signed first by the latter in the respective book. 104. The Ministers of State may attend the sessions of either one of the Chambers and take part in the discussion. But they must withdraw from the hall of the Chamber before voting is proceeded with. 105. No one shall be Minister of State who is not  (1) A citizen in the exercise of his rights. (2) A native or a naturalised citizen who has resided 10 years in the country after having obtained his naturalisation papers. (3) A layman. (4) Over 25 years of age and of well-known morality and qualifications. No one shall be Minister who is a contractor for public works or services; and whoever files any claim for his own interest shall cease to be a Minister if at the time of filing such claim he holds such office. 

106. Within the first 15 days after the opening of the ordinary sessions, the Ministers must present to Congress in writing a detailed report of all the work done during the year and of the condition of the administration. The Minister of Finance shall furthermore, within the same term, present the project for the budget for the ensuing calendar year, and the detailed account of the expenses incurred during the preceding calendar year. 
The items of expenses shall be kept one by one with all their details, but should there be amongst the latter any one of a secret character, the publication of which should be deemed inadvisable, the Minister shall not include it, but he must give explanations, and show the corresponding voucher to the committee appointed by Congress to examine the accounts of the Treasury. Failure to present these reports and the project within the time specified shall render the defaulting Minister liable therefor. 107. All deliberations and resolutions of the President and the Council of Ministers shall be entered in the corresponding book of minutes which shall be signed by all present. When the extreme gravity of any matter so demands it, the President shall add to the Council such persons as he may consider proper to call. The resolutions and the votes shall be set down in the minutes.

CHAPTER VII.  The Judicial Power.

108. 

The judicial power shall be vested in the Supreme Justice Court of Justice divided into branch courts: one of cassation with five members, and the others of appeals with three members each.

The number of courts of appeals shall be determined by law in accordance with the needs of the administration of justice. The justices shall be elected by the Senate from among the lists of three candidates for each place, which must be presented to it separately by the Chamber of Deputies and the executive power. The candidates of either list may be the same in whole or in part. The Senate shall designate which are the justices who are to constitute each branch court, and which of their members is to be their President. The President of the Court of Cassation shall be the President of the Supreme Court. The powers of the Supreme Court in bench and those of each branch court shall be determined by law. 

109. The judicial power shall be exercised also by the tribunals and courts established by law, all of which, whatever be their denomination, shall depend upon the Supreme Court. The law shall mark the jurisdiction, number and duration of the courts and tribunals, their attributions, duties, faculties and the manner in which they shall incur liability. The Supreme Court has the power to appoint all officials who administer justice under it as well as to appointor remove the subordinate personnel of the branch courts and lower courts. Congress is authorised to organise the jurisdiction on governmental litigious matters. 

110. The office of judge or justice is incompatible with that of alderman or municipal employee, and with that of employee and subordinate of the other powers. But the office of professor of a professional school supported or subsidised by the State is not incompatible, if the appointment is made by the respective board of directors. No judge or judicial functionary shall engage in the profession of law, or be a solicitor, except in cases personally affecting himself, his spouse, his ascendants or descendants, or brothers, by blood or affinity. Nor shall any judicial functionary (1) Address any communication to the executive power or to Congress or to public officials or official corporations, congratulating or criticising them for their acts. (2) Take any part in the political elections outside of casting their personal vote. (3) Take any part in meetings, demonstrations or any other acts of a political character.

The provisions of article 65 in regard to deputies and senators are also applicable to justices. 111. For the office of justice the following requisites are necessary:   (1) To be a native of the Republic and a citizen in the exercise of his rights. (2) To belong to the laity. (3) To be over 35 years of age. (4) To have a lawyer's degree issued or recognised in the country by the authority or corporation legally empowered therefor, and to have practised his profession for at least 10 years, either as an official of the judicial branch or as a professor of law, or in private practice. 

The following shall not be appointed justices:   (1) Persons who are deaf or dumb, or those who are physically or mentally defective. (2) Those who have been sentenced for crimes committed against property, public faith or good morals. Persons who are related to each other by blood or affinity, - being ascendants and descendants or brothers, shall not act as justices at the same time. Justices must give a bond or mortgage security up to the sum of 5,000 colons before entering upon the discharge of their duties. 112. Justices shall have the right to remain in office while they discharge their duties well. They shall not be suspended without a previous declaration that there is ground to institute proceedings against them, nor shall they be discharged except by virtue of a judgment rendered against them. A justice who, while in the discharge of his duties as such, shall be rendered incapable of continuing in office by reason of age or illness, shall be separated from the Supreme Court upon justification of his case, and by the vote of three-fourths of the total number of its members. A justice shall have then the right to receive a life pension amounting to one-half of the salary which he is drawing at the time of his retirement. 113. The salary of the justices shall be fixed by law every 10 years, and those of the other public officials who render their service in the courts and other inferior tribunals shall be fixed every 5 years. The salaries of these officials shall not be reduced during the period for which they were fixed. 114. Public officials who are serving in the inferior courts or tribunals shall not be suspended during their term of office except upon previous declaration that there is ground for instituting proceedings against them; nor shall they be dismissed except by virtue of a final judgment.

The Supreme Court, for grave reasons, however, shall cancel, by a vote of two-thirds of the total number of its members, the election of any of said officials. 115. In order to fill accidental vacancies of justices, the Senate shall elect every 2 years 20 assistant justices who must have the same qualifications required for the office of justice, and who have property of their own to the value of 5,000 colons, or an annual income of 3,000 colons, and who are not subalterns, officials of the court or employees of the other branches of the Government, or aldermen or municipal employees. No lawyer shall sit as assistant justice in any case of which he is in charge or which he may be defending before the courts. Whenever any justice is to be substituted, either for a specified case or for any length of time, the Supreme Court in bench shall draw such substitute by lot from among the list of assistant justices. Whenever a vacancy shall occur amongst the justices by reason of death or incapacity, the Supreme Court shall report this fact to the executive power and to the Chamber of Deputies, in order that the Senate in its ordinary or extraordinary session may fill such vacancy. In the meantime the Supreme Court shall elect one of the assistant justices to fill the vacancy temporarily.

CHAPTER VIII.  The Municipal Regime.

116. For the purposes of the general administration of national affairs, the territory of the Republic shall continue to be divided into the seven provinces of San Jose, Alajuela, Cartago, Hercdia, Guanaeaste, Puntarenas and Limon. The provinces shall be divided into cantonments and the cantonments into districts. Hereafter, no cantonment shall be created that has not at least 5,000 inhabitants; neither shall a cantonment be created, if upon dismembering it from the other or others the dismembered cantonment should not be left with a population of at least 6,000 inhabitants and sufficient territory for its development. The law creating a new cantonment shall designate its boundaries in indubitable manner. The executive power shall issue, as soon as possible, the opportune orders so that the boundaries of existing cantonments and provinces shall be clearly determined. Should the municipalities concerned agree in the total or partial demarcation of their boundaries, the executive power shall approve the agreement and the line agreed upon by the parties shall be considered as the boundary line. Otherwise, the disputed line shall be submitted to the decision of the Chamber of Deputies, so as to settle the question by a law fixing the boundaries and adopting the natural divisions as far as may be practicable. 117. The management of interests which are purely local in character shall be entrusted by each cantonment to a municipality and an intendant, who shall be elected by the citizens domiciled in such cantonment at least 3 months before election. Each municipality shall be composed of 3 aldermen in those cantonments whose population does not exceed 5,000 inhabitants; 5 in those whose population exceeds 5,000 and is less than 10,000; and in those cantonments of over 10,000 inhabitants there shall be an additional alderman for every 10,000 inhabitants or fraction thereof exceeding 5,000. In order to fill the vacancies of aldermen, there shall be elected at the same time as many substitutes as there are sitting aldermen; and to replace the vacancy of the intendant, a vice-intendant shall be elected. Each district shall furthermore elect a sitting and a substitute syndic, whose main duty shall be to represent before the municipality the special interests, of his district, and to see that the funds of the latter are used for the needs thereof, after deducting the percentage of general expenses for the cantonment which may correspond to the district in the proportion which its population has to the total population of the cantonment. 118. The sitting and substitute aldermen shall hold their office for 6 years, and one-half of them shall be renewed every 3 years. If the number of aldermen is odd, the half of the even number resulting after adding a unit to the total shall be renewed first. The alderman or aldermen who are to leave office after the first 3 years shall be decided by lot. The syndics shall hold office for 3 years, and shall be elected by the citizens of the district at the same time as the aldermen. The office of alderman and syndic is obligatory and gratuitous. The law shall designate the qualifications which said officers must have, and the grounds which may be alleged as excuses for declining the election. The intendant and vice-intendant shall hold office for 3 years, and may be re-elected. The office of intendant is salaried. The amount of the salary shall be fixed by the municipality for the following period, and shall not be increased or diminished for the running term of 3 years. The term of office of municipal officials shall begin on the 1st May, on which date they shall enter upon the duties thereof. 119. The municipality shall not take any action without

the presence of two-thirds of its members. The decisions shall be taken by a majority of the votes present. The intendant shall preside over the sessions, but shall not vote. The provision regarding the substitute deputies, as contained in article 63, is applicable to aldermen. 120. The municipality has the power freely to appoint and discharge the heads of the several departments. Sub-alternate officials shall be freely appointed and discharged by the intendant, but the municipality has the right to disapprove such appointments or dismissals. The intendant is the executor of the laws and resolutions of the municipality on municipal matters. The municipality shall deliberate and decide upon all matters of local interest, and it is therefore its duty to take care of the sanitation, to which they must give preferred attention in accord with the Supreme Board of Health, and to take care also of the public comfort, improvement and recreation; of the roads, streets and squares of the cantonment; of the municipal public works; of the lighting and water systems, neatness, markets, sewers, water-mains and in general of everything that tends to the progress and welfare of the neighbourhood considered as an administrative unit different from that of the State. All this shall be done in accordance with the general laws and the provisions of the present constitution. It shall dispose of all the revenues and income belonging to it according to the law. It may decree new taxes whenever there is a law authorising it. Its decree shall be obligatory to the neighbourhood after it has been approved by the executive power, who shall not refuse its approval if the tax is according to law, and does not exceed the maximum which the latter may have fixed and must fix for each item. It shall attend to the needs of the cantonment with its revenues and income. No expenditure shall be authorised by the municipality or by law which does not respond to a real necessity; and the use of the public funds of the cantonments for feasts, celebrations, receptions or other purposes foreign to those of the municipal institution is forbidden. A general law shall provide what may be proper in regard to the manner of forming and liquidating the municipal budget. Every 3 months the intendant shall publish and cause to be printed and circulated a statement giving in detail the revenues and the expenditures; and he shall publish every year in the official journal a report of whatever has been done during the preceding year. 121. The intendant shall propose to the municipality the measures which he may deem proper.

He may veto any resolution of the municipality within the 8 working days following the passage thereof, whenever in his opinion said resolution is contrary to law, or is beyond the powers of the corporation. Private individuals impaired in their rights may in similar cases appeal from municipal resolutions. The municipality shall reconsider its resolutions immediately, and if insisted on, the case shall be submitted for final decision to the executive power, who shall consider and decide the matter in question in the Council of the Cabinet. 122. The executive power shall take care that the municipalities and intendants comply with their legal duties. Should he notice any illegality in the discharge of the duties belonging to such corporations or officials, he may suspend their resolutions, if so decided in the Council of the Cabinet, and he shall report this fact to the Senate at its next session, so that the latter may take the proper action or may determine the corresponding liability. 123. There shall be a Governor for each province, who shall be the agent for and appointed by the executive power, with the qualifications and attributions determined by law. This official shall have no authority over the municipality and the intendant in the exercise of the latter's office. He must, on the contrary, and as far as not against law, lend them his assistance and collaboration.

CHAPTER IX. The Reform of this

Constitution.

124. The present constitution may be partially reformed through a legislative act, which must be subject to the following provisions:   (1) No amendment shall be proposed, considered, or decided upon in extraordinary sessions. (2) No proposed amendment which has been rejected by either one of the Chambers or by Congress shall be again presented until after 2 years. (3) Either Chamber may propose an amendment by three of its members, no more, no less. The proponents must present a reasoned statement together with the draft of the articles, which shall be published in the official journal before they are read in the Chamber. (4) No proposed amendment shall cover matters which are not perfectly connected with one another. Each matter shall be> the object of a proposed amendment which may refer to several articles of the constitution if they supplement one another, (5) Each Chamber shall, before entering upon the discussion of any amendment, elect a commission of three persons, from among its members, to report within 8 days whether

or not the amendment is advisable. This report shall be published in the official journal and shall not be taken up for debate until 3 days after its publication. (6) Saving the provision contained in section 10 of this article, with reference to Congress, no amendment shall be considered validly made until passed by two-thirds of the votes present. (7) After the amendments have been presented, and their publication and report on the same have been proceeded with as aforesaid, they shall be taken up for debate on three different days. Should the Chamber approve the amendment, with or without amendments, it shall be referred to the other Chamber for review. Should this not be done, the proposed amendment shall be considered as rejected. 

(8) The reviewing Chamber in the same session, or, in case of lack of time, in the session immediately following, shall take up the proceedings on the amendment. If the Chamber, after holding three debates, should agree to the amendment as it was sent to it, the record shall be sent to the executive power. Should the Chamber reject the amendment as a whole, said amendment shall be considered defeated. Should the amendment be accepted in general, but subject, in its opinion, to some necessary changes, said changes shall be proposed to the Chamber where the amendment originated. In such case, should the latter accept the changes after a debate, the respective bill shall be considered modified, and shall be forwarded by the reviewing Chamber to the executive power, but should such changes be disapproved, the amendment shall be considered rejected. 

(9) If in the foregoing cases the proposed amendment should be referred to the executive power, the President shall, in the Council of Ministers, decide what he may deem convenient, and he shall return the record within the first 8 days after the sessions for the year immediately following have opened. The resolution of the executive and the reasons on which his decision is based shall be noted in the record of the proposed amendment, and the respective actor statement shall be signed by the President and the Ministers. This document shall likewise be published in the official journal. (10) Three days after the report of the executive has been published, the Congress shall, in joint session, begin to consider the matter, which must undergo three debates on such dates as it may designate, without need of referring the report to a new committee. In the event that the executive has accepted it without change, or should propose a change accepted by Congress, two-thirds of the votes of deputies and senators present shall be sufficient to consider
the amendment ratified. But three-fourths of the total number of deputies and senators shall be necessary to consider the amendment passed, if the executive should object to it or should suggest changes which Congress does not accept. If in either case the necessary special majority should not be obtained, the proposed amendment shall be considered as rejected. (11) If the amendment agreed upon in accordance with the foregoing principles should refer to any of the guarantees specified in chapter I I of this constitution, said amendment shall not be held valid if not ratified by a majority of the votes of a Constituent Assembly which shall be called by Congress for that purpose. 125. Whenever, according to article 1, or to the last article, a Constituent Assembly has to be called, Congress shall, within 8 days following the approval of the treaties or the amendments, pass a law calling for a n election of deputies, possessing the qualifications which this constitution demands for the office of senator. The election shall be made by provinces at the rate of one sitting deputy for every 15,000 inhabitants and fraction not over 7,500, and of a substitute deputy for every three and fraction of three of the sitting deputies. The Assembly shall meet within 3 months, at the latest, and the rules established by article 69 in regard to the number necessary to constitute a quorum shall also be applicable to the Assembly. The provisional board of directors shall be composed of the three eldest deputies who shall, in order of seniority, fill the office of president, first and second secretary.

CHAPTER X.  The Observance of this

Constitution.

126. The present constitution, signed by all the deputies in the Assembly, shall be referred to the executive power for its immediate publication and observance, without the need of the oath formerly used. The former constitution of 1871, re-enacted in 1882 and in this same year by a decree of the Constituent Assembly, as well as all the laws which thereafter amended it, are hereby abrogated. 127. The existing laws shall continue in force and shall be obeyed, in so far as they are not contrary to this constitution. 128. In order that the interpretation of any of the provisions of this constitution may be considered authentic, it is necessary that the same procedure and formalities prescribed for their revision be observed. 

129. Congress, at its ordinary sessions, shall ascertain whether or not this constitution has been violated, and whether or not the liability of the infractors has been enforced; and, in its proper case, it shall take the necessary steps for the punishment of the guilty. 

Transitory Provisions. 

ART. 1. The first presidential term shall end on the 8th May, 1923, and until then the President elected by the people on the 1st April of the present year shall exercise the executive power in accordance with the constitution. The budget to be voted in 1923 shall show the salary the President shall receive for the next 6 years and for each succeeding term of 6 years. 2. The office of Vice-President of the Republic shall become effective for the term commencing on the 8th May, 1923. Meanwhile, in regard to succession to the presidency, the system of designates shall be used which was in force under the previous constitution. 3. The Constituent Assembly ratifies the appointments of the justices of the Supreme Court of Justice and the assistant justices, to which decrees No. 5 of the 12th April and No. 13 of the 4th June of the present year respectively refer. 4. In order to arrange the municipal regime during the transition period it is hereby ordered â¢ (1) That one-half of the members of the present municipalities shall continue in office until the 30th April, 1919. The President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers shall draw by lot the one-half which must cease at the present time, and shall replace it with individuals appointed by him possessing the qualifications required by law. Should the number be an odd one, the one-half resulting from the total plus one shall cease at the present time. (2) That the office of intendant shall not be filled until the 1st May, 1919, and in the meantime the Government and political chiefs shall continue to exercise the powers which they have at present. During that interval the executive must submit the proposed municipal ordinances, and Congress must publish them. The municipalities shall continue to be governed as at present until the 1st May, 1919, on which date the provisions in regard to the new municipalities shall become effective. (3) That the syndics at present in office shall continue in their places until the 30th April, 1919. Should any vacancy occur and should there be no substitute to fill it, the executive shall replace it, appointing a person for that

office possessing the legal requisites, after hearing the principal inhabitants and taxpayers of the district. (4) That the first popular election of sitting and substitute aldermen, as well as of syndics, intendants and vice-intendants shall take place on the first Sunday in March, 1919. 5. The Assembly shall convert itself into an ordinary Congress, and shall remain in ordinary session until the 31st August of the present year, and for the purpose of constituting the legislative Chambers it shall observe the rules for distribution of members established by the present constitution. 6. The senators and deputies who compose the present Assembly, and who shall form the next Congress, and the members of the municipality now in office shall continue in their places until the 30th April, 1919. The executive power shall, at the proper time, call for elections in accordance with article 52 of the constitution; and one-half of the members of the Chambers which may then be elected, as well as those of the municipalities, shall be renewed every 3 years in the manner established in this constitution. 7. In order to fill the absolute or temporary vacancies of senators, the Chambers shall elect a member of the Chamber of Deputies, giving preference to those of the same province as the senator who left the vacancy. Provided that if the vacancy is only temporary, the deputy elected to fill it shall be reinstated in his Chamber when the absence of the sitting senator should cease. 8. If the number of substitute deputies of one province should be exhausted, the vacancies which may occur shall be filled by those of another province which the board of directors may elect. 9. During the present constitutional period the representation for the provinces shall be as follows: San Jose, 9 deputies and 4 senators; Alajuela, 7 deputies and 3 senators; Cartago, 5 deputies and 2 senators; Heredia, 3 deputies and 2 senators; Guanacaste, 3 deputies and 1 senator; Puntarenas, 1 deputy and 1 senator; Lim6n, 1 deputy and 1 senator. The renewals which may occur during the 6 years immediately following shall be made in accordance with this proportion. 10. The judges and mayors who are at present discharging judicial duties shall not be removed from office until the expiration of the term in force, in accordance with the original law, without prejudice to the provisions contained at the end of article 114. 

