COSTA BICA. POLITICAL (Translation.) CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Costa

717
Rica.

— Signed at San Josi, November 22, 1848. President of Costa Rica, &o. Inasmuch as the most excellent the Congress of the Republic has decreed and sanctioned the following Constitution:
JOSE M A B I A CALTBO,

In the name of God, the Father and Legislator of the Universe. Whereas experience has shown that several of the provisions granted in 1847 are inconvenient when reduced to practice, and that doubts have arisen from the manner in which they are expressed ; therefore, the Congress, by virtue of the power conferred upon it by the said Constitution in its CLXXXVIIth Article, and at the solicitation of the majority of the municipalities, has proceeded to reform the fundamental law of the 21st of January, 1847, by decreeing the following: CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC,

C H A P T E R I.— Of the Republic of Costa Rica.
SUCTION

1.—Of the Costa Rica People.

AKT. I. The Republic of Costa Rica is composed of all Costa Ricans united in a national body. I I . The Republic of Costa Rica is sovereign, free, and independent.
SECTION

2.—Of the Costa Ricans.

I I I . Costa Ricans are such as are so either by birth or naturalization. IV. Costa Ricans by birth are : 1. All men bom within the territory of Costa Rica ; 2. Those bora out of the territory of Costa Rica, of Costa Rjcan fathers, absent on the service of the Republic, or upon their own private business, provided that, in the latter case, they have not become domiciliated in a foreign country. V. Costa Ricans by naturalization are: 1. Natives of any other country who shall have been domiciliated in Costa Rica at the time it proclaimed its independence in 1821, or erected itself into a Republic in 1848 ; 2. Those who have acquired this right by virtue of any public Treaty; 3. Women who, not being Costa Ricans, have married, or shall hereafter marry, with a Costa Rican; 4. Those who have obtained, or shall hereafter obtaiu, letters of naturalization, conformably to l a w ;

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848.

216 1848

?78

COSTA RICA.

5. Natives of any country whatsoever of the world, who shall, in the presence of the authority appointed by law, declare their wish to become naturalized.
SECTION

3 . - 0 / the Duties of Costa Rieans.

VI. The duties of Costa Rieans are: 1. To live subject to the Constitution, and to obey and respect the constituted authorities; 2. To contribute towards the public expenses;. 3. To serve and defend the country ; 4. To practise hospitality.
SECTION

4.—Of the Territory of Costa Rica,

VII. The limits of the territory of the Republic are those of the uti possidetis oi 1826. VIII. The territory of the Republic of Costa Rica shall be divided into provinces. Each province shall be composed of one or more cantons, and each canton shall be divided into parochial districts. The law shall regulate the territorial division, and determine what authorities are to be appointed.
CHAPTER

II.—Of Citizens.

IX. Citizens are suoh male Costa Rieans as possess the following qualifications: 1. The having completed the age of 21 years ; 2. Being the owner of landed property in Costa Rioa, amounting to the net value of 300 dollars, or possessing an annual income of 150 dollars, and paying the taxes fixed by law; 3. The being able to read and write ; but this qualification shall only be required from and after the year 1853. X. The exercise of the right of citizenship is suspended: 1. In the case of those who are under criminal prosecution ; 2. In the case of fraudulent debtors, or of defaulters to the public revenue, against whom it has already been, or may hereafter be, necessary to institute legal proceedings. 3. In the case of those who are suffering under mental alienation ; 4. On account of judieial prohibition.. XL The rights of citizenship are lo8t: 1. By having been sentenced by a court of justice to any corporal or degrading punishment, so long as rehabilitation has not been obtained; 2. By becoming naturalized in a foreign country; 3. By being guilty of filial ingratitude, and for having deserted wife and children, or for notorious violation, of family duties.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 217 1848

COSTA K1CA.
CHAPTER

779

III.—Of the Government.

XII. The Government of Costa Rica is popular, representative, elective, and responsible. XIII. The supreme power shall, as regards the administration thereof, be divided into legislative, executive, and judicial, XIV. It is one of the duties of Government to protect liberty, security, and property.
CHAPTER

IV.—-Of the Religion of the Republic.

XV. The Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion is that of the Republic; it is protected by the Government, which will not contribute funds for the support of any other form of worship.
CHAPTER SECTION

V.—Of the Elections.

1.—Of the Nomination of Mectors.

XVI. Every 6 years, that is, in the year in which it is the duty of the canton electors to proceed to the ordinary election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to that of the representatives of the nation, there shall be nominated in each •parochial district as many canton electors as are required for the district, in the proportion of 1 for each 1,000 souls of its population ; but one elector shall also be nominated for such district, the population of which does not amount to 1,000 souls. XVII. The nomination of the electors belonging to each parochial district shall be effected by a relative plurality of the votes of the parochial voters of the district, who vote in common for the said nomination; and each voter shall give his suffrage for 2 electors belonging to the district, one in the class of electors properly so called, the other In that of substitutes. XVIII. The parochial voters for each district consist of the inhabitants of the said district, who shall be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship. XIX. In each district, the suffrages of the parochial voters shall be received and registered by the authority and with the formalities prescribed by law. XX. The authority empowered to receive the votes shall proceed to do so as soon as the time appointed by law shall have arrived, and shall summon the parochial voters to the election 8 days beforehand. XXI. The law shall determine the time within which the said nominations are to be made, the authority who is to make the scrutiny, and all' other arrangements necessary for duly effecting the said nomination.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848.

218 1848

780

COSTA RICA. SECTION

2.—Of the Electors.

XXII. The requisite qualifications for an elector are: 1. To be a Costa-Rican in the exercise of the rights of citizenship; 2. To have completed 25 years of age; 3. To be able to read and write; 4. To be an inhabitant of the province in which he is nominated; 5. To be the father of a family or the head of a house; 6. To have a property free from all incumbrances, amounting to 1,000 dollars in freehold land. XXIII. Neither the President, the Vice-President of the Republic, nor the Ministers of State can become electors. XXIV. The office of elector shall last 6 years.
SECTION

3.—Of the Canton Elections.

XXV. The Electoral Assembly of the canton shall be composed of the electors nominated in the parochial districts. XXVI. The duties of the canton Electoral Assemblies are: 1. To vote, in the person of each individual elector for the elections of President and Vice-President of the Republic; 2. To elect the representatives who are to be nominated in the province, in the ratio of I for every 8,000 souls, and I substitute in addition, and also 1 for every remainder of ird at least; 3. To elect the members of the corporations of the capitals of provinces, the jurymen to serve on trials connected with the press (los jurados de imprenta), and such others as are prescribed by the law. XXVII. The voting for the election of President and VicePresident of the Republic shall be effected by each elector giving his suffrage in the Electoral Hall, by means of a slip of paper, on which is written the name of the individual for whom the party votes, the said balloting paper to be signed by the voter. The same method shall be practised in the election for Representatives. XXVIII. The registers of the voters for the President and VicePresident shall be forwarded to the Congress, and those of the votes for Representatives to the authority appointed by law, XXIX. The law shall fix the time when the elections are to take place, as well as whatever is necessary for their due regulation.
SECTION

4.—Of the Arrangements common to all Elections.

XXX. The elections shall be public, and no one 6hall appear there in arms. XXXI. Whatever is done at the elections in contravention of what is prescribed by this Constitution or by the law, is null and illegal.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848.

219 1848

COSTA RICA. SECTION

781

5.—Of the Scrutiny of the Votes for Representatives.

XXXII. The law shall appoint the authority by whom the voting is to be regulated, and by whom those who have obtained the majority of votes shall be declared elected, M-hether as actual Representatives or as substitutes.
CHAPTEB SECTION

VI.—Of the Legislative Power.

1.—Of the Organization of the Legislative Power.

XXXIII. The Congress, composed of 1 Chamber, presided over by the Vice-President of the Republic, exercises the legislative power. XXXIV. The Congress shall be composed of Representatives chosen by the towns, conformably to what is provided in Article XXVI, paragraph 2, XXXV. The Congress shall assemble every year on the 1st day of May, even if it should not have been, convoked, and its sessions shall last 60 days, and, when necessary, may be prorogued to 90. XXXVI. The Congress shall also assemble on extraordinary occasions, when convoked by the Executive Power, but it can only occupy itself with the matters submitted, by the latter for its consideration.
SECTION

2.—Of the Representatives.

XXXVII. The qualifications for Representatives are t 1. The being a Costa-Rican, either by birth or naturalization ; 2. The having completed 25 years of age; 3. The being in the exercise of the rights of citizenship; 4. The being possessed of landed property amounting in value to 3,000 dollars, and of which the party must have been the owner 1 year before his nomination : or the being professor of some science. XXXVIIT. The Representatives shall remain in office for 6 years, and they shall be renewed, in the proportion of one-half every 8 years; the members who are to retire in the first instance, shall be determined by lot, after which the oldest among those remaining in office shall be replaced.
SECTION

3.— Of the Congress.

XXXIX. The President of the Republic shall open the sessions of the Congress on the pre-appointed day, and shall deliver a speech explanatory of the state of public affairs. XL. That the sessions may be opened and the legislative labours be continued there must be present two-thirds, at least, of the total number of Representatives.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 220 1848

782

COSTA EICA.

XLI. The Chamber of Representatives shall be located in the capital. XLII. The sessions shall be public, except in the case of there being reasons for discussing any business with closed doors (en sesion secreta), or of one of the Ministers of State requesting it in the name of the Executive Power. XLIII. The Chamber possesses the right to determine upon such rules and regulations as may be requisite for its due government and internal management. XLIV. In conformity with the laws and regulations introduced, the Chamber can correct such of its members as infringe them, having previously established the penalties to be incurred by such violation. XLV. It can also suspend such of its members as seriously fail in th e respect which is due to the Chamber ; but for this purpose it is necessary that the decision should be come to by two-thirds of the members who are present at the sessions, and also that an interval of 48 hours shall have elapsed between the commission of the offence and the decision thereou. XLVI. It belongs to the Chamber to decide upon whatever relates to the election of its members and to the resignations tendered by the latter, XLVII. The vacancies which occur in- the Chamber shall be filled up by the respective substitutes ; and in case of failure on the part of the latter, new elections shall be had recourse to. XLVIII. The Representatives are invested with this character on behalf of the nation, and not on account of the province in which they are nominated ; they shall not, therefore, receive orders either from the towns, assemblies, or any person whomsoever. XLIX. The Representatives are not responsible either for the opinions they may deliver or the votes which they may give in the Congress. L. The Representatives shall not during the sessions be proceeded against or distrained in civil process. Neither shall they in that interim be arrested for alleged crimes, except they have been previously suspended by the Chamber, and given up to the competent judge or tribunal; unless, indeed, they have been taken in the open commission of an offence which incurs corporal or degrading punishment, or previously to the above-mentioned interim shall have been sentenced to imprisonment and incarcerated accordingly. LI. The offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic, as well as those of Minister of State and of Minister of the Supreme Court, are incompatible with that of Representatives. LII. No persons can be nominated Representatives in a province, . who, at the time the election is being made therein are in the exer-

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848.

221 1848

COSTA B1CA.

783

cise of any authority or jurisdiction which extends over the whole territory of the said province.
SECTION

4.—Of the Powers of the Congress.

hill. The following are the powers belonging exclusively to the Congress: 1. To conduct the scrutiny of votes, and, when the case occurs, to carry out the elections of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, to receive from them the constitulional oath, to accept or refuse their resignations,- and to hear the accusations which may be brought against them; 2. To appoint the Ministers of the Supreme Court; 3. To accept or refuse the resignations which the latter may tender of their offices; 4. To impose taxes and national contributions; 5. To decree the alienation or appropriation to public purposes of the national property; 6. To authorize loans and other contracts whenever the public interests so require; 7. To mortgage, or allow to be mortgaged, the national domains and revenues for the payment of the above-mentioned loans; 8. To examine, every year, the accounts of the expenditure, by the Executive Power, of the public revenues; 9. To approve the Treaties or Conventions entered into by the Executive Power, with any other Government or nation; 10. To permit or refuse the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic, or the anchoring of foreign ships of war in its ports and harbours ; 11. To authorize the Executive Power, when, it applies for permission, to declare war against any nation, and to require the same to enter into negotiations for peace; 12. To grant rewards and recompenses for great services rendered to the country, and to decree public honours to the memory of distinguished men; 13. To grant amnesties or general pardons; 14. To determine the alloy, weight, stamp, form, and denomination of the legal currency; 15. To grant exclusive privileges for undertakings serviceable to the nation; 16. To establish tribunals, courts of justice, and the other offices and employments necessary for the public service; 17. To make the laws and decrees required by the different branches of the public administration; to interpret the same; and to reform or abrogate existing regulations and legislative acts, of whatever kind.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 222 1848

784
SECTION

COSTA ETCA.

5.—Of the Formation of the Laws.

LIV. The laws and other legislative acts may originate in the Congress, on the motion of its members, or on that of the Ministers of State. LV. No Bill (proyecto de lei) or project of any other legislative act, can be passed, without having previously undergone 3 different discussions, each one, on a distinct day, unless the Chamber should declare the matter to be an urgent one, in which case there shall be one discussion only in each session. l/VI. No Bill or project of any other legislative act, although it be approved by the Congress, shall have the force of law, without the sanction of the Executive Power; should the latter consider it proper to give its assent, it shnll do so, ordering, at the same time, the law to be carried into execution ; but if the Executive Power refuse its assent, it shall return the Bill to the Congress, accompanied by such objections and observations as it may have to make to it. LVII. The Executive Power may object to any Bill or project of any other legislative act, whether on account of considering it objectionable altogether, or because it thinks that 6ome alterations are required to be made therein. LVIIT. Upon a Bill objected to in its entirety being received back by the Congress, the same shall be taken into consideration; and if the objections be declared to be well-founded, the Bill shall not be proceeded with, but shall be placed in the archives; if however they be declared unfounded, the progress of the Bill shall remain suspended until the next meeting of the Congress. LIX. Should the objections of the Executive Power be restricted to proposing some amendments in the Bill, and the Congress consider them as unadvisable, in that case also the progress of the Bill shnll remain suspended until a definitive decision be given in the next meeting of the Congress; but if the Chamber accede to the amendments proposed by the Executive, the Bill shall then be sent up to the latter, who. under these circumstances, cannot refuse its assent. LX. The Congress, at its next meeting, shall again take into consideration the objections of the Executive; and should it once more, by the vote of three-fourths of the totality of its members, declare all of them to be unfounded, the Bill shall be sent up to the Executive to receive its sanction, which can no longer be refused. LXI. Bills or projects of any other legislative acts which are sent up to the Executive for its sanction shall be so sent in duplicate, both copies being signed by the President and the Secretaries of the Chamber; these projects shall be either sanctioned or objected to, and returned to the Chamber within 8 days after they have been received \ which term having expired, the Bills that have not beer

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 223 1848

COSTA RICA.

785

returned shall have the force of law, and the Executive mu«t sanction them, and cause them to bo published and executed. One of the 2 copies of each Bill must be returned with either the sanction or the observations of the Executive, and the other shall be placed in the archives of the respective Ministry. LXII. The intervention of the Executive Power is necessary in all the resolutions and nets of the Congress, except the following: 1. Those which relate to the elections to be made and the resignations which are either to be accepted or declined; 2. The resolutions which relate to the prorogation of the ordinary sessions to 90 days j 3. The regulations agreed to by the Congress for its internal government and direction.
SECTION

6.—Of (he permanent Committee of the Congress.

LXIII. During the recesses of the Congress there shall be a permanent committee, composed of 4 Representatives, elected by the Legislative Power, and of the Vice-President of the Republic, who shall be the President of the said committee. LXIV. The duties of the permanent committee arc: 1. To prepare all the Bills and projects of decrees suggested by experience, for the purpose of laying them before the Chamber at the commencement of its ordinary sessions ; 2. To point out the reforms necessary to be introduced into different laws and decrees, as well as the laws which ought to be abrogated; 3. To interpret laws and decrees at the instance of the Executive Power, or of the tribunals of justice; 4. To offer suggestions to the Executive Power whenever the latter is desirous of consulting them; 5. To inform the Congress upon the subject of such Bills and projects of decrees as, having been before thrown out, are again brought in j 6. To accept or refuse the resignations of jurymen (Jurados); 7. To codify the laws and legislative decrees in the form and manner prescribed by the law ; 8. To introduce into its own body such regulations as may be necessary for its internal government.
CHAPTER SECTION VII.

1.—Of the President and Vice-President of the Republic.

LXV. There shall be in Costa Rica a President of the Republic, who shall be its first chief, and a Vice-President, who shall be its second one. [1848—49.] 3 E

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 224 1848

786

COSTA KICA.

LXVI. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall both remain in office 6 years, and are re-eligible at the option of the people. LXVII. The requisite qualifications for being a President or Vice-President, are: 1. To be a native-born Costa Rican, in the exercise of the rights of citizenship; 2. To have completed 30 years of age; , 3 . To possess a capital, in real property, of not less than 10,000 dollars; 4. To be, or to have been, married. LXVIIt. The election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be made by the canton electors. LXIX. The Congress shall, in public session, scrutinize or regulate the votes of the electors, and shall declare as elected to fill the offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic those who have obtained the absolute plurality of votes. When no such plurality of votes has been obtained, the Congress shall complete the election, by choosing (also by plurality) from among the 3 persons who have obtained the greater number of votes for each of the chief magistrateships, or from among those who have acquired an equal number of the maximum of electors, the individuals who are to be President and Vice-President of the Republic, and shall declare them as elected in due form. LXX. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall, on entering office, take the constitutional oath, in the presence of the Congress, but should the latter have closed its sessions, in that of the permanent commission. LXXI. The 6 years' duration of the offices of President and VicePresident of the Republic, are to be reckoned from the day of their entering upon them; and upon that term being completed, the functions of the said magistrates cease ipso facto, LXXII. When by death, resignation, or other cause, the office of President or that of Vice-President of the Republic becomes vacant, there shall be made, in the cases determined by the law, an extraordinary election for the purpose of filling up the vacancy, and the party elected shall remain in office the whole of the time which may be necessary to complete the constitutional period. LXXI II. The law shall assign the salaries and emoluments to be enjoyed by the President and Vice-President of the Republic.
SECTION

2.—Of those called to exercise the Executive Power.

LXXIV. The exercise of the Executive Power belongs to the President of the Republic.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 225 1848

COSTA EICA.

787

LXXV. In the cases of death, resignation, or any other failure, either temporary, accidental, or permanent on the part of the President, the Vice-President of the Republic shall exercise the Executive Power, and if, from the same causes, he should also fail, it shall be exercised by the Vice-President of the Congress, and in the event of his failure or incompetency, by the deputy whom that body shall select to fill bis place. LXXVI. The President and Vice-President of the Republic can neither of them quit the territory of Costa Rica during their continuance in office. t
SECTION

3.—Of the Dudes of the Executive Power.

LXX VII. The duties of the Executive Power are: 1. To preserve the order and tranquillity of the Republic, repel all external attacks, and suppress every disturbance of social order in the interior; 2. To fulfil and execute, and cause to be fulfilled and carried Gut, the constitution and the laws; 3. To suspend, with the consent of the permanent commission, the completion of any law or decree, the executing of which might be productive of serious injuries to the Republic; 4. To see that the other public employe's, although they may not be immediately subordinate to them, fulfil and execute the laws; and, with this object, to require from the said employes, or to direct the competent authorities so to require from thera, the proper responsibilities; 6. .To assemble and organize the land and sea forces necessary for repelling any foreign invasion, or for suppressing any disturbance of public order; G. To command the army, in person, when it is considered necessary, entrusting, in such case, the Executive Power to the person provided by the law; 7. To appoint and remove, at will, the Ministers of State, and all the other employes of the executive branch ; 8. To carry on diplomatic negotiations, enter into Treaties with other Governments and ratify them, having previously obtained the approval of the Congress; 9. To declare war against another nation, with the authorization of the Congress; 10. To dispose of the public revenue, in conformity with the laws ; 11. To appoint, of its own accord, the commanders and other officers of the army and navy; 12. To nominate to public employments of any description, provided such nomination be not reserved by law for some other authority; 13. To grant retiring pensions to the generals, commanders, and 3 E 2

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 226 1848

788

COSTA RICA.

. other officers of the army and navy, and to accept or refuse the resignations offered by them of their commissions; 14. To grant, when considered necessary, letters of marque, against any nation against whom war has been declared ; 15. To issue sailing licences; 16. To commute the pain of death for a less severe punishment in favour of condemned culprits, when required by motives of public convenience; 17. To grant special pardons ; 18. To exercise the right of presenting to vacant ecclesiastical benefices, conformably to law; 19. To convoke an extraordinary meeting of the Congress, when rendered necessary by important reasons; 20. To create the establishments and corporate bodies which tend to the welfare and prosperity of the Republic, and to decree the statutes necessary for the same; 21. To adopt, upon its own responsibility, all the measures it may deem necessary for defending the country against every foreign aggression or internal commotion with which it may be threatened, rendering afterwards to Congress a clear and definite account of the use it has made of such power; and 22. To provide for itself the regulations necessary for the internal regulation of its affairs. 4.— Of the responsibility of those who exercise the Executive Power. LXXVIII. The person who exercises the Executive Power is responsible: 1, When he favours the interests or operations of any nation which is the enemy of Costa Rica; 2. When he violates the constitution, and upon being remonstrated with, persists in such violation.
SECTIOH

5.—Of the Ministers of State. LXXIX. For the dispatch of the business devolving upon the Executive Power, Ministers of State, as determined by the law, shall be attached to it. LXXX. Each one of these Secretaryships shall be under the direction of a Minister of State, but the Executive Power may commit 2 of them to one single Minister. LXXXI. To be a Minister of State it is requisite: 1. To be a Costa Rican in the exercise of the rights of citizenship; 2. To be married, or the head of a family; 3. To possess a capital in landed property of not less than 3,000 dollars, or to be the professor of some science; and 4. To be 30 years of age.
SUCTION

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 227 1848

COSTA BICA.

789

LXXXII. All the acts of the Executive Power shall be subscribed or communicated by one of the before-mentioned Ministers, without which requisite formality they shall not be obeyed. LXXX1II. From what is provided in the preceding Article is excepted the appointment or the removal of the said Ministers, which can be effected only by the person invested with the Executive Power, without the intervention of any Minister. LXXXIV. The Ministers of State are responsible for the Acts signed by them, and which are contrary to the Constitution and the laws; on which account it is their duty to give their advice to the person invested with the Executive Power, in all matters which concern their particular Ministry. LXXXV. The Ministers of Slate shall, with the consent of the Executive Power, give to the Congress all the information and. particulars it may demand of them, touching the matters connected with their respective Ministries, except ou such matters as require secresy, and so long as is thought necessary by the Executive Power. LXXXVI. Each Minister of State shall present to the Congress within the first 8 days of its ordinary sessions, a written report upon the actual state of the affairs entrusted to his Ministry, and suggesting what Congress should do for their improvement. LXXXVII. The Ministers of State shall lay before the Congress the Bills and projects of other legislative Acts granted by the Executive Power, and shall take part in the discussion upon the said Bills as well as in that upon any others whatsoever, but they shall not have a deliberating vote.
CHAPTER SECTION

VIII—-Of the Judicial Power.

1.—Of the Supreme Court of Justice.

LXXXVIII. The judicial power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice and by the other tribunals or courts by law established. • LXXXIX. There shall be in the Republic a Supreme Court of Justice composed of the number of Minister Judges determined by law. XC. The duties of the Supreme Court of Justice, are : 1. To take cognizance of all litigious matters in which are concerned the foreign diplomatic Agents accredited to the Government of the Republic, in the cases permitted by the public law of nations, and by existing Treaties; 2. To take cognizance of actions for responsibility brought against the diVomatic Agents and Consuls of the Republic for the inefficient discharge of their duties;

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 228 1848

790

COSTA K10A.

3. To take cognizance of actions brought against the persons invested with the Executive Power and the Ministers of the Supreme" Court for ordinary crimes, after they have been tried by the Congress and deprived of their employments ; and, 4. To take cognizance of all other actions referred to it by law. XCI. The Minister Judges of the Supreme Court shall be nominated by the Congress by an absolute plurality of votes, and the vacancies which may occur shall befilledup ad interim, in the manner provided by law.
SECTION

2.—Arrangements connected with the Supreme Court.

XCII. In order to be a Minister Judge of the Supremo Court it ia required: 1. To be a Costa Rican, in the exercise of the rights of citizenship ; 2. To be married,.or the head of a family; 3. To have completed the age of 30 years; 4. To possess a capital of his own, in landed property, which shall not be less than 3,000 dollars; 5. To possess all the other qualifications required by the law. XCIII. The law shall determine the duration in office of the Minister Judges of the Supreme Court, which duration shall not be less than 6 years, XCIV. The tribunal intended to enforce the responsibility of the Minister Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the actions for responsibility, and the mode of forming the said tribunal, shall be objects of a particular law.
SECTION

3.—Of the other Tribunals and Courts of Justice.

XCV. The law shall create the other tribunals and courts of justice which may be necessary for the administration of justice, aud shall define the powers belonging to them, and the qualifications to be possessed by those composing them, the authority by whom they are to be appointed, and the duration of their office.
SECTION

4.—Arrangements common to all the Ministers and Courts of Justice.

XCVI. The Ministers and Judges of whatsoever tribunals and courts of justice cannot be suspended from their offices except in consequence of an accusation legally brought forward and sent for trial, nor dismissed, except by a judicial sentence in accordance with the laws.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 229 1848

COSTA B1CA.
CHAPTER

791

IX.—Of the Political Government of the Provinces, Canton*,and Parochial Districts.

XCVII. In each province there shall be a Governor, appointed at the pleasure of the Executive Power, and removable by the same, XCVIII. The Governors are the immediate agents of the Executive Power, and, as such, are bound to fulfil and cause to be fulfilled the orders thereof. XCIX. The said Governors, in the exercise of their duties, are responsible to the Supreme Court of Justice for any abuses of authority and infractions of the laws. C. The law shall determine the qualifications which are required in order to become a Governor, as well as the time he is to remain in office.
CHAPTER

X.—Of the Municipal Government.

CI. There shall be in the capital of each province, and in the principal towns of cantons, municipal bodies, whose organization, functions, and responsibility shall be particularized and set forth in the ordinances of such corporations. An express law shall regulate the political and judicial government of the sea-ports, taking duly into consideration their retrospective circumstances.
CHAPTER

XI.—Of the Responsibility of the Public Employis.

CII. All the public employes are responsible to the authorities designated in the Constitution or in the law, for any abuse of the powers they are invested with, or for failure in the proper discharge of the duties of their office. CIII. The persons charged with the Executive Power, the Ministers of State and the Ministers Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, are responsible to the Congress only, which shall decide by the unanimous vote of two-thirds of the Representatives, whether or not the accusation is admissible; and in case of its being so, the accused remains suspended. CIV. Upon an accusation being admitted, the Congress shall, of itself,- institute the proceedings at law, by means of a commission from out of its own body; and shall pronounce the sentence in public session, which sentence shall be restricted to depriving tlie accused of bis office. Two-thirds of the votes present are necessary for the pronouncing of the sentence. CV. Parties condemned by the Congress may be amenable to the judgment and sentence of the competent tribunal, if the offeuces of which they are accused are defined by the law, und are such as are visited with a severer kind of punishment. CVI. The law shall regulate the mode of conducting the trials

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 230 1848

792

COSTA RICA.

which are proceeded with at the iustance of the Congress as well as the formalities to be observed therein. XII.— Various Arrangements. CVII. No Costa Rican shall be put upon trial except before the competent tribunals and courts of justice established by this Constitution or by the law; nor condemned without being heard and convicted j nor can he be subjected to any other punishment than such as has been provided by law previously to the commission of the crime. CVIII. No Costa Rican can be arrested or sent to prison, except by the authority appointed by law, and in the cases, and in the manner provided by the same. CIX. No Costa Rican is obliged to give evidence in any criminal suit, either against himself, his wife, immediate relatives, or brothers, whether in blood or affinity. CX. No crime shall be punishable by confiscation; but this does not include the seizures and fines imposed by the law. CXI. The penalty of death shall be applicable in the following cases only: 1. In that of premeditated and undoubted murder; 2. For an attempt against public order, the committing of which has been the cause of the death of one or more individuals; but in this case the ringleaders and principal offenders in the disturbance can alone be subjected to that penalty. CXII. With the exception of the taxes established by law, no Costa Rican shall be deprived of his property without his free conBent ; unless public necessity, recognised as such by the law shall require it, and previous indemnification, as adjudged by competent persons, be made. CXIII. All Costa Ricans have the right to publish their thoughts by means of the press, without the necessity of any previous censorship ; but the articles must bear the signature of the parties, who shall remain liable to the responsibility and penalties provided by law for the abuses of such right, which abuses are to be proved as such by the juror or jurors established by the law for that purpose. CXIV. All Costa Ricans have the power of claiming their rights at the hands of the public authority, provided this be done with proper respect, and in a temperate manner; but no individual or particular association can so act in the name of the people, or arrogate such a power to themselves. Those who contravene this z-egulation shall be tried conformably to the laws. CXV. No house can be entered by force, nor searched, nor can any papers or private correspoudence be intercepted or examined unless by the authority and in the cases prescribed by law.
CHAPTEB

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848.

231 1848

COSTA 1UOA.

793

CXVI. The settlement of entailed estates is forbidden; nor shall there be iu Costa Rica any inalienable landed property. CXVII. All Costa Ricans shall be equal in the eye of the law. XIII.—Of the Constitutional Oath. CXVIII. No public employe shall enter upon his office without taking an oath " to defend and maintain the Constitution of the Republic, and to fulfil faithfully and exactly the duties of their employment."
CHAPTER

XIV.—Of the Reform of the Constitution. CXIX. This Constitution can be reformed by the Congress at any time, upon the demand being made by a majority of the Representatives present at the session, and upon the decree of three-fourths of the said Representatives. CXX. Before being approved by the Chamber, the Articles reformed or added must undergo 3 different discussions, each one of them upon a separate day; and they shall be considered as law upon receiving the sanction of the Executive Power; but if the latter should make objections, the Congress shall take them into consideration ; if they are regarded as valid, then the Bill must be deposited in the archives; and if they are not considered as well-founded by three-fourths of the Representatives, recourse must then be had to what has been provided in Articles LVIII, LIX, and LX. CXXI. The present reforms being presented and approved, are ipso facto sanctioned; and the Executive Power will cause the same to be printed, circulated, and published throughout the Republic. CXXII. The Constitution decreed on the 21st of January, 1847, is reformed, and all laws and regulations opposed to the present one are hereby repealed and annulled. Given in the city of San Jose, on the 22nd day of November, 1848. MANUEL JOSE CARAZO, president.
CHAPTER NAZABIO TOLEDO, 1 „ J , .

—
SANTIAGO FERNANDEZ,

,> secretaries.

[Signed by 8 Deputies.] Therefore I order that it be fulfilled in all its parts, and that for this purpose it be printed, published, and sworn to in all the towns of the Republic. San Jose, November 30, 1848. JOSE MARIA CASTRO. JOAQUIN BERNARDO CAIVO, Minister of State and Secretary of Foreign and Home Affairs. JUAN DE DIOS ZESPEDES, Chief of Section entrusted, ad interim, with the Ministry of Finance and War.

HeinOnline -- English translation of the original Constitution of 1848. 232 1848

