THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
Prepared by: dr. Ljubomir Valkovic

Zagreb. 1991.

Foreword
The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia was promulgated by the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia on December 22, 1990. On the same day the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia also promulgated the Constitutional Actfor the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, the Constitutional Actfor its implementation and the decisions on the promulgation of these documents were published in Narodne Novine, the official gazette of the Republic of Croatia No. 56 of December 22, 1990. This booklet contains all these documents and supplements to the Constitutional Act of February 21, 1991. This booklet also contains the speech made by the President of the Republic of Croatia, Dr. Franjo Tudman, in the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia on December 22, 1990, at the promulgation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia The speech of the President of the Republic is a document of lasting importance which explains not only the political conditions prevailing at the time of the drawing up of the Constitution, but also the basic determinants of this most important legal act of Croatia. At the end of the booklet there is a subject index which will certainly make it easier for readers to find their way about in the text of the Constitution. Zagreb, May 30, 1991

Pursuant to Article 438 of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia enacted at the session of the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber, held on December 22. 1990, the

DECISION on the Promulgation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia
The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, enacted by the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia at the session of the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber, held on December 21,1990, is hereby promulgated and becomes effective. Number: 6301-90-9 Zagreb, December 22, 1990 SABOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA President of the Chamber of Associated Labour Ivan Matija President of the Chamber of Communes Slavko Degoricija President of the Socio-Political Chamber Ivan Vekic President of the Sabor . Dr. Zarko Domljan

27

The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia
I. HISTORICAL FOUNDATIONS The millennial national identity of the Croatian nation and the continuity of its statehood, confirmed by the course of its entire historical experience in various statal forms and by the perpetuation and growth of the idea of one's own state, based on the Croatian nation's historical right to full sovereignty, manifested itself: - in the formation of Croatian principalities in the seventh century; - in the independent mediaeval state of Croatia founded in the ninth century; - in the Kingdom of Croats established in the tenth century; - in the preservation of the subjectivity of the Croatian state in the Croatian-Hungarian personal union; - in the autonomous and sovereign decision of the Croatian Sabor 1 of 1527 to elect a king from the Habsburg dynasty; - in the autonomous and sovereign decision of the Croatian Sabor to sign the Pragmatic Sanction of 1712; - in the conclusions of the Croatian Sabor of 1848 regarding the restoration of the integrity of the Triune
1

Parliament (Translator)

29

Kingdom of Croatia under the power of the Ban, 2 on the basis of the historical statal and natural right of the Croatian nation; - in the Croato-Hungarian Compromise of 1868 regulating the relations between the Kingdom of Dalmatia, Croatia and Slavonia and the Kingdom of Hungary, on the basis of the legal traditions of both states and the Pragmatic Sanction of 1712; - in the decision of the Croatian Sabor of October 29, 1918, to dissolve state relations between Croatia and Austro-Hungary, and the simultaneous affiliation of independent Croatia, invoking its historical and natural right as a nation, with the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs, proclaimed on the theretofore territory of the Habsburg Monarchy; - in the fact that the Croatian Sabor never sanctioned the decision of the National Council of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs to unite with Serbia and Montenegro in the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (December 1, 1918), subsequently (October 3, 1929) proclaimed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia; - in the establishment of the Banovina of Croatia in 1939 by which Croatian state identity was restored in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia; - in laying the foundations of state sovereignty during the Second World War, through decisions of the Antifascist Council of the National Liberation of Croatia (1943), as counter to the proclamation of the Independent State of Croatia (1941), and subsequently in the Constitution of the People's Republic of Croatia (1947), and several later constitutions of the Socialist Republic of Croatia (19631990). At the historic turning-point marked by the rejection of the communist system and changes in the international order in Europe, the Croatian nation reaffirmed at the first democratic elections (1990) by its freely expressed will its millennial statehood and its resolution to establish the
1

Vice-Roy (Translator)

30

Republic of Croatia as a sovereign state. Proceeding from the above-presented historical facts, and from the generally accepted principles in the modern world and the inalienability and indivisibility, nontransferability and nonconsumability of the right of the Croatian nation to self-determination and state sovereignty, including the inviolable right to secession and association, as the basic preconditions for peace and stability of the international order, the Republic of Croatia is hereby established as the national state of the Croatian nation and a state of members of other nations and minorities who are its citizens: Serbs, Moslems, Slovenes, Czechs, Slovaks, Italians, Hungarians, Jews and others, who are guaranteed equality with citizens of Croatian nationality and the realization of ethnic rights in accordance with the democratic norms of the United Nations Organization and the free world countries. Respecting the will of the Croatian nation and all citizens, resolutely expressed at free elections, the Republic of Croatia is hereby formed and shall develop as a sovereign and democratic state in which the equality and freedoms and rights of man and the citizen shall be guaranteed and ensured, and their economic and cultural progress and social welfare promoted. II. BASIC PROVISIONS Article 1 The Republic of Croatia is a unitary and indivisible democratic and social state. Power in the Republic of Croatia derives from the people and belongs to the people as a community of free and equal citizens. The people shall exercise this power through the election of representatives and through direct decisionmaking.

31

Article 2 The sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia is inalienable, indivisible and untransferable. The sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia encompasses its land area, rivers, lakes, canals, internal maritime waters, territorial sea, and the air space above these. The Republic of Croatia shall exercise, in accordance with international law, sovereign rights and jurisdiction in the maritime areas and the seabed and subsoil thereof of the Adriatic Sea outside the state territory up to the borders with its neighbours. The Croatian Sabor and people shall directly, independently and in accordance with the Constitution and law, decide: - on the regulation of economic, legal and political relations in the Republic of Croatia; - on the preservation of natural and cultural wealth and its utilization; - on association in alliances with other states. The Republic of Croatia may conclude alliances with other states, retaining the sovereign right to decide by itself on the powers to be transferred and the right freely to withdraw from them. Article 3 Freedom, equal rights, national equality, love of peace, social justice, respect for human rights, inviolability of ownership, conservation of nature and the human environment, the rule of law and a democratic multiparty system are the highest values of the constitutional order of the Republic of Croatia. Article 4 In the Republic of Croatia government shall be organized on the principle of the separation of powers into the legislative, executive and judicial branches.

32

^

Article 5 In the Republic of Croatia laws shall conform with the Constitution, and other rules and regulations shall conform with the Constitution and law. Everyone shall abide by the Constitution and law and respect the legal order of the Republic. Article 6 Formation of political parties shall be free. Political parties shall be formed according to the territorial principle. The work of any political party which by its programme or activity violently endangers the democratic constitutional order, independence, unity or territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia shall be prohibited. Article 7 The armed forces of the Republic of Croatia shall protect its sovereignty and independence and shall defend its territorial integrity. The defence system of the Republic of Croatia shall be regulated by law. Article 8 The frontiers of the Republic of Croatia may only be altered by a decision of the Croatian Sabor. Article 9 Croatian citizenship, its acquisition and termination shall be regulated by law. No citizen of the Republic of Croatia shall be exiled from the Republic nor be deprived of citizenship, and may not be extradited to another state. Article 10 The Republic of Croatia shall protect the rights and

33

interests of its citizens living or staying abroad, and shall promote their links with the homeland. Parts of the Croatian nation in other states shall be guaranteed special concern and protection by the Republic of Croatia. Article 11 The coat-of-arms of the Republic of Croatia is the historical Croatian coat-of-arms whose base consists of 25 alternating red and white (argent) fields. The flag of the Republic of Croatia consists of three colours: red, white and blue, with the historical Croatian coat-of-arms in the centre. The anthem of the Republic of Croatia is "Lijepa nasa domovino".3 The description of the historical Croatian coat-of-arms and flag, the text of the anthem, and the use of these and other state symbols shall be regulated by law. Article 12 The Croatian language and the Latin script shall be in official use in the Republic of Croatia. In individual local units another language and the Cyrillic or some other script may, along with the Croatian language and the Latin script, be introduced into official use under conditions specified by law. Article 13 The capital of the Republic of Croatia is Zagreb. The city of Zagreb shall be a separate territorial and administrative unit whose organization shall be regulated by law.

3

Our Beautiful Homeland (Translator)

^

III. FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS AND RIGHTS OF MAN AND THE CITIZEN 1. Common Provisions Article 14 Citizens of the Republic of Croatia shall enjoy all rights and freedoms, regardless of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, education, social status or other properties. All shall be equal before the law. Article 15 Members of all nations and minorities shall have equal rights in the Republic of Croatia. Members of all nations and minorities shall be guaranteed freedom to express their nationality, freedom to use their language and script, and cultural autonomy. Article 16 Freedoms and rights may only be restricted by law to protect the freedoms and rights of other people and the public order, morality and health. Article 17 During a state of war or an immediate danger to the independence and unity of the Republic, or in the event of some natural disaster, individual freedoms and rights guaranteed by the Constitution may be restricted. This shall be decided by the Croatian Sabor by a two-thirds majority of all representatives or, if the Croatian Sabor is unable to meet, by the President of the Republic. The extent of such restrictions shall be adequate to the nature of the danger, and may not result in the inequality of citizens in respect of race, colour, sex, language, religion, national or social origin.

35

Not even in the case of immediate danger to the existence of the state may restrictions be imposed on the application of the provisions of this Constitution concerning the right to life, prohibition of torture, cruel or degrading treatment or punishment, and on the legal definitions of penal offences and punishments, and on freedom of thought, conscience and religion. Article 18 The right to appeal against individual legal acts made in first-instance proceedings before courts or other authorized bodies shall be guaranteed. The right to appeal may exceptionally be denied in cases specified by law if other legal protection is ensured. Article 19 Individual acts of state administration and bodies vested with public powers shall be based on law. Judicial review of the legality of individual acts of administrative authorities and bodies vested with public powers shall be guaranteed. Article 20 Anyone violating the provisions of this Constitution concerning the basic freedoms and rights of man and the citizen shall be held personally responsible and may not exculpate himself by invoking a higher order.

2. Personal and Political Freedoms and Rights Article 21 Every h u m a n being shall have the right to life. In the Republic of Croatia there shall be no capital punishment.

Article 22 Man's freedom and personality shall be inviolable. No one shall be deprived of liberty, nor may his liberty be restricted, except when so specified by law, which shall be decided by a court. Article 23 No one shall be subjected to any form of maltreatment or, without his consent, to medical or scientific experiments. Forced and obligatory labour shall be forbidden. Article 24 No one shall be arrested or detained without a written court order based on law. Such an order shall be read to and served on the arrested person at the moment of arrest. The police may without a court order arrest a person reasonably suspected of having committed a serious criminal offence defined by law, and shall immediately hand him over to the court. The arrested person shall be immediately informed in a way understandable to him of the reasons for arrest and of his rights determined by law. Any person arrested or detained shall have the right to appeal to the court, which shall without delay decide on the legality of the arrest. Article 25 Any arrested and condemned persons shall be treated humanely and their dignity shall be respected. Anyone who is detained and accused of a penal offence shall have the right within the shortest term specified by law to be brought before a court, and within the statutory term to be acquitted or condemned. A detainee may be released on legal bail to defend himself.

37

^

Any person who has been illegally deprived of liberty or condemned shall, in conformity with law, be entitled to damages and a public apology. Article 26 All citizens and aliens shall be equal before courts, government bodies and other bodies vested with public powers. Article 27 The Bar as an autonomous and independent service shall provide citizens with legal aid, in conformity with law. Article 28 Everyone shall be presumed innocent and may not be considered guilty of a penal offence until his guilt has been proved by a final court judgement. Article 29 Anyone suspected or accused of a penal offence shall have the right: - to a fair trial before a competent court specified by law; - within the shortest possible term to be informed of the reasons for the charges preferred against him and of the evidence incriminating him; - to a defence counsel and free communication with him, and to be informed of this right; - to be tried in his presence if he is accessible to the court, and to defend himself by himself or with the assistance of the defence counsel chosen by him. A charged and accused person shall not be forced to testify against himself or to admit his guilt. Evidence illegally obtained shall not be admitted in court proceedings.

38

Article 30 A penal judgement for a serious and exceptionally dishonourable penal offence may, in conformity with law, have as a consequence loss of acquired rights or a ban on acquiring, for a specific time, certain rights to the conduct of specific affairs, if this is required for the protection of the legal order. Article 31 No one shall be punished for an act which before its commission was not defined by law or international law as a punishable offence, nor may he be sentenced to a punishment which was not defined by law. If after the commission of an act a less severe punishment is determined by law, such punishment shall be imposed. No one may again be tried for an act for which he was already sentenced and for which a final court judgement was passed. No criminal proceedings shall be repeated against a person acquitted by a final court judgement. Article 32 Anyone who legally finds himself on the territory of the Republic shall have the right freely to move and choose a residence. Every citizen of the Republic shall have the right at any time to leave the state territory and permanently or temporarily to settle abroad, and at any time to return home. The right of movement within the Republic and the right to enter or leave it may exceptionally be restricted by law, if this is necessary to protect the legal order, or the health, rights and freedoms of others. Article 33 Foreign citizens and stateless persons may obtain asylum in Yugoslavia, unless they are persecuted for non-

39

political crimes and activities contrary to the basic principles of international law. No alien who legally finds himself on the territory of the Republic shall be banished or extradited to another state, unless a decision made in accordance with a treaty or law is to be enforced. Article 34 Homes shall be inviolable. Only a court may by a warrant based on law and a statement of reasons order the search of a home or other premises. The tenant concerned shall have the right, personally or through his representatives and two obligatory witnesses, to be present at the search of his home or other premises. Subject to conditions spelled out by law, police authorities may even without a court warrant or consent from the tenant enter his home or premises and carry out a search in the absence of witnesses, if this is indispensable to enforce an arrest warrant or to apprehend the offender, or to prevent serious danger to life or major property. A search aimed at finding or securing evidence, which there is reasonable probability to believe is to be found in the home of the perpetrator of a penal offence, may only be carried out in the presence of witnesses. Article 35 All citizens shall be guaranteed respect for and legal protection of personal and family life, dignity, reputation and honour. Article 36 Freedom and secrecy of correspondence and all other forms of communication shall be guaranteed and inviolable.

40

^

Restrictions necessary for the protection of the Republic's security and the conduct of criminal proceedings may only be prescribed by law. Article 37 Everyone shall be guaranteed the safety and secrecy of personal data. Without consent from the person concerned, personal data may be collected, processed and used only under conditions specified by law. Protection of data and supervision of the work of information systems in the Republic shall be regulated by law. The use of personal data contrary to the purpose of their collection shall be prohibited. Article 38 Freedom of thought and expression of thought shall be guaranteed. Freedom of expression shall specifically include freedom of the press and other media of communication, freedom of speech and public expression, and free establishment of all institutions of public communication. Censorship shall be forbidden. Journalists shall have the right to freedom of reporting and access to information. The right to correction shall be guaranteed to anyone whose constitutionally determined rights have been violated by public communication. Article 39 Any call for or incitement to war, or resort to violence, national, racial or religious hatred, or any form of intolerance shall be prohibited and punishable. Article 40 Freedom of conscience and religion and free public profession of religion and other convictions shall be guaranteed.

41

Article 41 All religious communities shall be equal before the law and shall be separate from the state. Religious communities shall be free, in conformity with law, publicly to perform religious services, open schools, teaching establishments and other institutions, social and charitable institutions and to manage them, and shall in their activity enjoy the protection and assistance of the state. Article 42 All citizens shall be guaranteed the right to peaceful assembly and public protest. Article 43 Citizens shall be guaranteed the right to free association for the purposes of protection of their interests or promotion of social, economic, political, national, cultural and other convictions and objectives. For this purpose, citizens may freely form political parties, trade unions and other associations, join them or leave them. The right to free association shall be restricted by the prohibition of any violent threat to the democratic constitutional order and the independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Republic. Article 44 Every citizen of the Republic shall have the right, under equal conditions, to take part in the conduct of public affairs, and have access to public service. Article 45 All citizens of the Republic who have reached the age of eighteen years shall have universal and equal suffrage. This right shall be exercised at direct elections by secret ballot.

42

In elections for the Croatian Sabor and the President of the Republic, the Republic shall ensure suffrage to all citizens who at the time of the elections find themselves outside its borders, so that they may vote in the states in which they find themselves or in any other way specified by law. Article 46 All citizens shall have the right to submit petitions and complaints, to make proposals to government and other public bodies and to receive answers thereto. Article 47 Military service and the defence of the Republic shall be the duty of all citizens able to perform it. Conscientious objection shall be allowed to all those who for religious or moral beliefs are not willing to participate in the performance of military duties in the armed forces. Such persons shall be obliged to perform other duties specified by law. 3. Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Article 48 The right of ownership shall be guaranteed. Ownership implies obligations. Holders of the right of ownership and its users shall contribute to the general good. A foreign person may acquire the right of ownership under conditions spelled out by law. The right of inheritance shall be guaranteed. Article 49 Entrepreneurial and market freedom shall be the basis of the economic system of the Republic.

43—

The state shall ensure all entrepreneurs an equal legal status on the market. Monopolies shall be forbidden. The Republic shall stimulate economic progress and social welfare and shall care for the economic development of all regions. The rights acquired through the investment of capital shall not be lessened by law, nor by any other legal act. Foreign investors shall be guaranteed free transfer and repatriation of profit and the capital invested. Article 50 Ownership may in the interests of the Republic be restricted by law, or property taken over against indemnity equal to its market value. Entrepreneurial freedom and property rights may exceptionally be restricted by law for the purposes of protecting the interests and security of the Republic, nature, the human environment and human health. Article 51 Everyone shall participate in the defrayment of public expenses, in accordance with their economic possibilities. The tax system shall be based on the principles of equality and equity. Article 52 The sea, seashore and islands, waters, air space, mineral wealth and other natural resources, as well as land, forests, fauna and flora, other parts of nature, real estate and things of special cultural, historic, economic or ecological significance which are specified by law to be of interest to the Republic, shall enjoy its special protection. The way in which goods of interest to the Republic may be used and exploited by holders of rights to them and by owners, and compensation for the restrictions imposed on them, shall be regulated by law.

44

Article 53 The National Bank of Croatia shall be the central bank of the Republic of Croatia. The National Bank of Croatia shall, within the framework of its rights and duties, be responsible for the stability of the currency and for general payment liquidity at home and abroad. The National Bank of Croatia shall be independent in its work and shall be responsible to the Croatian Sabor. Profits made through the operations of the National Bank of Croatia shall accrue to the state budget. The status of the National Bank of Croatia shall be regulated by law. Article 54 Everyone shall have the right to work and to freedom of work. Everyone shall be free to choose his vocation and occupation, and all work places and duties shall be accessible to everyone under the same conditions. Article 55 Every employed person shall have the right to remuneration, ensuring for himself and his family a free and decent life. Maximum working hours shall be regulated by law. Every employed person shall have the right to a weekly rest and annual holidays with pay, and may not renounce these rights. Employed persons may, in conformity with law, participate in decision-making in the firms in which they work. Article 56 The right of those employed and of members of their families to social security and social insurance shall be regulated by law and collective agreements.

45

^

Rights in connection with childbirth, maternity and child care shall be regulated by law. Article 57 The Republic shall ensure to weak, helpless and other unprovided-for citizens due to unemployment or incapacity to work the right to assistance to meet their basic needs. The Republic shall ensure special care for the protection of disabled persons and their inclusion in social life. Receiving humanitarian help from abroad may not be forbidden. Article 58 Every citizen shall be guaranteed the right to health care. Article 59 In order to protect their economic and social interests, all employees and employers shall have the right to form trade unions and freely to join and leave them. Trade unions may form their federations and associate in international trade union organizations. Formation of trade unions in the armed forces and the police may be restricted by law. Article 60 The right to strike shall be guaranteed. The right to strike may be restricted in the armed forces, the police, government administration and the public services specified by law. Article 61 The family shall enjoy special protection of the Republic. Marriage and legal relations in marriage, commonlaw marriage and families shall be regulated by law.

Article 62 The Republic shall protect maternity, children and young people, and shall create social, cultural, educational, material and other conditions conducive to the realization of the right to a decent life. Article 63 Parents shall have the duty to bring up, support and school their children, and shall have the right and freedom independently to decide on the upbringing of children. Parents shall be responsible for ensuring the right of their children to the full and harmonious development of their personalities. Physically and mentally handicapped and socially neglected children shall have the right to special care, education and welfare. Children shall be bound to take care of old and helpless parents. The Republic shall take special care of parentless minors and of parentally neglected children. Article 64 Everyone shall have the duty to protect children and helpless persons. Children may not be employed before reaching the legally determined age, nor may they be forced or allowed to do work which is harmful to their health or morality. Young people, mothers and disabled persons shall be entitled to special protection at work. Article 65 Primary schooling shall be compulsory and free. Everyone shall have access, under the same conditions, to secondary and higher education in accordance with his abilities.

47

Article 66 Under conditions specified by law, citizens may open private schools and teaching establishments. Article 67 The autonomy of universities shall be guaranteed. Universities shall independently decide on their organization and work in conformity with law. Article 68 Freedom of scientific, cultural and artistic creativity shall be guaranteed. The Republic shall stimulate and assist the development of science, culture and the arts. The Republic shall protect scientific, cultural and artistic goods a s spiritual national values. Protection of moral and material rights deriving from scientific, cultural, artistic, intellectual and other creative endeavour shall be guaranteed. The Republic shall promote physical culture and sport. Article 69 Everyone shall have the right to a healthy life. The Republic shall ensure citizens the right to a healthy environment. Citizens, government, public and economic bodies and associations shall be bound, within their powers and activities, to pay special attention to the protection of human health, nature and the human environment.

48

—®
IV. ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT 1. The Croatian Sabor Article 70 The Croatian Sabor is a body of the elected representatives of the people and is vested with the legislative power in the Republic of Croatia. The Croatian Sabor shall consist of a Chamber of Representatives and a Chamber of Zupanije. Article 71 The Chamber of Representatives shall have no less than 100 and no more than 160 representatives, elected on the basis of direct universal and equal suffrage by secret ballot. Citizens in every zupanija shall on the basis of universal suffrage directly and by secret ballot elect 3 representatives to the Chamber of Zupanije. 4 The President of the Republic shall upon the expiry of his term become a lifelong member of the Chamber of Zupanije, unless he explicitly renounces this duty. The President of the Republic may nominate u p to 5 representatives to the Chamber of Zupanije from among citizens especially deserving for the Republic. Article 72 Representatives in the Chambers of the Croatian Sabor shall be elected for a term of four years. No one shall at the same time be a representative in the Chamber of Representatives and the Chamber of Zupanije. The number of and conditions and procedure for the
4

Zupanija or earlier In Latin comltatus refers to a county or a shire as a local government unit. fTranslator)

49

®
election of representatives to the Chambers of the Croatian Sabor shall be regulated by law. Article 73 Elections for representatives in the Chambers of the Croatian Sabor shall be held not later than 60 days after the expiry of the mandate or the dissolution of the Chambers of the Croatian Sabor. The first session of the Chambers of the Croatian Sabor shall be held not later than 20 days after the completion of the elections. Article 74 Representatives in the Croatian Sabor shall not have an imperative mandate. Representatives in the Croatian Sabor shall have a regular monetary remuneration and shall have other rights specified by law. Article 75 Representatives in the Croatian Sabor shall enjoy immunity. No representative shall be called to account criminally, detained or punished for an opinion expressed or a vote cast in the Sabor. No representative shall be detained, nor shall criminal proceedings be instituted against him without approval thereof by the Chamber of which he is a member. A representative may be detained without assent of his Chamber only if he h a s been caught in the act of committing a criminal offence which carries a penalty of imprisonment of more than five years. In such a case, the president of the Chamber concerned shall be notified thereof. If the Chamber is not in session, approval for the detention of the representative, or for the continuation of criminal proceedings against him, shall be given and his right to immunity decided by the credentials-and-immu-

50

nity commission of his Chamber, such a decision being subject to subsequent confirmation by the Chamber. Article 76 The term of office of representatives in the Croatian Sabor may be extended by law only in the event of war. Article 77 The Chamber of Representatives and the Chamber of Zupanije may be dissolved if so decided by the majority of all their representatives. The president of the Republic may, in conformity with the Constitution, dissolve the Chamber of Representatives. Article 78 The Chambers of the Croatian Sabor shall be in regular session twice a year: the first time between J a n u ary 15 and J u n e 30, and the second time between September 15 and December 15. The Chambers of the Croatian Sabor shall sit in emergency session at the request of the President of the Republic, the Government or the majority of representatives in the Chamber. Article 79 The internal organization and mode of work of the Chamber of Representatives and the Chamber of Zupanije shall be regulated by their respective rules of procedure. The rules of procedure shall be passed by a majority vote of all representatives. The Chamber of Representatives and the Chamber of Zupanije shall each have a chairman and one or more vice-chairmen. The rights and duties of the chairmen and vicechairmen shall be defined by the Chambers' rules of procedure. The chairman of the Chamber of Representatives shall be the president of the Croatian Sabor.

51

Article 80 The Chamber of Representatives shall: - decide on the enactment and amendment of the Constitution; - pass laws; - adopt the state budget; - decide on war and peace; - decide on alterations of the boundaries of the Republic; - call referenda; - carry out elections, appointments and relief of office, in conformity with the Constitution and law; - supervise the work of the Government of the Republic of Croatia and other holders of public powers responsible to the Sabor, in conformity with the Constitution and law; - grant amnesty for penal offences; - conduct other affairs as specified by the Constitution. Article 81 The Chamber of Zupanije: - shall propose to the Chamber of Representatives bills and the calling of referenda; - shall discuss and may give opinion on questions falling within the competence of the Chamber of Representatives; - shall give to the Chamber of Representatives prior opinion on the procedure for the enactment of the Constitution and laws which regulate national rights, elaborate constitutionally determined freedoms and rights of man and the citizen and the electoral system, the organization, responsibilities and operation of government bodies, and the organization of local self-government and administration; - may, within a period of 15 days from the date of the passage of a law in the Chamber of Representatives, with a substantiated opinion return the law for fresh consideration in the Chamber of Representatives. In such a case,

52

the Chamber of Representatives shall decide on the passage of such a law by a majority vote of all representatives, except when the Chamber of Representatives passes laws by a two-thirds majority; - shall conduct other affairs as specified by the Constitution. Article 82 Unless otherwise specified by the Constitution, the Chamber of Representatives and the Chamber of Zupanije shall make decisions by a majority vote, provided that a majority of representatives are present at the session. Representatives shall vote personally. Article 83 Laws which regulate national rights shall be passed by the Chamber of Representatives by a two-thirds majority vote of all representatives. Laws which elaborate the constitutionally defined freedoms and the rights of man and the citizen, the electoral system, the organization, responsibilities and operation of government bodies and the organization of local self-government and administration shall be passed by the Chamber of Representatives by a majority vote of all representatives. Article 84 Sessions of the Croatian Sabor shall be public. Article 85 All representatives in the Chamber of Representatives, working bodies of the Chamber of Representatives, the Chamber of Zupanije and the Government of the Republic of Croatia shall have the right to propose laws.

53

Article 86 Representatives in the Chambers of the Croatian Sabor shall, in conformity with the rules of procedure, have the right to put questions to the Government of the Republic of Croatia and to individual ministers. Article 87 The Chamber of Representatives may call a referendum on a proposal for the amendment of the Constitution, on a bill or on any other issue falling within its competence. The President of the Republic may, at the proposal of the Government and with the counter-signature of the prime minister, call a referendum on a proposal for the amendment of the Constitution or on any other issue which he considers to be important for the independence, unity and existence of the Republic. At such a referendum, a decision shall be made by the majority of the voters who voted, provided that the majorily of the total number of electors have taken part in the referendum. Decisions made at referenda shall be binding. A law shall be passed on referenda. Article 88 The Chamber of Representatives may, for a maximum period of one year, authorize the Government of the Republic of Croatia to regulate by decrees individual issues falling within its competence, except those relating to the elaboration of constitutionally defined freedoms and rights, national rights, the electoral system, the organization, responsibilities and operation of government bodies and local self-government. Decrees based on statutory authority shall not have a retroactive effect. Decrees passed on the basis of statutory authority shall cease to be valid after the expiry of a period of one year from the date when the Chamber of Representatives

54

received such authority, unless otherwise decided by the Chamber of Representatives. Article 89 Laws shall be promulgated by the President of the Republic within eight days from the date when they were, in conformity with the Constitution, passed in the Chamber of Representatives. Article 90 Before coming into force, laws shall be published in Narodne novine, the Republic's official gazette. A law shall come into force at the earliest on the eighth day after its publication, unless otherwise specified by law for especially justified reasons. Only individual provisions of a law may have a retroactive effect. Article 91 State revenues and expenditures shall be determined by the state budget. A law whose application demands financial funds shall specify the sources of such funds. Article 92 The Chambers of the Croatian Sabor may form inquiry commissions regarding any issue of public interest. The composition, responsibilities and powers of inquiry commissions shall be in accord with law. Article 93 An ombudsman, who shall be a commissioner of the Croatian Sabor, shall protect the constitutional and legal rights of citizens in proceedings before government administration and bodies vested with public powers. The ombudsman shall be elected by the Chamber of Representatives for a term of eight years.

55

Conditions for the election and relief of office and the mode of work of the ombudsman and his deputies shall be regulated by law. 2. The President of the Republic of Croatia Article 94 The President of the Republic of Croatia is the head of state. The President of the Republic shall represent the Republic at home and abroad, be responsible for abiding by the Constitution, and ensure the continuance and unity of the Republic and the regular functioning of government. Article 95 The President of the Republic shall be elected, on the basis of universal and equal suffrage at direct elections by secret ballot, for a term of five years. No one shall be President of the Republic more than twice. The President of the Republic shall be elected by a majority vote of all electors who voted. If none of the candidates has obtained such a majority, a new election shall be held after 14 days. The two candidates who at the first election obtained the largest number of votes shall have the right to stand at the new election. If one of the candidates who obtained the largest number of votes withdraws his candidature, the candidate who is next in the number of votes obtained shall acquire the right to be elected. Elections for the President of the Republic shall be held no less than 30 and no more than 60 days before the expiry of his term. Before assuming duty, the President of the Republic shall take a solemn oath swearing loyalty to the Constitution. The election of the President of the Republic shall be regulated by law.

Article 96 The President of the Republic shall not, except for party-related duties, perform any other public or professional duty. Article 97 In the event of the death of the President of the Republic, his resignation, or his being permanently prevented from performing his duties, the occurrence of which shall be established by the Constitutional Court of Croatia at the proposal of the Government of the Republic of Croatia, the duty of the President of the Republic shall be temporarily assumed by the president of the Croatian Sabor. The election of a new President of the Republic shall be carried out within 60 days from the date when the former president ceased to perform his duties. Article 98 The President of the Republic shall: - call elections for the Chambers of the Sabor and shall convene their first session; - call referenda, in conformity with the Constitution; - appoint and relieve of duty the prime minister of the Republic of Croatia; - at the proposal of the prime minister of the Republic of Croatia appoint and relieve of duty its vice-premiers and members; - grant pardons; - confer decorations and other awards specified by law; - perform other duties specified by the Constitution. Article 99 The President of the Republic shall, at the Government's proposal, decide on the establishment of diplomatic

57

®
and other representative offices of the Republic of Croatia abroad. The President of the Republic shall appoint and recall diplomatic representatives of the Republic of Croatia, receive letters of credence and letters of recall from foreign diplomatic representatives. Article 100 The President of the Republic is commander-in-chief of the armed forces of the Republic of Croatia. The President of the Republic shall appoint members of the National Defence Council of the Republic of Croatia and preside over it, and shall appoint and relieve of duty military commanders, in conformity with law. On the basis of a decision by the Croatian Sabor, the President of the Republic may proclaim war and conclude peace. Article 101 The President of the Republic shall pass decrees with the force of law and take emergency measures in the event of a state of war or an immediate danger to the independence and unity of the Republic, or when government bodies are prevented from regularly performing constitutional duties. During the time the President of the Republic is making use of such powers, the Chamber of Representatives may not be dissolved. The President of the Republic shall submit decrees with the force of law for approval to the Chamber of Representatives as soon as the Sabor is in a position to meet. Article 102 The President of the Republic may convene a session of the Government of the Republic of Croatia and place on its agenda items which he deems should be considered.

58

The President of the Republic shall preside over the sessions of the Government at which he is present. Article 103 The President of the Republic may give to the Croatian Sabor information of, and shall once a year submit to it a report on, the state of the Republic. Article 104 The President of the Republic may, at the proposal of the Government and with the counter-signature of the prime minister, after having consulted the chairman of the Chamber, dissolve the Chamber of Representatives, if this Chamber has passed a vote of no confidence in the Government, or if it has not approved the state budget within a month from the date when it was proposed. The President of the Republic may not again dissolve the Chamber of Representatives before the expiration of one year from the date of its dissolution. Article 105 The President of the Republic shall be impeachable for any violation of the Constitution he has committed in the performance of his duties. Proceedings for the impeachment of the President of the Republic may be instituted by the Chamber of Representatives by a two-thirds majority vote of all representatives. The impeachability of the President of the Republic shall be decided upon by the Constitutional Court of Croatia by a two-thirds majority vote of all judges. If the Constitutional Court of Croatia sustains the impeachment, the duty of the President of the Republic shall cease by force of the Constitution. Article 106 In the performance of his powers the President of the Republic shall be assisted by a Presidential Council and

59

other advisory and auxiliary bodies whose members shall be appointed and recalled by the President of the Republic. 3. The Government of the Republic of Croatia Article 107 The Government of the Republic of Croatia shall exercise executive powers in conformity with the Constitution and law. Article 108 The Government of the Republic of Croatia shall consist of a prime minister, vice-premiers, ministers and other members. Article 109 The organization, operation and decision-making by the Government shall be regulated by law and its rules of procedure. The internal organization of ministries shall be regulated by Government decrees, and services for the conduct of its affairs shall be set up by it. Article 110 The Government shall pass decrees in conformity with the Constitution and law, introduce bills, propose the state budget, and enforce laws and other regulations enacted by the Croatian Sabor. Article 111 The Government shall be responsible to the President of the Republic and the Chamber of Representatives of the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia.

^

The prime minister, vice-premiers and members of the Government shall be jointly responsible for the decisions made by the Government, and shall be personally responsible for their respective competences. Article 112 The prime minister shall, not later than 15 days from his nomination, present the Government to the Chamber of Representatives and ask for a vote of confidence in the Government. The nomination of the prime minister and members of the Government shall be deemed to have been accepted if confidence in it has been expressed by a majority of all representatives in the Chamber of Representatives. Article 113 At the proposal of at least a tenth of the representatives in the Chamber of Representatives, a vote of confidence in the prime minister, individual Government members or the Government as a whole may be requested. A vote of confidence in the Government may also be requested by the prime minister. No vote of confidence may be taken before the expiry of three days from the date of service of the proposal to the Chamber of Representatives. A no confidence decision shall be accepted if it has been voted for by the maj oriry of the total number of representatives. If the Chamber of Representatives rejects the proposal for a vote of no confidence, the representatives who made it may not again make the same proposal before the expiry of three months. If a vote of no confidence in the prime minister or the Government as a whole is passed, the prime minister shall submit his resignation to the President of the Republic, who shall dissolve the Government. If a vote of no confidence in an individual member of the Government is passed, the prime minister may resign

61

or may propose to the President of the Republic to relieve of duty the member of the Government against whom the vote of no confidence was passed. Article 114 The organization of state administration shall be regulated by law. Employees in state administration shall be appointed on the basis of public competition, unless otherwise specified by law. 4. Judicial Power Article 115 Judicial power shall be exercised by courts. Judicial power shall be autonomous and independent. Courts shall administer justice on the basis of the Constitution and law. Article 116 The Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia, as the highest court, shall ensure uniform application of laws and equality of citizens. The establishment, jurisdiction, composition and organization of courts and court proceedings shall be regulated by law. The formation, competence and organization of the office of public prosecutor shall be regulated by law. Article 117 Court hearings shall be open and judgements shall be passed publicly in the name of the Republic of Croatia. The public may be barred from a hearing or part thereof if minors are being tried, or for the purposes of protection of the private lives of the parties, or in marital

disputes and proceedings in connection with guardianship and adoption, or for the purposes of protection of military, official or business secrets, and for the protection of security of the Republic's defence. Article 118 Justice shall be administered by judges and lay-assessors in conformity with law. Article 119 Judges and lay-assessors who take part in the administration of justice shall not be called to account for an opinion given in the process ofjudicial decision-making. Judges shall, in conformity with law, enjoy the same immunity as representatives in the Croatian Sabor. Article 120. Judicial office shall be permanent. A judge shall be relieved of his judicial office: - at his own request; - if he has become permanently incapacitated to perform his office; - if he has ben sentenced for a criminal offence which makes him unworthy to hold judicial office; - if in conformity with law it is so decided by the High Judiciary Council of the Republic owing to the commission of an act of serious infringement of discipline. The judge concerned shall have the right to submit to the Chamber of Zupanije of the Croatian Sabor a request for protection against the decision to relieve him of office. A judge shall not be transferred against his will. A judge shall not perform an office or work defined by law a s being incompatible with his judicial office.

63

Article 121 Judges and public prosecutors shall, in conformity with the Constitution and law, be appointed and relieved of duty by, and questions concerning their disciplinary responsibility decided upon by, the High Judiciary Council of the Republic. The High Judiciary Council of the Republic shall have a president and 14 members. The president and members shall be proposed by the Chamber of Zupanije, and shall be elected by the Chamber of Representatives for a term of eight years from among notable judges, public prosecutors, lawyers and university professors of law, in conformity with law. V. THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA Article 122 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia shall consist of 11 judges elected by the Chamber of Representatives at the proposal of the Chamber of Zupanije for a term of eight years from among outstanding jurists, especially judges, public prosecutors, lawyers and university professors of law. The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia shall elect a president for a term of four years. Article 123 Judges of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia shall not perform any other public or professional duties. Judges of the Constitutional Court of Croatia shall enjoy the same immunity a s representatives in the Croatian Sabor.

1
Article 124 Ajudge of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia may be relieved of office before the expiry of the term for which he was elected if he requests to be relieved, if he is sentenced to a term of imprisonment, or if he is permanently incapacitated to perform his office, as established by the Court itself. Article 125 The Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia shall: - decide on the conformity of laws with the Constitution; - decide on the conformity of other regulations with the Constitution and law; - protect the constitutional freedoms and rights of man and the citizen; - decide jurisdictional disputes among legislative, executive and judicial branches; - decide, in conformity with the Constitution, on the impeachability of the President of the Republic; - supervise the constitutionality of the programmes and activities of political parties and may, in conformity with the Constitution, ban their work; - supervise the constitutionality and legality of elections and republican referenda, and decide electoral disputes which do not fall within the jurisdiction of courts; - conduct other affairs specified by the Constitution. Article 126 The Constitutional Court ofYugoslavia shall repeal a law if it finds it to be unconstitutional. The Constitutional Court of Croatia shall repeal or annul any other regulation if it finds it to be unconstitutional or illegal. Article 127 Conditions for the election ofjudges of the Constitu-

65

tional Court of the Republic of Croatia and the termination of their office, conditions and time-limits for instituting proceedings for the assessment of the constitutionality and legality, procedure and the legal effect of its decisions, protection of the constitutional freedoms and rights of man and the citizen, and other issues important for the performance of duties and work of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia, shall be regulated by the Constitutional Act. The Constitutional Act shall be passed by the procedure determined for amending the Constitution. The internal organization of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia shall be regulated by its rules of procedure. VI. ORGANIZATION OF LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION Article 128 Citizens shall be guaranteed the right to local selfgovernment. The right to local self-government shall include the right to decide on needs and interests of local significance, particularly on regional development and town planning, organization of localities and housing, public utilities, child care, social welfare, culture, physical culture, sport and technical culture, and the protection and promotion of the environment. A law shall be passed on local self-government. Article 129 Units of local self-government shall, in conformity with law, be communes and districts or towns. Their areas shall be determined by law after the opinion of the inhabitants of the areas concerned has been heard. The organization and responsibilities of the bodies of local self-government units shall be regulated by their bylaws in conformity with law.

^

Citizens may directly participate in the management of local affairs, in conformity with law and the by-laws of local self-government units. Citizens shall also have the right to establish, in conformity with law, other forms of local self-government in localities and parts thereof. Article 130 Units of local self-government shall, in conformity with law and by-laws, be independent in the conduct of local affairs and shall only be subjected to the supervision of legality by competent bodies of the Republic. In communes and districts or towns, local self-government bodies may be established by law. The organization and responsibilities of such bodies shall be regulated by law. Specific affairs of state administration may be by law transferred to the responsibility of local self-government bodies. In conducting such affairs, bodies of local selfgovernment units shall be subordinate, in conformity with law, to bodies of state administration. Article 131 Zupanije are units of local administration and selfgovernment. Areas of Zupanije shall be determined by law so as to express the historical, transport and economic factors, and to be natural self-government units within the framework of the Republic. The organization and responsibilities of Zupanija bodies shall be determined by law. Large towns may by law be organized as Zupanije.

67

VII. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 1. International Agreements Article 132 International agreements shall, on behalf of the Republic of Croatia, be concluded by the President of the Republic, but may also be concluded, in conformity with law, by the Government of the Republic of Croatia. Article 133 International agreements which entail the passage or amendment of laws, international agreements of a military and political nature, and international agreements which financially commit the Republic shall be subject to ratification by the Croatian Sabor. International agreements which grant international organizations or alliances powers derived from the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, shall be subject to ratification by the Croatian Sabor by a two-thirds majority vote of all representatives. Article 134 International agreements concluded and ratified in accordance with the Constitution and made public shall be part of the Republic's internal legal order and shall in terms of legal effect be above law. Their provisions may be changed or repealed only under conditions and in the way specified in them, or in accordance with the general rules of international law. 2. Association and Secession Article 135 Procedure for the association of the Republic of Croatia in alliances with other states may be instituted

^

by at least one third of the representatives in the Croatian Sabor, by the President of the Republic, or by the Government of the Republic of Croatia. Such association of the Republic shall first be decided upon by the Croatian Sabor by a two-thirds majority vote of all representatives. The decision concerning the Republic's association shall be made on the basis of a referendum by a majority vote of the total number of electors in the Republic. Such referendum shall be held within 30 days from the date the decision was rendered by the Croatian Sabor. The provisions of this Constitution concerning association shall also relate to conditions and procedure for disassociation (secession) of the Republic of Croatia, except when owing to extraordinary circumstances the Croatian Sabor may, at the proposal of a third of the representatives, or of the President of the Republic, or the Government of the Republic of Croatia, for the purposes of protection of the Republic of Croatia, decide on disassociation (secession) by a two-thirds majority vote of all representatives present. VIII. AMENDING THE CONSTITUTION Article 136 Amendment of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia may be proposed by at least one fifth of the representatives in the Chamber of Representatives of the Croatian Sabor, the President of the Republic, and the Government of the Republic of Croatia. Article 137 The Chamber of Representatives shall, upon hearing the opinion of the Chamber of Zupanije, decide by a majority vote of all representatives whether or not to start proceedings for the amendment of the Constitution.

A draft amendment of the Constitution shall require a majority vote of all representatives. Article 138 A decision to amend the Constitution shall, on the basis of a prior opinion of the Chamber of Zupanije, be made by the Chamber of Representatives by a two-thirds majority vote of all representatives. Article 139 Amendment of the Constitution shall be promulgated by the Chamber of Representatives of the Croatian Sabor. IX. TRANSITIONAL AND CONCLUDING PROVISIONS Article 140 The Republic of Croatia shall remain part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia until a new agreement is reached by the Yugoslav republics, or until the Croatian Sabor decides otherwise. If the territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia is infringed by an act of or procedure by a federal organ or an organ of other republics or provinces, members of the Federation, or if the Republic is brought into an unequal position in the Federation, or its interests are endangered, the Republic of Croatia's organs shall, on the basis of the right to self-determination and the sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia established by the Constitution, make the necessary decisions for the protection of the sovereignty and interests of the Republic of Croatia. Article 141 This Constitution shall apply as of the date of its promulgation by the Croatian Sabor, unless otherwise

70

specified by the Constitutional Act for its implementation regarding the application of its individual provisions. Elections for the Croatian Sabor and the President of the Republic shall be called in accordance with the electoral laws, which shall be passed not later than one year after the promulgation of this Constitution. Article 142 A Constitutional Act shall be passed for the implementation of this Constitution.

71

Pursuant to Article 141 of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia enacted at the session of the Chamber ofAssociated Labur, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber, held on December 22, 1990, the

DECISION on the Promulgation of the Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia
The Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, enacted by the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia at the session of the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber, held on December 21, 1990, is hereby promulgated and becomes effective. Number: 6301-90-10 Zagreb, December 22, 1990 SABOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA President of the Chamber of Associated Labour Ivan Matija President of the Chamber of Communes Slavko Degoricija President of the Socio-Political Chamber Ivan Vekic President of the Sabor Dr. Zarko Domljan

73

The Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia
Article 1 The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (in further text: the Constitution) shall apply as of the day it is promulgated by the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber of the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia, unless otherwise specified with respect to the implementation and transition to the application of its individual provisions. Aticle 2 The provisions of the Constitution for whose application it is not, according to the Constitution, necessary to enact a constitutional act or a law, shall be applied immediately as of the day of the promulgation of the Constitution. Article 3 Laws making possible the application of the provisions of the Constitution which may not be directly applied, shall be enacted not later than a year from the date of the promulgation of the Constitution. A constitutional act on the Constitutional Court of Croatia shall be enacted not later than three months after the promulgation of the Constitution.

75

Article 4 Laws, other regulations and enactements shall be brought into accord with the Constitution within a year from the date of the promulgation of the Constitution. Article 5 The provisions of Articles 7, 99, 100, 132, 133 and 134 of the Constitution shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of Article 140 of the Constitution. Article 6 Until the constitution of the newly-elected Sabor of the Republic of Croatia, the Sabor Chambers in their present composition shall pass laws and other acts in the sphere, in the way and according to the procedure determined by the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia of 1974, and the Rules of Procedure of the Sabor. Article 7 Until the election of the president of the Republic in conformity with the Constitution, the incumbent president of the Republic shall be vested with all the duties determined by the Constitution. Article 8 The Law on the Government of the Republic of Croatia [Narodne novine, No. 41/90) shall remain in force until the enactment, in conformity with the Constitution, of a law on the organization, operation and decision-making of the Government of the Republic of Croatia. Article 9 The establishment, jurisdiction, compositon and organization of courts and court proeceedings shall be regulated by law, in conformity with the Constitution, not

76

later than one year from the date of the promulgation of the Constitution. Article 10 This Act shall become effective when it is, simultaneously with the promulgation of the Constitution, promulgated by the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber of the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia.

77

Pursuant to Article 142 of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia enacted at the session of the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber, held on February 21, 1991, the

DECISION on the Promulgation of the Constitutional Act Supplementing the Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia
The Constitutional Act Supplementing the Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, enacted by the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia at the session of the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber, held on February 2 1 , 1991, is hereby promulgated and becomes effective. Number: 6701-91-12/3 Class: 012-02/91-01/02 Zagreb, February 21, 1991 SABOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA President of the Chamber of Associated Labour Ivan Matlja President of the Chamber of Communes Slavko Degoricija President of the Socio-Political Chamber Ivan Vekic President of the Sabor Dr. Zarko Domljan

79

The Constitutional Act Supplementing the Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia
Article 1 Three new Articles are added to the Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia [Narodne novine No. 56/90) after Article 9, which read: Article 9a In the Republic of Croatia the provisions of the Constitution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia which are not in accord with the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia are repealed. In the Republic of Croatia the provisions of federal laws, other regulations and enactments of federal agencies which are not in accord with the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia and the laws of the Republic of Croatia, are repealed. In the Republic of Croatia the provisions of federal laws and other regulations and enactments of federal agencies which are published in a secret official gazette and other secret bulletins and acts, are repealed a s null and void from the viewpoint of the constitutional and legal order of the Republic of Croatia.

81

Article 9b In the Republic of Croatia federal agencies may not without prior consent from the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia or the President of the Republic of Croatia determine the existence of an emergency situation, proclaim a state of emergency, introduce emergency measures, or order the use of the armed forces in peacetime. Article 9c The Government of the Republic of Croatia is hereby authorized to determine federal laws, other regulations and other enactments which shall not be applied in the Republic of Croatia if they disrupt the territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia, bring the Republic of Croatia into an unequal position in the federation, or endanger its sovereignty or interests. This authority of the Government of the Republic of Croatia also relates to acts and procedures of federal agencies. The acts mentioned in paragraph 1 of this Article which refer to federal laws shall be submitted by the Government of the Republic of Croatia to the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia for confirmation. Article 2 This Act shall come into force upon its promulgation by the Chamber of Associated Labour, the Chamber of Communes and the Socio-Political Chamber of the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia.

82

Index

83

T h e n u m b e r after individual t e r m s s t a n d s for t h e corresponding article a n d p a r a g r a p h of t h e Constitution of t h e Republic of Croatia. A abroad - protection of citizens 10/1 - right of settling 32/2 - representing the Republic 94/2 - representative offices of the Republic 9 9 / 1 accused persons -rights 2 5 / 2 , 2 9 / 1 - prohibition of forced admission of guilt 2 9 / 2 activities of political parties - prohibition 6 / 3 - constitutionality 125 administrative authorities 19/2 adoption 117/2 Adriatic Sea 2 / 3 advisory bodies 106 air space - sovereignty 2 / 2 - natural resources 5 2 / 1 alliances with other states - deciding thereon 2 / 4 - retaining the right 2 / 5 - association 135 aliens 26, 33/2 alteration of frontiers 8 amending the Constitution - competence of the Chamber of Representatives 80 - competence of the Chamber of Zupanije 81

85

- referendum 8 7 / 1 . 87/2 - right to call a referendum 136 - prior opinion hearing 137/1 - draft amendment of the Constitution 137/2 - mode of deciding 138 - promulgation 139 amnesty 80 annual holidays 5 5 / 3 anthem 11 application of the Constitution 141/1 appointment - competence of the Chamber of Representatives 80 - prime minister 98 area - units of local self-government 129/1 -zupanije 131/2 arrest 2 4 / 1 . 2 4 / 2 arrested persons 2 5 / 1 armed forces - d u t y 7/1 - restriction of formation of trade unions 5 9 / 3 - restriction of the right to strike 6 0 / 2 - President of the Republic 100/1 artistic creative endeavour -freedom 6 8 / 1 - stimulation 6 8 / 2 - artistic goods 6 8 / 3 - protection of rights 6 8 / 4 association of the Republic 2/4, 135 associations 4 3 / 1 asylum 3 3 / 1 authorized bodies 18/1 autonomy - cultural 15/2 - university 6 7 / 1 auxiliary bodies 106 awards 98 B banishment 3 3 / 2 beginning of the application of the Constitution 141/1 birth 14/1

86

bodies - federal 140/2 - vested with public powers 19, 26 business secrets 117/2 by-laws 129/2, 129/3 C call for war 39 calling elections 98 canals 2 / 2 capital - rights acquired through investment 4 9 / 4 - foreign investors 4 9 / 5 capital punishment 2 1 / 2 censorship 3 8 / 3 central bank 5 3 / 1 chairman of the Chamber of Representatives 7 9 / 3 , 79/4, 79/5,104/1 chairmen of the Sabor Chambers 79/2 - detention of representatives 75 - election 7 9 / 3 - rights and duties 79/4 - president of the Sabor 7 9 / 5 Chamber of Representatives, see Sabor of the Republic of Croatia Chamber of Zupanije, see Sabor of the Republic of Croatia chambers of the Sabor of the Republic of Croatia - see Chamber of Representatives - see Chamber of Zupanije charitable institutions 41/2 charges preferred 2 9 / 1 childbirth 56/2, 128/2 child care 128/2 children - Republic's protection 62 - upbringing 6 3 / 1 - parents' responsibility 63/2 - special care 6 3 / 3 - protection by everyone 6 4 / 1 - prohibition of work 6 4 / 2 citizens - power 1/2

87

- abroad 10/1 citizens' proposals 46 citizenship - acquisition and termination 9 / 1 - prohibition of deprivation 9/2 city -of Zagreb 13 - units of local self-government 129/1 - state administration 130/2 - zupanije 131/4 coat-of-arms 11 collective agreements 5 6 / 1 colour - equality of citizens 14/1 - prohibition of restriction 17/2 coming into force of laws 9 0 / 2 commander-in-chief 100/1 common-law mariage 6 1 / 2 communes 129/1. 130/2 compensation 5 2 / 2 conscientious objection 47/2 condemned persons 2 5 / 1 constitutional act - on the Constitutional Court 127/1, 127/2 - for the implementation of the Constitution 141/1. 142 Constitutional Court - establishment of permanent prevention of the President of the Republic 9 7 / 1 - deciding on the impeachability of the President of the Republic 105/4 - composition 122/1 - president 122/2 - prohibition of performance of other duties 123/1 - immunity of judges 123/2 - relief of office of judges 124 -jurisdiction 125 - repeal of laws 126/1 - repeal or annulment of other regulations 126/2 - constitutional act on the Constitutional Court 127/1 - procedure for the passage of the Constitutional Act 127/2 - international organizations 133/2 constitutional order

88

- values 3 - political parties 6 / 3 - restriction of freedom of association 4 3 / 2 correspondence 36 court hearings 117 court order 24 court proceedings 2 9 / 3 courts - right to appeal 18/1 - deprivation of liberty 2 2 / 2 - arresting a person 2 4 / 2 - legality of arrest 2 4 / 3 - time-limit for bringing a detained and accused person before a court 2 5 / 2 - equality of citizens 26 - rights of suspected or accused persons 2 9 / 1 - judicial power 115/1 - basis for administration of justice 115/3 - establishment, jurisdiction, composition and organization 116/2 court warrant 3 4 / 2 , 3 4 / 4 credentials-and-immunity commission 7 5 / 5 criminal act 3 1 / 2 criminal proceedings - prohibition of repetition 3 1 / 2 - freedom of correspondence 3 6 / 2 Croatian - language 12 - nation 10/2 Creation citizenship 9 / 1 cultural - wealth 2 / 4 -creativity 6 8 / 1 , 6 8 / 4 - goods 6 8 / 3 cultural autonomy 15/2 culture 128/2. 6 8 / 2 currency 53/2 currency stability 53/2 Cyrillic script 12/2 D damages 2 5 / 4

89

death 9 7 / 1 decrees - based on statutory authority 88 - with the force of law 101 - regulating internal organization of ministries 109/2 - Government's competence 110 decorations 98 defence counsel 2 9 / 1 defence of the Republic - citizens' duty 4 7 / 1 - court hearings 117/2 defence system 7 / 2 democratic constitutional order 6 / 3 democratic multiparty system 3 democratic state 1/1 deprivation - citizenship 9 / 2 - liberty 2 2 / 2 - property 5 0 / 1 detainees 2 5 / 2 , 2 5 / 3 detention 2 4 / 1 , 2 4 / 3 dignity - of arrested and condemned persons 2 5 / 1 - of all citizens 35 diplomatic representative offices 9 9 / 1 diplomatic representatives 9 9 / 2 direct decision-making 1/3 direct elections - suffrage 4 5 / 1 - President of the Republic 9 5 / 1 direct threat - state of war 17/1 - decrees with the force of law 101/1 disabled persons - care by the Republic 5 7 / 2 - protection at work 6 4 / 3 disassociation (secession) 135/5 disciplinary responsibility 121/1 dissolution (again) of the Chamber of Representatives 104/2 dissolution of the Government 113/6 dissolution of the Sabor Chambers - time-limit for elections 7 3 / 1 - deciding on 7 7 / 1

- President of the Republic 77/2, 104 -prohibition 101/1 districts 129/1, 130/2 draft amendments to the Constitution 137/2 duty - defence of the Republic 4 7 / 1 - contribution to the general good 4 8 / 2 - defrayment of public expenses 5 1 / 1 - upbringing of children 6 3 / 1 - care of parents 6 3 / 4 - protection of children 6 4 / 1

economic - progress 4 9 / 3 - relations 2 / 4 - development 4 9 / 3 - system 4 9 / 1 education - equality of citizens 14/1 - access 6 5 / 2 equality - nations and minorities 15/1 -citizens 116/1 equality - values of the constitutional order 3 - of all before the law 14/2 - of citizens before courts 26 elections - way of exercising power 1 / 3 - realization of suffrage 4 5 / 1 - citizens abroad 4 5 / 2 - competence of the Chamber of Representatives 80 - President of the Republic 95, 9 7 / 2 - for the Sabor Chambers 98 - constitutionality and legality 125 -judges of the Constitutional Court 127/1 - promulgation of the Constitution 141/2 electors - deciding at referenda 8 7 / 3 - election of the President of the Republic 9 5 / 3 - association of the Republic 135/3

electoral disputes 125 extradition - prohibition 9 / 2 - of foreigners 3 3 / 2 emergency measures 101/1 emergency sessions of the Sabor Chambers 78/2 employees 114/2 employment 54/2 entrepreneurial freedom - basis of the economic system 4 9 / 1 - possibility of restriction 50/2 entrepreneurs 4 9 / 2 environment 128/2 exclusion - right to appeal 18/2 - public from court hearings 117/2 executive power - separation of powers 4 - Government of the Republic of Croatia 107 - jurisdictional disputes 125 exile 9/2 extraordinary circumstances 135/5 office of public prosecutor 116/3 F family 61 family life 35 federation of trade unions 59/2 financial funds 9 1 / 2 flag 11/2, 11/4 flora 5 2 / 1 forced labour 2 3 / 2 foreign citizens 3 3 / 1 foreign investors 4 9 / 5 foreign persons 4 8 / 3 forests 5 2 / 1 formation and establishment - political parties 6 / 1 - schools and other institutions 41/2 free - establishment of institutions of public communication - public profession of religion 40

92

- association 43 - repatriation of capital 4 9 / 5 - choice of vocation and occupation 54/2 freedom (liberty) - values of the constitutional order 3 - formation of political parties 6 / 1 - expression of nationality 15/2 - thought 17/3 - religion 17/3 -inviolability 2 2 / 1 - prohibition of restriction 2 2 / 2 - movement 3 2 / 1 - choosing residence 3 2 / 1 - correspondence 3 6 / 1 - thought 3 8 / 1 - expression of thought 3 8 / 1 , 38/2 - the press 3 8 / 2 - speech 3 8 / 2 - public expression 38/2 - access to information 3 8 / 3 - conscience 40 - religion 40 - performance of religious services 4 1 / 2 - work 5 4 / 1 - deciding on the upbringing of children 6 3 / 1 - creativity 6 8 / 1 frontiers - exercise of sovereign rights 2 / 3 - alteration 8 - Chamber of Representatives 80

general - liquidity 53/2 - rules of international law 134 goods of interests to the Republic 5 2 / 2 government - separation of powers 4 - President of the Republic 9 4 / 2 - decrees with the force of law 101/1 governmnt bodies - equality of citizens 26

93

- petitions and proposals 46 Government of the Republic of Croatia - emergency sessions of the Sabor Chambers 78/2 - supervision 80 - right to propose laws 85 - representatives' questions 86 - referendum 8 7 / 2 - decrees on the basis of statutory authority 8 8 / 1 - permanent prevention of the President of the Republic 97/1 - appointment of prime minister and ministers 98 - establishment of representative offices of the Republic 99/1 - convening sessions by the President of the Republic 102/1 - presiding over sessions by the President of the Republic 102/2 - dissolution of the Chamber of Representatives 104/1 - executive power 107 - composition 108 - organization and operation 109/1 - internal organization 109/2 - competence 110 - responsibility 111 - presentation to the Chamber of Representatives 112 - vote of confidence 113 - international agreements 132 - association of the Republic 135/1 - disassociation (secession) of the Republic 135/5 - amendment of the Constitution 136 guardianship 117/2 H head of state 9 4 / 1 health - restriction of freedoms and rights 16 - restriction of the right of movement 3 2 / 3 - restriction of entrepreneurial freedom 50/2 - duty to pay attention 6 9 / 3 health care 58 helpless persons 6 4 / 1 High Judiciary Council of the Republic 120/2 121

higher education 6 5 / 2 historical Croatian coat-of-arms 1 1 / 1 , 11/2 holders of public powers 80 honour 35 housing 128/2 human environment - restriction of property rights 50 - duty to protect it 6 9 / 3 human environment 3 humanitarian help 5 7 / 3 I illegality of regulations 126/2 inalienability of sovereignty 2 / 1 incitement to war 39 incompatibility of office 120/5 inquiry commissions 92 immediate danger to the existence of the state 17/3 immunity - representatives in the Sabor 75 -judges 119/2 -judges of the Constitutional Court 123/2 imperative mandate implementation of the constitution 142 individual - legal acts 19/1 - acts 1 9 / 1 . 19/2 indivisibility - t h e state 1/1 - sovereignty 2 / 1 independence of the Republic - political parties 6 / 3 - armed forces 7/1 - state of war 17/1 - restriction of the right to association 4 3 / 2 - referendum 8 7 / 2 inequality of citizens 17/2 information and reports of the President of the Republic 103 information systems 3 7 / 2 innocence 28 infringement of discipline 120/2

infringement of the territory of the Republic 140/2 institutions 4 1 / 2 institutions of public communication 38/2 investment of capital 4 9 / 4 inviolability - ownership 3 - freedom 2 2 / 1 - home 3 4 / 1 intellectual creative endeavour 6 8 / 4 interests of the Republic - restriction of ownership 5 0 / 1 - restriction of entrepreneurship 50/2 internal legal order 134 internal maritime waters 2 / 2 international agreements - banishment 3 3 / 2 - extradition 3 3 / 2 - conclusion 132 - ratification 133 - legal nature international law - realization of sovereign rights 2 / 3 - punishment 3 1 / 1 - asylum 3 3 / 1 international organizations 133/2 international trade union organizations 5 9 / 2 intolerance 39 islands 5 2 / 1 issues of public interest 9 2 / 1 J joint responsibility 111/2 judgement 117/1 judges - accountability 119/1 - immunity 119/2 - relief of office 120/2 - right to request protection 120/3 - prohibition of performance of another office 120/5 - appointment and relief of duty 121/1 - composition of the High Judiciary Council of the Republic 121/3

96

—®
- election of judges of the Constitutional Court 122/1 judges of the Constitutional Court - composition of the court 122/1 - prohibition of performance of other duties 123/1 - immunity 123/2 -relief of office 124 - conditions for the election of judges and termination of office 127/1 judicial office 120/1, 120/2 judicial power - separation of powers 4 - courts 115/1 - Independence 115/2 - jurisdictional disputes 125 judicial review 19/2 jurisdiction 2 / 3 jurisdictional disputes 125 L land 5 2 / 1 land area 2 / 2 language - equality of citizens 14/1 - freedom of use 15/12 - during a state of war 17/2 lakes 2 / 2 large towns 131/4 lawyers - appointment to the High Judiciary Council of the Republic 121/3 - appointment of judges of the Constitutional Court 122/1 lay-assessors 118, 119/1 Latin script - in the Republic 12/1 - in local units 12/2 legal - definitions 17/3 -aid 27 legality 125 legal bail 2 5 / 3 legislative power

97

- separation 4 -holder of 7 0 / 1 - jurisdictional conflicts 125 letter of credence 9 9 / 2 letters of recall 9 9 / 2 liquidity 53/2 lifelong member of the Chamber of Zupanije 73 "Lijepa nasa domovino" 11/3 links with homeland 10/1 localities 129/4 local units 12/2 love of peace 3 local administration and self-government - citizens rights 128/1 - content of rights 128/2 - regulation by law 128/3 - u n i t s 129/1 - organization and responsibilities of bodies 129/2 - management by citizens 129/3 - various forms of local self-government 129/4 - status of units' bodies 130/1 - establishment of local self-government bodies 130/2 - transfer of affairs 130/3 - status of Zupanije 131/1 - responsibilities of Zupanije 131/2 - Zupanija bodies 131/3 - large towns 131/4 M man's freedom 2 2 / 1 man's personality 2 2 / 1 maltreatment 2 3 / 1 market - freedom 4 9 / 1 -value 5 0 / 1 market 4 9 / 2 marriage 6 1 / 2 maritime areas 2 / 3 marital disputes 117/2 medical experiments 2 3 / 1 members of the Government of the Republic of Croatia - appointment 98

- composition of the Government 108 - responsibility 111/2 - vote of confidence 113/7 - passing a vote of no confidence 113/7 members of the High Judiciary Council of the Republic - composition of the Council 121/2 - election 121/3 military - service 4 7 / 1 -secret 117/2 military commanders 100/2 mineral wealth 5 2 / 1 ministers - representatives' questions 86 - composition of the Government 108 ministries 109/2 minorities - equality 15/1 - rights 15/2 minors 1 1 7 / 2 , 6 3 / 5 monetary remuneration 74/2 monopolies 4 9 / 2 moral beliefs 4 7 / 2 motherhood - rights 5 6 / 2 - protection 62 mothers 6 4 / 3 multiparty system 3 N Narodne novine 9 0 / 1 national - hatred 39 - equal rights 3 National Bank of Croatia 53 National Defence Council 100/2 national origin - equality of citizens 14/1 - in a state of war 17/2 natural disasters 17/1 natural wealth - preservaton 2 / 4

99

- protection by the Republic 52/1 nature - conservation 3 - restriction of entrepreneurial freedom and property rights 50/2 - duty to pay attention 6 9 / 3 new agreement of Yugoslav republics 140/1 new elections 9 5 / 4 non-political crimes 3 3 / 1 oath 9 5 / 6 obligatory labour 2 3 / 2 official - use of language and script 12 -secrets 117/2 official gazette 9 0 / 1 ombudsman 93, 9 3 / 1 ombudsman's deputies 9 3 / 3 opinion - competence of the Chamber of Zupanije 81 -of inhabitants 129/1 organization (formation) - political parties 6/2 - defence 7/2 - universities 6 7 / 1 - Chamber of Representatives 7 9 / 1 - Government 109/1 - ministries 109/2 - state administration 114/1 - courts 116/2 - office of public prosecutor 116/3 - Constitutional Court 127/3 - bodies of local self-government units 129/2 - bodies for the performance of specific affairs of state administration 130/3 - Zupanija bodies 131/3 -jurists 122/1 -judges 121/3 ownership - inviolability 3 - obligations 4 8 / 2 - restrictions 5 0 / 1 ownership rights - obligation to contribute to the general good 4 8 / 2

100

- restrictions 5 0 / 2 P pardon 98 parents 63 parts of localities 129/4 parts of the Croatian nation 10/2 party-related duties 96 peaceful assembly 42 penal judgement 30 people - power 1/2 - exercise of power 1/3 - decision-making 2 / 4 - equality 2 / 4 - rights 15/2 permanent prevention 9 7 / 1 personal data - safety and secrecy 3 7 / 1 - prohibition of use 3 7 / 3 pesonal life 35 personal responsibility 111/2 personality 2 2 / 1 petitions 46 physical culture - Republic's care 6 8 / 5 - local self-government 128/2 police - restriction of trade union formation 5 9 / 3 - restriction of the right to strike 60/2 police authorities 3 4 / 4 political opinion 14/1 political parties - freedom of formation 6 / 1 - territorial principle 6/2 - prohibition of association 4 3 / 1 - freedom of association 4 3 / 1 - supervision 125 political relations 2 / 4 possibility of obtaining asylum 3 3 / 1 power - belongs to the people 1/2

101

- mode of exercise 1/3 - separation 4 powers 133/2 presenting the Government 122/1 president of the Constitutional Court 122/2 president of the High Judiciary Council of the Republic 1 2 1 / 2, 121/3 Presidential Council 106 President of the Republic - state of war 17/1 - election 4 5 / 2 , 141/2 - lifelong member of the Chamber of Zupanije 7 1 / 3 - nomination of representatives 7 1 / 4 - dissolution of the Chamber of Representatives 7 7 / 2 - emergency sessions of the Sabor Chambers 78/2 - calling a referendum 87/2 - head of state 9 4 / 1 - general powers 9 4 / 2 - election 95 - prohibition of performance of other duties 96 - temporary assumption of duty 9 7 / 1 - time-limit for the election of a new President 9 7 / 2 - competence 98 - establishment of diplomatic and other representative offices 9 9 / 1 - diplomatic representatives 9 9 / 2 - commander-in-chief 100/1 - National Defence Council 100/2 - proclamation of war and conclusion of peace 100/3 - decrees with the force of law 101 - convening sessions of the Government 102 - information and reports 103 - dissolution of the Chamber of Representatives 104 - impeachability 105, 125 - Presidential Council 106 - responsibility of the Government 111/1 - responsibility 125 - international agreements 132 - procedure for association of the Republic 135/1 - procedure for disassociation of the Republic 135/5 - procedure for the amendment of the Constitution 136 president of the Sabor - chairman of the Chamber of Representatives 7 9 / 5

102

- assumption of duties of the President of the Republic 9 7 / 1 primary schooling 6 5 / 1 prime minister - appointment 98 - counter-signature for dissolution of the Chamber of Representatives 104/1 -responsibility 111/2 - presentation of the Government 112/1 - acceptance of the nomination 112/2 - request for a vote of confidence 113/1 - vote of confidence 113/2 -resignation 113/6. 113/7 principle of the separation of powers 4 principles of the tax system 51/2 private life 117/2 private schools 66 private teaching establishments 66 proceedings - treatment of arrested persons 2 5 / 1 - before courts 116/2 - before the Constitutional Court 127/1 professional duty - President of the Republic 96 -judges of the ConstituUonal Court 123/1 profits 5 3 / 3 programmes of political parties 6 / 3 , 125 prohibition - torture 17/3 - maltreatment 2 3 / 1 - forced labour 2 3 / 2 - foreign accused persons 2 9 / 2 - n e w trial 3 1 / 2 - repetition of criminal proceedings 3 1 / 3 - banishment 3 3 / 2 - use of personal data 3 7 / 3 - censorship 3 8 / 3 - incitement to war 39 - monopolies 4 9 / 2 - lessening rights 4 9 / 4 - employment of children 6 4 / 2 - performance of specific duties 123/1 promulgation of laws 89 property 14/1

103

1
protection - data 3 7 / 2 - constitutional freedoms and rights 125, 127/1 - sovereignty 135/5, 140/2 public - morality 16 - affairs 44 - protest 42 - expenses 5 1 / 1 public apology 2 5 / 4 public bodies 46 public competition 114/2 public duty - President of the Republic 96 -Judges of the Constitutional Court 123/1 public prosecutors - appointment and relief of duty 121/1 - High Judiciary Council of the Republic 121/3 - Constitutional Court of the Republic 122/1 public services 44, 6 0 / 2 public utilities 128/2 publication of laws 9 0 / 1 publicity - sessions of the Sabor Chambers 84 - court hearings 117/1 R race 17/2 racial hatred 39 ratification of international agreements 133/2 real estate 5 2 / 1 referendum - competence of the Chamber of Representatives 80 - competence of the Chamber of Zupanlje 81 - procedure 87 - President of the Republic 98 - constitutionality and legality 125 - association of the Republic 135/3 - time-limit for holding it 135/4 regional development and town planning 128/2 regular sessions of the Sabor Chambers 7 8 / 1 release on ball 2 5 / 3

104

relief of duty - by the Chamber of Representatives 80 - prime minister 98 - military commanders 100/2 - members of the Presidential Council 106 - members of the Government 113/7 -judges 120/2, 120/3, 121/1 - public prosecutors 121/1 -judges of the Constitutional Court 124 religion - equality of citizens 14/1 - state of war 17/2 - free public profession 40 - freedom 40 religious - services 4 1 / 2 - beliefs 4 7 / 2 religious communities 4 1 / 1 , 4 1 / 2 religious hatred 39 repeal - laws 126/2 - regulations 126/2 report of the President of the Republic 103 representative offices 9 9 / 1 representatives 1/3 representatives, see Sabor of the Republic of Croatia representatives' questions 86 representing the Republic 9 4 / 2 republican bodies - supervision 130/1 - decision-making 140/2 republican referendum 125 reputation 35 residence 3 2 / 1 resignation - President of the Republic 9 7 / 1 - prime minister 113/7 resort to violence 39 responsibilities - of the bodies of local self-government units, original 129/2 - of the bodies of local self-government, transferred 130/3 - of Zupanija bodies 131/3

105

responsibility - personal 20 - parents 6 3 / 2 - President of the Republic 105, 125 - Government 111 -judges 119/1 restriction - freedoms and rights 16 - during a state of war 17/1 - liberty 2 2 / 2 - the right of movement 3 2 / 3 - freedom of correspondence 3 6 / 2 - free association 4 3 / 2 - ownership 5 0 / 1 - entrepreneurial freedom 5 0 / 2 - formation of trade unions 5 9 / 3 - the right to strike 6 0 / 2 retroactive effect - decrees 8 8 / 2 - laws 9 0 / 2 returning laws for fresh consideration 81 request for protection 120/3 rights - human 3 - suspected persons 2 9 / 1 - accused persons 2 9 / 1 - arrested persons 2 4 / 2 , 2 4 / 3 right to -life 1 7 / 3 , 2 1 / 1 - appeal 1 8 / 1 . 18/2, 2 4 / 3 - damages 2 5 / 4 - public apology 2 5 / 4 - leave the state territory 3 2 / 3 - move within the Republic 3 2 / 3 - leave the Republic 3 2 / 3 - presence of witnesses at the search 3 4 / 3 - consent by the tenant 3 4 / 3 - correction 3 8 / 4 - peaceful assembly 42 - public protest 42 - free association 4 3 / 1 - public service 44 - public affairs 44

106

^ - submit petitions and complaints 46 - ownership 4 8 / 1 . 4 8 / 3 - inheritance 4 8 / 4 - work 5 4 / 1 - remuneration 5 5 / 1 - annual holidays 5 5 / 3 - social insurance 5 6 / 1 - in connection with childbirth 56/2 - formation of trade unions 5 9 / 1 -strike 6 0 / 1 , 6 0 / 2 - upbringing of children 6 3 / 1 - child care 6 3 / 3 - a healthy life 6 9 / 1 , 6 9 / 2 - propose laws 85 - put questions in the Sabor 86 - local self-government 128/1, 128/2 - institute procedure for the Republic's alliance with other states 135/1 - propose amendment of the Constitution 136 rivers 2 / 2 rule of law 3 rules of procedure - Sabor Chambers 7 9 / 1 , 79/2, 86 - Government 109/1 - Constitutional Court 127/3

Sabor of the Republic of Croatia - decision-making 2 / 4 - state of war 17/1 - suffrage of Croatian citizens abroad 4 5 / 2 - constitutional status 7 0 / 1 - composition 7 0 / 2 - composition of the Chamber of Representatives 7 1 / 1 - composition of the Chamber of Zupanije 71/2, 7 1 / 3 , 71/4 - term of representatives 7 2 / 1 - prohibition of membership in both Chambers 7 2 / 2 - election of representatives 7 2 / 3 - time-limits for elections for representatives 7 3 / 1 - first session 73/2

107

- no imperative mandate 7 4 / 1 - renumeratlon and other rights of representatives 74/2 - Immunity of representatives 75 - extension of the term of representatives 76 - dissolution of the Chambers 77 - regular sessions 7 8 / 1 - emergency sessions 7 8 / 2 - rules of procedure 7 9 / 1 . 79/2 - chairmen 7 9 / 3 . 79/4, 7 9 / 5 - competence of the Chamber of Representatives 89 - competence of the Chamber of Zupanlje 81 - decision-making 8 2 / 1 - passing laws by a two-thirds majority vote 8 3 / 1 - passing laws by a majority vote of all representatives 83/2 - public sessions 84 - right to propose laws 85 - representatives' questions 86 - referendum 87 - decrees based on statutory authority 88 - promulgation of laws 89 - publication of laws 9 0 / 1 - coming Into force of laws 9 0 / 2 - state budget 9 1 / 1 - financial funds 9 1 / 2 - inquiry commissions 92 - ombudsman 93 - proclamation of war and conclusion of peace 100/3 - information and reports by the President of the Republic 103 - enforcement of laws and other regulations enacted by It 110 - responsibility of the Government 111/1 - protection of judges in proceedings for their relief 120/3 - association of the Republic 135/2 - disassociation (secession) of the Republic 135/5 - decision of the Sabor on the Republic's membership in theSFRY 140/1 - promulgation of the Constitution 141/1 - elections 141/2 scientific experiments 2 3 / 1 script 15/2 scientific creativity 68

108

schools - religious 4 1 / 2 - private 66 sea - Republic's sovereignty 2/2 - natural resources 52/1 seabed and subsoil thereof 2 / 3 search 34 seashore 5 2 / 1 secondary education 6 5 / 2 secrecy - correspondence 3 6 / 1 - personal data 37/1 secret ballot - realization of suffrage 45/1 - election of representatives to the Chamber of Representatives 71/1 - election of representatives to the Chamber of Zupanlje 7 1 / 2 - election of the President of the Republic 9 5 / 1 security - Republic's defence 117/2 - (safety) personal data 37/1 - of the Republic 3 6 / 2 , 5 0 / 2 services (office) - Government 109/2 - prohibition of performance 120/5 settlement 3 2 / 2 sex 14/1. 17/2 SFRY 140/1 social - state 1/1 - justice 3 - security 5 6 / 1 - welfare 128/2 - institutions 4 1 / 2 - welfare 4 9 / 3 - security 5 6 / 1 - origin 14/1. 17/2 social status 14/1 solemn oath 9 5 / 6 sovereign rights 2 / 3 sovereignty

109

-inalienability 2 / 1 - encompassment 2 / 2 - protection 7/1 - disassociation (secession) 135/5 - decisions necessary for protection 140/2 spiritual national values 6 8 / 3 stateless persons 3 3 / 1 state revenues 9 1 / 1 state symbols 11/4 strike -right to 6 0 / 1 - restriction of the right 6 0 / 2 suffrage - who has it 4 5 / 1 - citizens abroad 4 5 / 2 - elections for the Chamber of Representatives 7 1 / 1 - elections for the Chamber of Zupanije 7 1 / 2 - election of the President of the Republic 9 5 / 1 supervision - work of the Government 80 - bodies of local self-government units 130/1 Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia 115/1 suspected persons 2 9 / 1 sport - promotion by the Republic 6 8 / 5 - local self-government 128/2 state administration - individual acts 19/1 - restriction of the right to strike 6 0 / 2 - organization 114/1 - employees 114/2 - establishment of local bodies 130/2 - transfer to local bodies 130/3 state budget - National Bank of Croatia 5 3 / 3 - adoption 80 - revenues and expenditures 9 1 / 1 - non-approval 104/1 - proposition 110 state expenditures 9 1 / 1 state of war - restriction of constitutional rights 17/1 - decrees with the force of law 101/1

110

T tax system 5 1 / 2 teaching establishments - religious 4 1 / 2 - private 66 technical culture 128/2 termination of - citizenship 9 / 1 -office 127/1 territorial - sea 2 / 2 - principle 6/2 territorial integrity - political parties 6 / 3 - armed forces 7 / 1 - restriction of the right to free association 4 3 / 2 things 5 2 / 1 town planning 128/2 trade unions 4 3 / 1 , 59 transfer 120/4 two-thirds majority - laws which regulate national rights 8 3 / 1 - international agreements 133/2 - association of the Republic 135/2 - disassociation (secession) of the Republic 135/5 - amending the Constitution 138

unconstitutionality - laws 126/1 - other regulations 126/2 unequal position of Croatia 140/2 uniform application of laws 116/1 unity of the Republic - unitary state 1/1 - political parties 6 / 3 - state of war 17/1 - restriction of the right to free association 4 3 / 2 - President of the Republic 9 4 / 2 university - autonomy 6 7 / 1

111

- organization and work 6 7 / 2 university professors - High Judiciary Council of the Republic 121/3 - Constitutional Court 122/1 unprovided-for citizens 5 7 / 1 untransferability of sovereignty 2 / 1 unworthiness 120/2 upbringing of children 6 3 / 1 V vice-chairmen of the Sabor Chambers 7 9 / 3 vice-premiers 98, 108, 111/2 violence 39 vocations and occupations 5 4 / 2 vote of confidence in the Government - asking for 112, 113 vote of no confidence in the Government - dissolution of the Chamber of Representatives 104/1 - voting procedure 113 voting - by representatives personally 82/2 - vote of confidence in the Government 112/1 voting personally 8 2 / 2

W
warrant - for arrest 2 4 / 1 - for search 3 4 / 2 waters 5 2 / 1 weekly rest 5 5 / 3 witnesses 3 4 / 3 . 3 4 / 5 working bodies 85 working hours 5 5 / 2 work places 5 4 / 2 Y Yugoslav republics 140 young people - protection by the Republic 62

112

- protection at work 6 4 / 3 Z Zagreb 1 3 / 1 , 13/2 Z Zupanije - election of representatives 7 1 / 2 - units of local administration and self-government 131/1 - a r e a s 131/1 - organization and responsibilities 131/2 - large towns 131/4 Zupanije bodies 131/3

113

Contents
Foreword Speech made by dr. Franjo Tudman, President of the Republic of Croatia, at the promulgation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia: We stand before a great historic test Decision on the Promulgation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia Constitution of the Republic of Croatia Decision on the Promulgation of the Constitutional Act for the Implentation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia Constitutional Act for the Implentation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia Decision on the Promulgation of the Constituional Act supplementing the Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia Constitutional Act Supplementing the Constitutional Act for the Implementation of the Constitutional of the Republic of Croatia Index 5

7 27 29

73 75

79 81 83

115

Collection of the French, English and German translations of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia Prepared by: Dr. Ljubomir Valkovi£ Publisher: Sabor Republike Hrvatske Printed by: Multigraf - Zagreb, Repro studio - Zagreb Photographic editor: Zoran Filipovic Technical editor: HinkoBohr French translation: Dr. Zlatan Stipkovi6, Dr. Smiljko Sokol, Francoise Kveder, Herve Boudin English translation: Dr. Marko Pavicic, Dr. Sonia Wild Bi£anic, Dr. Branko Smerdel, Dr. Zeljko Bujas German translation: Irena Kozaric, Dr. Zlatan_Stipkovi£, Ivan Lovri£, Ratimir Skunca

117

