Title: Date Adopted: Date Published: Country: Copyright: Source: Translation Type: Translator:

The Constitution of the Transition of the Democratic Republic of the Congo: April 4, 2003 04/04/2003 04/05/2003 Congo, Democratic Republic of the Oceana Publications, Inc. Protestant Center for Publishing and Broadcasting (Centre Protestant d'Editions et de Diffusion - CEDI) Proprietary Marc R. Bouchacourt

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE TRANSITION OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, 2003 Table of Contents PREAMBLE TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS TITLE II THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY Chapter I The State Chapter II Sovereignty TITLE III PUBLIC LIBERTIES, FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS TITLE IV THE ORGANIZATION AND THE EXERCISE OF POWER Chapter I The Institutions of the Republic Section I The Executive Power Paragraph I The President of the Republic Paragraph II The Presidency of the Republic Paragraph III The Vice-Presidents of the Republic Paragraph IV The Government

1

Section II The Legislative Power Paragraph I The National Assembly Paragraph II The Senate Section III The Relationship between the Executive Power and the Legislative Power Section IV Incompatibilities and Immunities Section V The Judicial Power Chapter II The Institutions Supporting Democracy Chapter III Public Finance Section I General Provisions Section II The Court of the Audit Section III The Central Bank of the Congo Chapter IV The National Police and Armed Forces Section I The National Police Section II The Armed Forces Section III The High Council of Defense TITLE V INTERNATIONAL TREATIES AND AGREEMENTS TITLE VI FINAL AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

JOURNEL OFICIEL OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO Cabinet of the President of the Republic CONSTITUTION OF THE TRANSITION The Plenary Session of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue has enacted, The President of the Republic promulgates the Constitution of the Transition the terms of which follow:

2

PREAMBLE WE, DELEGATES OF THE COMPONENTS AND ENTITIES OF THE INTERCONGOLESE DIALOGUE, MEETING in Plenary Session; HAVING KNOWLEDGE of the cultural and spiritual values deeply rooted in the traditions of solidarity and justice of the Congolese People, and aware of the cultural diversity which is a factor of spiritual enrichment of our People’s personality; DEEPLY dedicated to the construction of a single harmoniously integrated Nation and to the strengthening of the national unity in order to give a real soul to our State; CONVINCED that only the values of equality, justice, freedom, democratic tolerance and social solidarity can found an integrated, fraternal, prosperous Nation, master of its destiny in History; DETERMINED to build a lasting State of Law based on political pluralism, the separation of powers between the executive, legislative and judicial, the participation of citizens in the exercising of power, the control of governors by those governed, transparency in the management of public affairs, the subordination of the military Authority to the civil Authority, the protection of people and their assets, full spiritual and moral development of each Congolese citizen, as well as the harmonious development of the national community; REAFFIRMING solemnly our attachment to principles of democracy and Human rights as defined by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of December 10, 1948, to the African Charter of Human and People’s Rights adopted on June 18, 1981, as well as to all international and regional legal instruments adopted within the framework of the United Nations Organization and of the African Union Organization, duly ratified by the Democratic Republic of the Congo; DETERMINED to guarantee the fundamental rights and freedoms of Congolese citizens and, in particular, to defend those of women and children; RENEWING our attachment to the United Nations Organization and the African Union; ENDEAVORING to guarantee a peaceful transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo operating according to the principles of consensus, inclusiveness and non-conflict and based on a distribution, as fair as possible, of different Government responsibilities between the Components and Entities of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue, an appropriate representation of the Provinces and of the different political tendencies and, in particular,

3

effective participation of women at all levels of responsibility, taking into account criteria of competence, credibility and integrity, in a spirit of national reconciliation; REITERATING our commitment to take advantage of the transition period to establish, in peace and harmony, a new political order in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular democratic institutions with a view to good governance of the country, as well as the creation of a national army, restructured and integrated; LOYAL to the relevant resolutions of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue of Sun City (Republic of South Africa) from February 25 to April 12, 2002, and to the Global and Inclusive Agreement on the Transition into a Democratic Republic of the Congo signed in Pretoria on December 17, 2002 and adopted in Sun City on April 1, 2003. SOLEMNLY APPROVE AND ADOPT THIS CONSTITUTION OF THE TRANSITION TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 The Constitution of the Transition of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is drafted on the basis of the global and inclusive Agreement on the Transition into a Democratic Republic of the Congo. The global and inclusive Agreement and the Constitution constitute the only source of power during the transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During the Transition period, all powers are established and exercised in a manner determined by the global and inclusive Agreement as well as this Constitution. Article 2 The Constitution of the Transition guarantees the inviolability of fundamental rights and liberties of the human person. Any law which is not in accordance with this Constitution, when the non-accordance has been established by the Supreme Court of Justice, is null and void (non avenue). Article 3 Every Congolese has the sacred right and duty to defend the nation and its territorial integrity and to defeat any individual or group of individuals taking over power by force or exercising it in violation of the provisions of this Constitution.

4

No one may divert the attributes of power and public authority (puissance publique) for personal needs in the carrying out of partisan interests or to facilitate interference of an institution or public service in the functioning of another institution or public service. TITLE II THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY Chapter I The State Article 4 The Democratic Republic of the Congo, within its borders of June 30, 1960, is an independent, sovereign, indivisible, democratic, social and secular State. Its emblem is a sky-blue flag with a large yellow star in its center and six small yellow stars all of same size and lined up longitudinally along the side of the flagpole. Its national anthem is “Debout Congolais.” Its motto is “Democracy, Justice, Unity.” Its currency is the “Congolese Franc.” Its coat of arms is composed of a lion’s head framed by two laurel branches and crossed hands in the center. Its national languages are: Kikongo, Lingala, Swahili and Tshiluba. Its official language is French. Article 5 The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a unitary decentralized State. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is composed of the City of Kinshasa and ten Provinces with juridical personality (doteés). These Provinces are: Bandundu, LowerCongo, Equator, West-Kasaï, East-Kasaï, Katanga, Maniema, North-Kivu, West Province, South-Kivu. The City of Kinshasa, within its current limits, is the capital city of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The organization and the functioning of the City of Kinshasa and the Provinces as well as the division of competences between the State and the Provinces shall be determined by an organic law to be passed during the first session of the National Assembly and Senate.

5

Article 6 No one may interfere with the integrity of the territory, the national unity and the sovereignty of the Congolese State. All the central, provincial and local authorities have the duty to safeguard the integrity of the Republic, sovereignty and national unity, subject to treason or high treason, depending on the case. Article 7 The State shall see to the harmonious development of all decentralized entities on the basis of national solidarity through an effective implementation of the mechanisms of administrative and financial autonomy as provided by the law. Article 8 The Provinces and the authorities dependent on them shall respect the Constitution of the Transition as well as the laws and regulations enacted by the Central Power in accordance with this Constitution. Article 9 The soil and subsoil belong to the State. The conditions of their concession are set by the law, which has to protect the local populations’ interests. Chapter II Sovereignty Article 10 National sovereignty belongs to the people. All power emanates from the people, who exercise it directly by means of referendum or elections and indirectly by means of their representatives. No individual or group of people may take upon itself to exercise sovereignty. The law establishes the conditions for the organization of elections and referendum. Suffrage is universal, equal and secret. It shall be direct or indirect. Voters are, according to the conditions determined by the law, all Congolese nationals of either gender, over the age of eighteen (18) and enjoying their civil and political rights. Article 11

6

Political pluralism is recognized in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Every Congolese has the right to create a political party or become a member of the party of his choice. Political parties contribute to the expression of suffrage, the formation of national conscience and civic education. They form and freely exercise their activities while respecting the law, public order and morality. Political parties shall respect the principles of pluralistic democracy and national unity and sovereignty. No one shall establish, in any form whatsoever, a single party on all or part of the national territory. The creation of a single party constitutes a crime of high treason punishable by law. Article 12 Political parties may receive public funds from the State to finance their electoral campaigns or their activities, under the conditions set by law. Article 13 Political opposition is recognized in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The rights concerning its existence, activities and struggle for a democratic takeover of power shall be sacred. The status, rights and duties of the political opposition are fixed by an organic law. Article 14 All ethnic groups and nationalities, which make up the people and territory of what has become the Congo (currently the Democratic Republic of the Congo) upon independence, shall enjoy equal rights and protection under the law as citizens. Congolese nationality is unique and exclusive. It may not be held concurrently with another nationality. An organic law shall set the conditions of recognition, acquisition, loss and recovery of the Congolese nationality. TITLE III PUBLIC LIBERTIES, FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS Article 15

7

The human person is sacred. The State has the obligation to respect and protect it. Every person has a right to life and to physical integrity. No one can be submitted to torture or to other forms of inhumane, cruel or degrading treatment. No one can be deprived of life or liberty except in cases fixed by law and according to the forms stipulated by such law. Article 16 The Democratic Republic of the Congo guarantees the exercising of individual and collective rights and freedom, including the freedom of movement, enterprise, information, association, and the freedom to meet, of procession, and demonstration, subject to the respecting of the law, public order and morality. Article 17 All Congolese are equal before the law and have a right to equal protection of laws. No Congolese may, in matters of education and access to public functions or in any other matter, be subject to a discriminatory measure, irrespective of whether it results from the law or an act of the executive power, for reasons of his religion, sex, family origin, social condition, residence, opinions or political convictions, or of his belonging to a race, ethnic group, tribe, cultural or linguistic minority. Article 18 Every person has a right to free development of his personality, without prejudice to the rights of others, public order and morality. No one may be subject to slavery, servitude of any similar condition. No one may be compelled to forced or mandatory labor, except in cases stipulated by law. Article 19 Individual freedom is inviolable and guaranteed by law. No one can be prosecuted, arrested or detained other than by virtue of the law and in the form it prescribes.

8

No one shall be prosecuted for an act or an omission that does not constitute a breach of the law at the time it was committed and at the time of the prosecution. Every person accused of an infraction shall be presumed innocent until his culpability has been established by a definitive judgment. Article 20 Any person arrested must be immediately informed or at the latest within twenty-four hours of the reasons for his arrest and of any charge held against him, in a language understood by this person. Such person must be immediately informed of his rights. The person kept in custody has the right to immediately contact his family and counsel. Police custody may not exceed forty-eight hours. Upon expiration of this period of time, the person kept in custody must be released or placed in the hands of the competent judicial authority. Every prisoner shall benefit from a treatment that preserves his life, his physical and mental health as well as his dignity. Article 21 Every person deprived of his freedom by arrest or detention has the right to recourse before a court that shall rule on the legality of the detention without undue delay and shall order the person’s release if the detention is illegal. The person who is the victim of an illegal arrest or detention has the right to a just and equitable compensation for the damage suffered. Every person has the right to defend himself alone or by means of a lawyer or legal counsel of his choice. Every prosecuted person has the right to demand to be heard in the presence of a lawyer of legal counsel of his choice, at any stage during the criminal procedure, including the police investigation and the pre-jurisdictional examination. Article 22 No one can be removed against his will from the judge assigned to his case by law. Every person has the right to have his case equitably heard within the legal period of time by a competent and legally established jurisdiction. Article 23

9

The hearings before civil and military courts are public, unless such publicity is deemed to be dangerous for the public order and morality. In such case, the court shall order the case to be heard in camera. Article 24 Every judgment is pronounced in public hearing. It is written and motivated [(substantiated)] (motivé). The right to appeal a judgment is guaranteed to all, in accordance with the law. No punishment may be pronounced or applied if it is not by virtue of the law. No stronger sentence than the one applicable at the time the infraction was committed may be inflicted. If a new law provides for a lesser sentence than the one provided by the law that was applicable at the time the infraction was committed, then the judge shall apply the lesser sentence. The sentence is individual. It may only be applied against the convicted person. The law determines the grounds for justification, pardon or non-liability. Article 25 No one shall be obliged to execute an order that is clearly illegal, in particular when such order constitutes an infringement of the fundamental rights and freedom of the human person. The burden of proof of the order’s manifest illegality is incumbent on the person who refuses to follow such order. Article 26 In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there is no religion of the State. Every person has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. Every person has the right to express his religion or convictions, alone or jointly, whether in public or in private, by worship, teaching, practice, carrying out of rites and the state of religious life, under the condition that the law, public order and morality are respected. The law sets the conditions of creation (constitution) of religious organizations. Article 27

10

Every person has the right to freedom of expression. This right implies the freedom to express one’s opinions and feelings, in particular by speech, in print and by image, under the condition that the rights of others, public order and morality are respected. Article 28 The freedom of the press is guaranteed. The law sets the modalities of its exercising. However, the law may restrict the exercise of the freedom of the press only in order to safeguard public order, morality as well as the respect for the rights of others. Article 29 Every person has the right to information. Freedom of information and broadcast by radio, television, written press or any other means of communication is guaranteed. State audiovisual and written media are public services the access to which is guaranteed in an equitable way to all political and social movements. The law sets the status of State media and guarantees their objectivity, impartiality and plurality of opinions in information processing and distribution. Article 30 The freedom of assembly and peaceful demonstration are guaranteed subject to the respecting of public order. Every person has the right to take part in an assembly or demonstration and no one can be compelled to do so. The law sets the rules for the application of this provision. Article 31 Every Congolese has the right to submit, individually or collectively, a peaceful petition to the public authority. No one can be made the object of discrimination for having initiated such a petition. Article 32

11

The Domicile is inviolable. Police visits or searches may only be carried out according to the methods and conditions provided by the law. Article 33 No Congolese may be deported from the Republic’s territory. No Congolese may be compelled, for political, ethnic or any other reasons, to go into exile or to reside out of his usual place of residence. Every Congolese has the right to circulate freely all over the Republic’s territory, and to reside there, to leave it and to come back to it. The exercising of this right may only be limited by virtue of the law. All Congolese enjoy the same rights irrespective of the place where they reside on the national territory. Article 34 Every person has the right to have his privacy, the secrecy of correspondence, telecommunication or any other form of communication respected. This right may only be infringed in cases envisaged by the law. Article 35 The right of sanctuary is recognized. The Republic accords, subject to national security, sanctuary on its territory to foreigners prosecuted or persecuted due in particular to their opinions, beliefs, their allegiance to a racial, tribal, ethnic, linguistic group or their action in favor of democracy and the defense of Human and People’s rights, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. It is forbidden for any person legally enjoying a right of sanctuary to undertake a subversive activity against their country of origin or against any other country from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The law sets the rules for exercising this right. Article 36 Private property is sacred. The State guarantees the right to personal or collective property acquired in accordance with the law and usage.

12

The State encourages and ensures the security of private national and foreign investments. Article 37 Expropriation for reasons of general interest or public utility may only take place in accordance with a law providing for prior payment of equitable compensation. No one’s assets may be seized except by virtue of a decision made by a competent judicial authority. Article 38 The exercising of art, business and industry, as well as the free movement of goods is guaranteed throughout the entire territory of the Republic, according to conditions set by law. Article 39 Work is a sacred right and duty for every Congolese. The State guarantees the right to work, to a protection against unemployment and an equitable and satisfactory remuneration ensuring the worker and his family of a humanely dignified existence, together with other (lese) means of social protection. No one may be discriminated against in his work due to one’s origins, gender, opinions or belief. Every Congolese has the right and duty to contribute through his work to national construction and prosperity. The law establishes the status of workers and regulates details pertaining to the legal regime of professions and the exercising of professions requiring a scholastic or academic qualification. The internal structures and functioning of professional organizations must be democratic. Article 40 The right to create organizations is guaranteed. The public authorities collaborate with national private organizations that contribute to the social, economic, intellectual, cultural, moral and spiritual development of populations and to the education of male and female citizens. This collaboration may be refurbished by means of subsidies.

13

The law shall set the modalities for exercising this right. Article 41 The right to unionize is recognized in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All Congolese have the right to form or become affiliated to trade unions, companies or other organizations to promote their well being and to ensure the defense of their social, economic and cultural interests, according to the conditions set by law. However, members of the armed forces, police forces and security services may not form nor become affiliated to trade unions. Article 42 The right to strike is recognized and guaranteed. It shall be exercised according to the conditions set by the law, which may forbid or limit its exercising in areas of national defense, security or for all public services or activities of vital interest to the community. Article 43 Every person has the right to get married to the person of his choice, of the opposite sex, and to create a family. The family, basic cell of the human community, is organized so as to ensure its unity and stability. It is placed under the special protection of public authorities. For parents, the care and education to be given to their children constitute a natural right and duty that they shall exercise under the supervision and with the assistance of public authorities. Children have the right to assist their parents. The law sets the rules on marriage and organization of the family. Article 44 Every child has the right to know the names of his father and mother. Every child has the right to enjoy the protection of his family, society and public authorities.

14

The State has the obligation to protect children against prostitution, procuring, homosexuality, incest, pedophilia, sexual harassment and any other form of sexual perversion. Article 45 The public authorities have the obligation to protect the youth against any attack on their health, education and moral development. Youth organizations play an educational role. The public authorities are obligated to give them their support. Article 46 Every Congolese has a right to education. It shall be provided by national education. National education shall include public and approved private establishments. An organic law shall set the conditions of its creation and functioning. Parents, by priority, have the right to choose the type of education to be given to their children. Education is obligatory until the level of studies and age set by law. Article 47 Education is free. However, it remains under the supervision of public authorities (pouvoirs), according to conditions set by law. The public authorities have the duty to promote and ensure, through teaching, education and distribution, the respect of Human rights, fundamental liberties and citizen’s duties stated in this Constitution. The State has the duty to ensure the spreading and teaching of the Constitution, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the African Charter on People’s and Human Rights as well as all the duly ratified regional and international instruments on Human rights and international humanitarian law. The State has the obligation to include the human person’s rights in all training programs of the armed forces, police and security services. The law determines the conditions for the application of this article.

15

Article 48 Eradication of illiteracy is a national duty for the realization of which all national potentials and resources must be mobilized. Article 49 The right to culture, the freedom of intellectual and artistic creation, as well as the freedom of scientific and technological research are guaranteed to citizens, under the condition that the law, public order and morality are respected. The State shall take into account, while fulfilling its duties, the country’s cultural diversity. The law guarantees copyright and royalties. The State protects the national cultural heritage. Article 50 The State has the obligation to ensure consumers’ sanitary well being and food security. The law sets the fundamental principles and rules of organization for public health (sécurité alimentaire) and food security. Article 51 The State has the duty to see that all forms of discrimination against women be eliminated and to ensure respect and promotion of women’s rights. The State has the obligation to take all appropriate measures in all areas, in particular in economic, social and cultural sectors, to ensure full participation of women in the nation’s development. The State shall take measures to fight against all forms of violence against women in public and private life. Women have the right to a significant representation in national, provincial and local institutions. Article 52 Seniors, handicapped people and invalid people have the right to special measures of protection proportionate to their physical, intellectual and moral needs. Article 53

16

All Congolese have the right to peace and safety. No portion of the national territory may be used as starting base for subversive or terrorist activities directed against any other State. Article 54 Every Congolese shall have the right to a healthy environment that is favorable to his development. Public authorities and citizens shall have the duty to ensure the environment’s protection according to conditions set by law. Article 55 Every Congolese shall have the right to enjoy national wealth. The State shall have the duty to redistribute it equitably and to guarantee the right to development. Article 56 Every Congolese shall have the right to enjoy the common heritage of humanity. The State shall have the duty to facilitate its enjoyment. Article 57 The State shall protect the rights and interests of Congolese abroad. Article 58 Subject to reciprocity, every foreigner who is legally present on the national territory shall benefit from the same rights and liberties as Congolese, with the exception of political rights. He shall benefit from protection granted to people and their goods according to conditions set by the laws and treaties. He shall comply with the Republic’s laws and regulations. Article 59 Every Congolese shall loyally fulfill his obligations with regards to the nation as a community. He shall have the duty to pay his taxes and fulfill his social obligations.

17

Article 60 Every Congolese shall have the duty to respect and treat his fellow citizens without any discrimination and to maintain with them relations that facilitate the promotion, safeguarding and reinforcement of national unity and mutual respect and tolerance. Furthermore, he shall have the duty to preserve and reinforce national solidarity. Article 61 The respect of human rights and fundamental liberties established in this Constitution is incumbent upon all citizens and public authorities. Article 62 The exercise of human rights and fundamental liberties established by this Constitution may only be suspended in cases specified herein. Article 63 Every person has the obligation to respect this Constitution and to comply with the Republic’s laws. TITLE IV THE ORGANIZATION AND THE EXERCISE OF POWER Chapter I The Institutions of the Republic Article 64 The political institutions of the transition are:
• • • • •

the President of the Republic, the Government, the National Assembly, the Senate, Courts and Tribunals.

Section I The Executive Power Paragraph I The President of the Republic Article 65

18

The President of the Republic in office at the time of the Transition Constitution’s promulgation shall remain in office for the whole duration of the transition period, subject to the application of the provisions of Article 66 of this Constitution. Article 66 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Constitution, the duties of the President of the Republic shall end upon his resignation; death; definitive incapacity; or his conviction for high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation or corruption. Once the Supreme Court of Justice, called upon by the Government, has ascertained the vacancy, the Vice-President who belongs to the same Component (Composante) as the President of the Republic, ensures [(shall stand in for)] the interim. The said Component shall present to the National Assembly the substitute for the President of the Republic, for ratification within seven days. If the National Assembly is not in session, an extraordinary session shall be immediately convened for this purpose, in accordance with Article 115 of this Constitution. Article 67 The President of the Republic shall take the oath before the Supreme Court of Justice during a public hearing. The oath shall be taken as follows: “I, ………, President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, appointed in conformity with the Global and Inclusive Agreement and the Constitution of the Transition, solemnly swear before the Congolese Nation: to scrupulously respect and defend the spirit and letter of the Global and Inclusive Agreement, the Constitution of the Transition and the Republic’s laws; to devote all my strength to defend the constitutional institutions, the territorial integrity and the national independence; to safeguard national unity; to loyally fulfill, as a faithful servant of the People, the high duties that have been entrusted to me.” Article 68 The President of the Republic is the Head of the State. He represents the Nation. He shall ensure the respect of the Constitution of the Transition.

19

He guarantees the national independence, the national territory’s integrity and the national sovereignty. Article 69 The President of the Republic convenes and chairs the Council of Ministers at least once every 15 days. Article 70 The President of the Republic promulgates laws according to the conditions set in articles 129 and 132 of this Constitution. Article 71 The President of the Republic ensures the execution of the laws and exercises regulatory power by means of decrees deliberated in the Council of Ministers. Article 72 The President of the Republic is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. He presides over the High Council of Defense. He names, dismisses and, if need be, revokes army and police officers, after deliberation with the High Council of Defense and pursuant to Article 187 of this Constitution. Article 73 In conformity with the provisions of Article 134 of this Constitution, the President of the Republic declares war following the decision of the Council of Ministers, with the approval of the High Council of Defense and the authorization of the National Assembly and the Senate. Article 74 In accordance with the provisions of Articles 135 and 136 of this Constitution, the President of the Republic proclaims a state of siege and a state of emergency following the decision of the Council of Ministers and, with the approval of the High Council of Defense, the National Assembly and the Senate. Article 75 The President of the Republic appoints Ambassadors and Extraordinary Envoys to foreign States and international organizations.

20

Ambassadors as well as Extraordinary Envoys to foreign States and international organizations are accredited to him. Article 76 In conformity with the provisions of the Global and Inclusive Agreement and its Appendices, the President of the Republic shall name:
• • • • • •

the State’s Senior civil servants, the Province Governors and Vice-Governors, the Central Bank Governor and Vice-Governor, the Ambassadors and Extraordinary Envoys, the members of the High Council of the Judiciary (Conseil supérieur de la magistrature), The State’s representatives before public and semi-public establishments.

The President of the Republic shall discuss the subjects mentioned in the first and fourth points of this article with the Vice-Presidents. The President of the Republic shall consult the Government on the implementation of the subjects mentioned in the first and fourth points of this article. Article 77 Upon proposal from the High Council of the Judiciary, the President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss judges and public prosecutors, after having informed the Government. Article 78 The President of the Republic has the right to pardon. He may postpone, commute and reduce sentences after having informed the Government. He exercises such prerogatives according to the conditions defined by law. Article 79 The President of the Republic shall confer grades regarding national Orders and award decorations in accordance with the law. Paragraph II The Presidency of the Republic Article 80

21

The Presidency of the Republic shall be composed of the President of the Republic and four Vice-Presidents. The President of the Republic ensures, with the Vice-Presidents, a necessary and exemplary leadership in the interest of the national unity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Article 81 The President of the Republic, with the Vice-Presidents, deals with all questions regarding the Government’s management. Article 82 The President of the Republic holds restricted meetings with the Vice-Presidents to discuss all matters concerning the conduct of the Government. Meetings between the President and the Vice-Presidents shall be held regularly, at least once every two weeks and, in every case, before each meeting of the Council of Ministers. Meetings between the President and the Vice-Presidents shall be convened by the President of the Republic, on his own initiative or upon request from a Vice-President. In case of temporary impediment, the meetings shall be chaired, taking turns by a VicePresident designated by the President of the Republic. Paragraph III The Vice-Presidents of the Republic Article 83 Four posts of Vice-President of the Republic are created. Vice-Presidents shall respectively come from (sont issus) the following Components: Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Congolese Rally for Democracy (Rassemblement Congolais pour la Démocratie) (RCD), the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo (Mouvement de Libération du Congo) (MLC) and the political Opposition. Article 84 Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 197 of this Constitution, the functions of a Vice-President shall end upon his resignation; death; definitive incapacity; or his conviction for high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation or corruption.

22

In case of termination of duties, the Vice President’s Component shall present to the National Assembly the substitute for the Vice-President, for ratification within seven days. If the National Assembly is not in session, an extraordinary session shall be immediately convened for that purpose, in accordance with article 115 of this Constitution. Article 85 Before taking up his duties, each Vice-President shall take the oath before the Supreme Court of Justice in a public hearing. The oath shall be taken as follows: “I, ………, Vice-President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, appointed in accordance with the Global and Inclusive Agreement and the Constitution of the Transition, solemnly swear before the Congolese Nation: to scrupulously respect and defend the spirit and letter of the Global and Inclusive Agreement, the Constitution of the Transition and the Republic’s laws; to devote all my strength to defend the Republic’s institutions and to preserve the Nation’s unity and indivisibility; to loyally fulfill, as a faithful servant of the People, the high duties that have been entrusted to me.” Article 86 In accordance with the Global and Inclusive Agreement, each Vice-President shall be responsible for one of the four governmental Commissions, hereby established: 1. The Political, Defense and Security Commission, chaired by the RCD Component; 2. The Economic and Financial Commission, chaired by the MLC Component; 3. The Reconstruction and Development Commission, chaired by the Governmental Component; 4. The Social and cultural Commission chaired by the political Opposition Component. Article 87 The Vice-Presidents shall convene and chair the meetings of their Commission. They shall present the reports of their Commission to the Council of Ministers.

23

They shall coordinate and supervise the implementation of the decisions of the Council of Ministers regarding their respective Commission. Article 88 Vice-Presidents shall suggest to the President of the Republic the grades in the national orders and the decorations, in conformity with the law. Paragraph IV The Government Article 89 The Government is composed of the President of the Republic, Vice-Presidents, Ministers and Vice-Ministers. The President of the Republic appoints the Ministers and Vice-Ministers upon recommendation from the Components and Entities of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue. Ministerial portfolios are shared between the Components and Entities of the InterCongolese Dialogue, according to the conditions and criteria set in Appendix I A of the Global and Inclusive Agreement. The duties of Minister and Vice-Minister end upon his resignation; death; definitive incapacity; his conviction for high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation, corruption; or dismissal upon suggestion of his Component or Entity. The vacancy is filled according to the conditions set in the second paragraph of this article. Article 90 During their office, members of the Government cannot purchase or rent, whether directly or indirectly, anything whatsoever that is owned by the State. At the beginning and end of their duties, they are required to provide to the National Assembly a written declaration on their honor of all their assets. Article 91 Ministers are responsible for the ministerial departments that have been entrusted to them. They shall implement, through decrees, the program fixed, and decisions made, by the Government. Article 92

24

In accordance with the provisions of Article 69 of this Constitution, the meetings of the Government as the Council of Ministers are chaired by the President of the Republic. In case of temporary impediment, the meetings shall be chaired, taking turns by a VicePresident designated by the President of the Republic. Article 93 The Government determines and conducts the Nation’s policy, in accordance with the Resolutions of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue. Article 94 The Government shall implement the laws of the Republic and the decrees of the President of the Republic. The Government has at its disposal the public administration, armed forces and national police as well as civil security and civil protection services. A decree deliberated in the Council of Ministers sets the Government’s organization and operation, as well as the practical rules of collaboration between the President of the Republic, the Vice-Presidents and the Government. Article 95 The Government is fully responsible for the management of the State and shall be held accountable by the National Assembly according to the conditions set by this Constitution. However, during the transition period, the National Assembly may not overthrow the Government either by rejecting a vote of confidence or the adoption of a motion of censure. Article 96 A Secretariat-General to the Government assists the President and the Vice-Presidents in the coordination of the governmental action. The Secretariat-General prepares the meetings, the work and all the files that are going to be the subject of consultations between the President of the Republic and the VicePresidents as well as at the Council of Ministers level. Section II The Legislative Power Article 97

25

The legislative power is exercised by the National Assembly and the Senate according to the conditions set by this Constitution. Paragraph I The National Assembly Article 98 Without prejudice to its other prerogatives acknowledged by this Constitution, the National Assembly:
• • • •

votes laws; controls the Government, public corporations, public establishments and services; controls the implementation of the Resolutions of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue; adopts the project of Constitution to be submitted to referendum.

Article 99 The National Assembly includes 500 members designated by the Components and Entities of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue according to the conditions set in Appendix I B of the Global and Inclusive Agreement. All the Components and Entities ensure a balanced provincial representation and, at the same time, a significant presence of women in the National Assembly. Only Congolese of at least 25 years of age at the time of their designation may be members of the National Assembly. Article 100 Members of the National Assembly have the title of Deputy. Their mandate is national. Deputies shall be appointed for the entire duration of the transition. Notwithstanding the provisions of the second paragraph of this article, a Deputy’s mandate may end upon his death; resignation; definitive incapacity; incompatibility or criminal conviction. The replacement shall be designated according to the conditions defined in the first paragraph of Article 99 of this Constitution. Article 101 The President of the National Assembly President is appointed for the entire duration of the transition. Without prejudice to the provisions of the first paragraph of this article, the duties of the President of the National Assembly end upon his resignation; death; definitive incapacity;

26

or his conviction for high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation or corruption. Article 102 The National Assembly is directed by a Bureau composed of a President, three VicePresidents, a Reporter (Rapporteur) and three Assistant-Reporters (Rapporteurs-adjoints issus), each coming from the Component and Entities of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue, in accordance with Appendix I B of the Global and Inclusive Agreement. The Components and Entities establish the Bureau of the National Assembly for the entire duration of the transition. No Component or Entity may be represented by more than one member on the Bureau of the National Assembly. In case of vacancy caused by death, resignation, definitive incapacity, incompatibility or criminal conviction of a member of the Bureau of the National Assembly, the replacement is designated according to the conditions set in the first paragraph of this article. Article 103 The organization and functioning of the National Assembly and the internal regulations of the National Assembly are governed by this Constitution. Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly’s Internal Regulations determine:
•

• • • •

•

•

the National Assembly’s operating rules, as well as the powers and privileges of the President of the National Assembly, the members of the Bureau of the National Assembly, the Presidents of the parliamentary groups and National Assembly committees; the Deputies’ voting system; the Deputies’ disciplinary system; the Deputies’ standing down and replacement terms; its standing committees’ number, designation rules, composition, role and competence, without prejudice to the National Assembly’s right to create special temporary committees; the organization of the administrative services falling under the authority of the President of the National Assembly assisted by a Secretary-general from the public Administration; in general, all the rules relating to the National Assembly’s functioning within the scope of its constitutional prerogatives.

The National Assembly’s Internal Regulations shall enter into force only if the Supreme Court of Justice, as necessarily called by the President of the National Assembly, declares that it is in accordance with the Constitution of the transition.

27

The Supreme Court of Justice shall render its decision within fifteen days. After this period, the National Assembly’s Internal Regulations shall be deemed to comply with the Constitution. Paragraph II The Senate Article 104 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Constitution and of the Republic’s laws, the Senate is entrusted with a mission of mediation regarding the political conflicts between the institutions. The Senate is in charge of formulating the preliminary Constitution to be submitted to referendum. It examines, along with the National Assembly, the proposals or bills of law regarding:
• • • • •

citizenship; decentralization; public finances; the electoral process; Institutions supporting democracy.

The National Assembly and the Senate adopt in identical terms the texts concerning matters listed in the first paragraph of this article. In case of disagreement between the National Assembly and the Senate or in case of urgency declared by the Government, a Joint [Consultative] Committee shall be set up to propose by consensus a single text to be adopted simultaneously by both parliamentary chambers. In case of persisting disagreement, final ruling shall be made by the National Assembly. Article 105 The Senate shall be composed of 120 members designated by the Components and Entities of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue according to the conditions set in Appendix I B of the Global and Inclusive Agreement. All the Components and Entities ensure a balanced provincial representation and, at the same time, a significant presence of women in the Senate. No Congolese can be a member of the Senate unless he/she is at least 40 years of age at the time of their designation. The Senate is composed in such a way as to guarantee every Province’s representation.

28

Article 106 Members of the Senate have the title of Senator. Their mandate shall be national. Senators are designated for the entire duration of the transition. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this article, a Senator’s mandate shall end upon is death; resignation; definitive incapacity; incompatibility or criminal conviction. The replacement shall be designated according to the conditions set in the first paragraph of Article 105 of this Constitution. Article 107 The Senate President shall be designated for the entire duration of the transition. Notwithstanding the provisions of the first paragraph of this article, the duties of the Senate President shall end upon his resignation; death; definitive incapacity; or his conviction for high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation or corruption. Article 108 The Senate shall be run by a Bureau composed of a President, three Vice-Presidents, a Reporter and three Assistant-Reporters, each coming from the Component and Entities of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue, in accordance with Appendix I of the Global and Inclusive Agreement. The Components and Entities shall establish the Bureau of the Senate for the entire duration of the transition. No Component or Entity may be represented by more than one member on the Bureau of the Senate. In case of vacancy caused by death, resignation, definitive incapacity, incompatibility or criminal conviction of a member of the Senate’s Bureau, the replacement is designated according to the conditions set in the first paragraph of this article. Article 109 The organization and functioning of the Senate are governed by this Constitution and the Senate’s Internal Regulations. Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Constitution, the Senate’s Internal Regulations shall set:

29

•

• • • •

•

•

the Senate’s operating rules, as well as the powers and prerogatives of the President of the Senate, of the members of the Senate’s Bureau, of the Presidents of the parliamentary groups and Senate committees; the Senators’ voting system; the Senators’ disciplinary system; the Senators’ standing down and replacement terms; its standing committees’ number, designation rules, composition, role and competence, without prejudice to the Senate’s right to create special temporary committees; the organization of the administrative services placed under the authority of the President of the Senate assisted by a Secretary-general from the public Administration; in general, all the rules relating to the operation of the Senate within the scope of its constitutional prerogatives.

The Internal Regulations of the Senate enter into force only if the Supreme Court of Justice, as necessarily called by the President of the Senate, declares it to be in accordance with the Constitution of the transition. The Supreme Court of Justice renders its decision within fifteen days. After this deadline, the Senate’s Internal Regulations are deemed (est répute) to comply with the Constitution. Section III The Relationship between the Executive Power and the Legislative Power Article 110 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Constitution, the President of the Republic communicates with the National Assembly and the Senate by means of messages read by him or read on his behalf which are not subject to deliberation. Article 111 Members of the Government have access to the National Assembly and the Senate as well as to their committees. If requested to do so, members of the Government are obligated to appear before the National Assembly and Senate to answer to and to provide to the members of the National Assembly and Senate all requested explanation about their activities. Article 112 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Constitution, the means of information and control of the National Assembly or the Senate, in matters listed in Article 104 of this

30

Constitution, regarding the Government, public companies, establishments and services are the following:
• • • • •

the oral or written question with or without debate and without a vote; the topical question; the interpellation; the board of inquiry; the Committees’ hearings.

Such means of control shall be exercised according to the conditions set by the National Assembly’s and Senate’s Internal Regulations and may not, in any case, give rise to the censure of the Government. Article 113 Each year, the National Assembly and Senate convene two ordinary sessions:
• •

the first session opens on the first Monday of the month of April; the second session opens on the first Monday of the month of October.

If the first Monday of the month of April or October is a public holiday, then the session shall open the first following workday. Each ordinary session cannot last more than three months. Article 114 The opening date of the first session of the newly designated National Assembly and Senate is fixed by the President of the Republic on the recommendation of the National Assembly President and of the Senate President. Article 115 In addition, the National Assembly and the Senate may be convened in a special session, following a fixed agenda, by:
• • •

the President of the Republic following a request from the Government, such request having been deliberated by the Council of Ministers; the National Assembly President, following a decision taken by the Bureau or a written request signed by an absolute majority of Representatives; the Senate President, following a decision of the Bureau or a written request signed by an absolute majority of Senators, regarding matters listed in Article 104 of this Constitution.

Special sessions are ended as soon as the agenda has been exhausted.

31

Article 116 The National Assembly and Senate may only validly sit when an absolute majority of their members are present. The meetings of the National Assembly and the Senate are public except, in exceptional cases and for a limited period of time, a meeting in camera is declared. An analytical record of the debates as well as the documents of the National Assembly and Senate shall be published in the Parliamentary Annals. Article 117 The National Assembly and Senate may establish their own commissions of inquiry. The Internal Regulations of each chamber determine the conditions of the powers and the organization and functioning of the commissions of inquiry it creates. Article 118 Without prejudice to the other related provisions of this Constitution, the law sets the rules regarding:
• • • • • •

• • • • • • • •

civil rights and the fundamental guarantees granted to citizens to exercise their public liberties; the electoral system; public finances; constraints imposed on a citizen’s person and goods for the sake of national defense; citizenship, the state and legal capacity of persons, matrimony, inheritance and gifts; the determination of offenses and the applicable penalties, criminal procedure, the Judicial Power’s organization and operation, the creation of new orders of jurisdiction, the status of magistrates, the legal system of the High Council of the Judiciary; the Bar’s organization, legal assistance and legal representation; amnesty and extradition; the tax base, tax rates and the methods of collection of all forms of taxation, the money issuing system; government loans and the State’s financial commitments; the creation of public companies, establishments and organizations; the status of the civil service; the army, police and security services; labor and social security law;

32

•

the overall organization of defense and national police, the recruitment system of the members of the armed forces and national police, the promotion, the rights and duties of the military personnel and the police personnel.

Without prejudice to the other related provisions of this Constitution, the law sets the fundamental principles regarding:
• • • • • • • • • • • •

the free administration of local authorities, their abilities and resources; the land and mining system; savings and the mutual insurance system; education and health; the prison system; the political and trade union pluralism; the right to strike; the organizing of media; the scientific research; cooperatives; culture and arts; sports and recreation.

Article 119 The Government may, to urgently implement its action program and after the deliberation of the Council of Ministers, request from the National Assembly an authorization to take, by executive decree, measures which are normally within the domain of the law. Such authorization is granted within the limits of time and conditions set by the enabling law. Executive decrees are issued by the Council of Ministers. They come into effect upon their publication. They become null and void if the ratification bill of law is not submitted to the Bureau of the National Assembly by the date fixed by the enabling law. The National Assembly may adopt or amend executive decrees during the examination of the ratification bill of law. Article 120 Matters other than those that fall under the domain of the law have a regulatory character. Texts having the character of law may be modified by executive decree if the Supreme Court of Justice, upon request from the Government, declares that the texts have a regulatory character pursuant to the previous paragraph. Article 121

33

Laws qualified as organic by this Constitution are voted and modified by an absolute majority of the National Assembly and Senate. Organic laws may only be promulgated if the Supreme Court of Justice, compulsorily called by the President of the Republic, declares them to be in accordance with this Constitution. The provisions of Article 119 of this Constitution are not applicable to organic laws. Article 122 Finance laws shall set the resources and expenses of the State according to the conditions and under the restrictions provided by an organic law. The creation and transformation of public employment may only be performed by finance laws. Article 123 The National Assembly passes finance bills according to the conditions provided by the organic law mentioned in the first paragraph of Article 122 of this Constitution. The annual finance bill, which includes in particular the budget, is submitted by the Government to the Bureau of the National Assembly at the latest on the first Monday in October of each year. If the annual finance bill, submitted within the constitutional period of time, is not passed before the beginning of a new fiscal year, the President of the Republic enacts it on the Government’s proposal deliberated in the Council of Ministers, taking into account the amendments voted by the National Assembly. If the finance bill has not been submitted on time to be promulgated before the beginning of the fiscal year, then the Government asks (demande) the National Assembly for the opening of temporary credit. In case the National Assembly does not rule on the temporary credit opening within fifteen days, the provisions of the bill providing for such credits shall be put into force by the President of the Republic based on the Government’s proposal as deliberated in the Council of Ministers. If, because of the above-described procedure, the year’s finance law has not been enacted on the first day of the month of February of the fiscal year, the President of the Republic, on the Government’s proposal deliberated in the Council of Ministers, implements the finance bill, taking into account the amendments voted by the National Assembly. Article 124

34

Amendments to the finance bill are not be admissible if their adoption would lead to either a decrease of receipts or an increase in expenditure, unless they are matched by compensatory proposals. Article 125 The introduction of laws belongs concurrently to the Government, each Representative and each Senator, regarding matters listed in Article 104 of this Constitution. Bills of laws passed by the Government in the Council of Ministers are submitted to the Bureau of the National Assembly. Before being discussed and adopted, projects of laws shall be notified to the Government for information. Within ten days following said notification, the Government communicates its eventual comments to the Bureau of the National Assembly as well as to the Bureau of the Senate in matters listed in Article 104 of this Constitution. Article 126 Government members, Deputies and Senators shall have the right to propose amendments to texts being discussed. Article 127 If it appears, during the legislative procedure, that a private bill or an amendment does not fall within the domain of the law, then the Government may raise an exception of inadmissibility. In case of disagreement, the Supreme Court of Justice, called by the President of the Republic, the National Assembly President or the Senate President, in matters listed in Article 104 of this Constitution, shall render its decision within eight days. Article 128 The inscription, of priority, to the agenda of the National Assembly or the Senate of a bill, a private bill or a declaration of general policy is the right of the Government if, after deliberation with the Council of Ministers, it is so required. Article 129 After its adoption, the law is transmitted without delay to the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws as finally adopted within fifteen days following the expiry of the deadlines for promulgation as indicated in Article 131 of this Constitution.

35

The promulgation deadline is reduced by half in case of urgency as declared by the National Assembly. Article 130 Within the prescribed time set for promulgation, the President of the Republic may, with an explanation, ask the National Assembly and Senate, in matters listed in Article 104 of this Constitution, for a new deliberation of the law or of some of its articles. The text submitted to a second discussion is adopted, either in its original form or after modification, by a majority of two-thirds of the members present of the National Assembly and Senate. Article 131 The Supreme Court of Justice may be called, for the purpose of having a law declared not to be in accordance with the Constitution of the Transition, by:
• • •

the President of the Republic within six days following the transmission to him of said law as finally adopted; at least one-tenth of the members of the National Assembly, within six days following the law’s final adoption; at least one tenth of the members of the Senate, within six days following the final adoption of the law concerning matters listed in Article 104 of this Constitution.

The law may be promulgated only if it has been declared in accordance with the Constitution of the Transition by the Supreme Court of Justice. The Supreme Court of Justice renders its decision within fifteen days after submission of the appeal to it. Article 132 The prescribed time set for promulgation is suspended until the outcome of the second deliberation or the Supreme Court of Justice’s decision declaring the law to be in conformity with this Constitution. In any case, upon the expiration of the constitutional deadlines, promulgation takes place by right. This is provided, if need be, by the President of the National Assembly. Article 133 Laws bear the seal of the State and are published in the Government Gazette (Journal Officiel). Article 134

36

In conformity with the provisions of Article 73 of this Constitution, the President of the Republic declares war based on a decision by the Council of Ministers and after favorable recommendation from the High Council of Defense and an authorization by the National Assembly and Senate. The President of the Republic informs the Nation of the declaration through a message. An organic law governs the rights and duties of citizens during war or in case of invasion or attack of the national territory by outside forces. Article 135 In conformity with the provisions of Article 74 of this Constitution, a state of siege, as well as a state of emergency (état d’urgence), is declared by the President of the Republic based on a decision of the Council of Ministers, after favorable recommendation from the High Council of Defense, the National Assembly and the Senate. The National Assembly and Senate then meet immediately. If they are not in session, a special session shall be convened for such purpose, in accordance with Article 115 of this Constitution. A state of emergency or a state of siege may be declared for all or part of the Republic’s territory for a thirty-day period. The decree declaring the state of emergency or the state of siege ceases upon the expiry of the period provided in the third paragraph of this article, unless the National Assembly and Senate, called by the President of the Republic upon a decision of the Council of Ministers, have authorized the extension of said deadline for successive periods of fifteen days. The National Assembly and Senate may, by means of a law, put an end at any time to the state of emergency or the state of siege. Article 136 In case of a declared state of emergency (urgence) or siege, the Government takes, in the Council of Ministers, urgent measures required to deal with the situation. Measures of urgency are, upon their signature, submitted to the Supreme Court of Justice, which immediately declares whether or not such measures derogate this Constitution. The modalities of the application of the state of siege and the state of emergency are determined by the law. Section IV Incompatibilities and Immunities

37

Article 137 The office of President of the Republic is incompatible with the exercise of any other political mandate or public office or private activity of a remunerated or lucrative nature. The provisions of the first paragraph of this article do not prevent the President of the Republic from undertaking missions within the framework of international organizations and bodies. Article 138 The office of Vice-President is incompatible with the exercise of any other political mandate or public office or private activity of a remunerated or lucrative nature. Article 139 The office of a Government member is incompatible with the mandate of Deputy, Senator or any other public or private remunerated activity. Article 140 The mandate of Deputy is incompatible with the mandate of Senator, and vice versa. The mandate of Deputy or Senator is incompatible with the functions or mandates of:
• • • • • •

members of institutions supporting democracy; members of the police and armed and security forces; magistrates; career diplomats; territorial politico-administrative officers, with the exception of heads of community-chefferie and of groups, public agents; members of the cabinet of the President of the Republic, of Vice-Presidents, of the National Assembly President, of the Senate President, of Ministers, of ViceMinisters, of Presidents of the Institutions supporting democracy, and in general of a political or administrative authority of the State, employee in a public company or a mixed corporation.

The mandate of Deputy or Senator is incompatible with the exercise of functions remunerated by a foreign State or international body. Article 141 The President of the Republic is not held criminally responsible for acts committed in the performance of his duties except in case of high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation, corruption or deliberate breach of the Constitution.

38

He may not be prosecuted for offenses listed in the first paragraph of this article, or for any other criminal offense committed outside the scope of his duties, except if he has been indicted by the National Assembly by a ruling of a majority of three-fourths of its members. Article 142 Vice-Presidents are not criminally responsible for acts committed in the performance of their duties except in case of high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation, corruption or deliberate breach of the Constitution. They may not be prosecuted for offenses listed in the first paragraph of this article, or for any other criminal offense committed outside the scope of their duties except if they have been indicted by the National Assembly by a ruling of a majority of three-fourths of its members. Article 143 It is considered high treason when the President of the Republic or the Vice-President undermines national independence or the national territory’s integrity, substitutes or attempts to substitute themselves for the other constitutional powers or attempts to prevent them from exercising the powers granted to them by this Constitution. An organic law shall set the penalties applicable to the offenses of high treason or a deliberate breach of the Constitution, as well as the procedure to be followed before the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 144 The other Government members are criminally responsible for acts committed during the performance of their duties. They are personally responsible in case of high treason, as defined in the first paragraph of Article 143 of this Constitution; of intentional violation of this Constitution; embezzlement of public moneys; misappropriation or corruption. They may not be prosecuted for offenses listed in the second paragraph of this article or for any other criminal offense committed outside the scope of their duties except when they have been indicted before the Supreme Court of Justice by the National Assembly by a ruling of a majority of two-thirds of its members. Article 145 A Deputy or Senator may not be prosecuted, interviewed, arrested, detained or judged as the result of any view held or vote cast by him in the performance of his duties.

39

Except in case of flagrant délicto, no Deputy or Senator may be prosecuted or arrested during sessions without the authorization of the National Assembly or Senate, as the case may be. Outside sessions, a Deputy or Senator may not be arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of the National Assembly or the Bureau of the Senate, respectively, except in case of flagrant délicto, authorized prosecution or final conviction. The Detention or prosecution of a Deputy or Senator shall be suspended upon the request of the parliamentary chamber of which he is a member. The suspension cannot exceed the duration of the current session. Section V The Judicial Power Article 146 Justice is rendered throughout the entire territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the name of the Congolese People. Decisions and judgments as well as the orders from civil and military courts and tribunals are carried out in the name of the President of the Republic. Article 147 Judicial power is independent from the legislative and executive powers. The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the Judicial Power’s independence. He is assisted, to this effect, by the High Council of the Judiciary, the organization and operation of which is set by an organic law. The Judicial Power is the guarantor of individual liberties and fundamental rights of citizens. In the performance of their duties, judges are subjected solely to the authority of the law. An organic law specifies the status of judges and their remuneration. Article 148 Judicial power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice, the Appeal Courts and the civil and military courts and tribunals as well as the public prosecutor’s office. Civil and military courts and tribunals as well as the corresponding public prosecutor’s offices may only be established in accordance with the law.

40

The type, jurisdiction, organization, operation and location of these courts and tribunals and public prosecutor’s offices as well as their procedures are set by law. Article 149 Civil and military courts and tribunals apply the laws and regulations as well as customary law insofar as it is in accordance with public order and morality. Article 150 Without prejudice to the other powers granted to it by this Constitution or by laws of the Republic, the Supreme Court of Justice has jurisdiction, through legal action or exceptional measures, over the constitutionality of laws and acts (actes) having force of law, as well as over appeals for the interpretation of this Constitution of the Transition. The Supreme Court of Justice is the judge of disputes over presidential and legislative elections, as well as over referendum. Moreover, the Supreme Court of Justice has jurisdiction over appeals filed against decisions and judgments rendered by civil and military courts and tribunals which have no possibility of appeal before the Court of Appeals, as well as over actions for the cancellation of acts and decisions from the Republic’s central authorities. Should the case be sent back to the level of the civil and military courts and tribunals, after having been reversed by the Supreme Court of Justice, then these courts and tribunals follow the High Court’s decision on the issue of law in question. The Supreme Court of Justice gives its opinion on propositions of law or regulatory acts submitted to it. Article 151 The Supreme Court of Justice shall be the court of first and final jurisdiction for the President of the Republic, Vice-Presidents, Deputies, Senators, Ministers and ViceMinisters, as well as Presidents and members of the Institutions supporting democracy pursuant to the conditions set by this Constitution. Article 152 The composition, organization and operation of the Supreme Court of Justice, as well as the other members of the Republic brought before it, are determined by an organic law. Article 153 The first President of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Republic’s Prosecutor General and the Auditor General of the armed forces shall be appointed and brought into office after the execution of the Global and Inclusive Agreement, with due respect to the

41

national balance of power and according to the procedure defined by the Components and Entities of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue. Chapter II The Institutions Supporting Democracy Article 154 The Institutions supporting democracy are:
• • • • •

the Independent Electoral Commission; the National Observatory of Human Rights; the High Authority on Media; the Truth and Reconciliation Commission; the Commission on Ethics and the Fight Against Corruption.

Article 155 The missions of the Institutions supporting democracy are:
• • • • •

to ensure neutrality and impartiality in the organization of free democratic and transparent elections; to guarantee the media’s neutrality; to consolidate the national unity through a truthful reconciliation between all Congolese; to promote and protect Human rights; to promote the practice of moral and republican values.

Article 156 The Institutions supporting democracy enjoy independence from one another and from the other institutions of the Republic. The Institutions supporting democracy enjoy juridical personality. Article 157 The Institutions supporting democracy are chaired by the representatives of the “Force Vives” Component (La Composante “Forces Vives”), in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Global and Inclusive Agreement. The other Components and Entities from the Inter-Congolese Dialogue shall belong to their respective boards. Article 158

42

The Presidents of the Institutions supporting democracy have the rank of “Minister” in accordance with the provisions of Section V.4.c of the Global and Inclusive Agreement. Article 159 The Presidents and members of the Institutions supporting democracy are appointed for the entire duration of the transition. Without prejudice to the provisions of the first paragraph of this article, the office of President and of members of the Institutions supporting democracy end upon their resignation; death; definitive incapacity; or their conviction for high treason, embezzlement of public moneys, misappropriation or corruption. In accordance with the Global and Inclusive Agreement, the organization or formation of the “Société civile” Component (La Composante “Société Civile”), from which that person comes, shall present his replacement to the National Assembly for ratification within seven days. Article 160 The organization, powers and operation of the Institutions supporting democracy are determined by organic laws passed by the National Assembly and Senate within thirty days of their installation. Chapter III Public Finance Section I General Provisions Article 161 The Congolese Franc is the monetary unit of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It shall be a lawful tender throughout the national territory. Article 162 The budgetary year (l’exercice budgétaire) begins on the first of January and ends on the thirty-first of December. Article 163 Every year, the Court of Audit (Cour des Comptes) shall submit to the National Assembly the Republic’s public accounts together with its comments. The Republic’s public accounts shall be closed by the law. Article 164

43

Taxes may only be established by virtue of the law. Contribution to the public expenses shall be a duty for each citizen and person living in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Exemptions or tax relief may only be established in accordance with the law. Section II The Court of the Audit Article 165 The Court of Audit controls, according to the conditions set by the law, the management of resources and accounts of all public corporations and bodies. Article 166 The Court of Audit reports to the National Assembly. The Court of Audit’s members shall be appointed, relieved from their office and, if necessary, dismissed by the President of the Republic on proposal of the National Assembly. Article 167 The Law shall set the composition, organization and operation of the Court of Audit. Section III The Central Bank of the Congo Article 168 The Central Bank of the Congo is the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s institution of currency issue. The Central Bank of the Congo shall enjoy management autonomy. It shall be overseen by the Minister responsible for finance. Article 169 The Central Bank of the Congo watches over:
• • • •

public funds; the monetary protection and stability; the setting and implementation of monetary policy; all banking activities.

44

Article 170 The Central Bank of the Congo is the Government’s economic and financial adviser. Article 171 The Governor of the Central Bank of the Congo shall be heard by the National Assembly every time requested. Article 172 The organization and operation of the Central Bank of the Congo are fixed by an organic law. Chapter IV The National Police and Armed Forces Section I The National Police Article 173 The National Police is charged with public security and the maintaining and restoring of order. The National Police shall be at the service of the Congolese Nation. No one can divert (détourner) it for his own profit. The National Police exercises its action over the entire national territory while respecting this Constitution and the Republic’s laws. Article 174 The National Police is apolitical. It is subordinated to the civil authority and is placed under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior (Ministre de l’Intérieur). Article 175 Recruitment into the National Police is based on objective criteria related to physical ability, a sufficient education, a good moral character as well as a balance between all Provinces. Article 176 No one may be recruited into the National Police, or take part in wars or hostilities if he has not reached at least eighteen years of age at the time of the recruitment.

45

Article 177 The law sets the organization and operation as well as the specific recruitment requirements of members of the National Police. Section II The Armed Forces Article 178 The mission of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is to defend the national territory’s integrity against any exterior aggression and, according to the conditions set by law, to participate in the economic, social and cultural development and to protect people and their goods. Article 179 The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo include land, air and naval forces. Article 180 The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are national, republican and apolitical. Manpower at all levels is composed in such a way that a fair and balanced participation of all Provinces is achieved. The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are at the service of the entire Congolese Nation. No one may divert them for his own profit, under sentence of high treason. Article 181 The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are subordinated to the civil authority and shall be under the authority of the High Commander of the Armed Forces. Article 182 No one may organize military or para-military groups or private militias, or to maintain a youth or subversive army, under sentence of high treason. Article 183

46

Recruitment into the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is based on objective criteria related to physical ability, a sufficient education, a good moral character as well as a balance between all Provinces. Article 184 No one may be recruited in the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or take part in wars or hostilities if he has not reached at least eighteen years of age at the time of the recruitment. Article 185 Promotion in the ranks of the Armed Force of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is based on ability, knowledge, discipline and relevant military training. Article 186 The law sets the conditions of recruitment, promotion, organization, disciplinary rules, service conditions as well as the rights and duties of military personnel. Section III The High Council of Defense Article 187 A High Council of Defense is instituted in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The High Council of Defense is chaired by the President of the Republic and, in case of his absence, by the Vice-President responsible for Defense. Article 188 The organic law on army and defense sets the composition, responsibilities, operation and organization of the High Council of Defense. Article 189 Without prejudice to the provision of the preceding article, the following people shall be members of the High Council of Defense as of right:
• • • • • •

the President of the Republic; the four Vice-Presidents; the Minister of Defense; the Minister of the Interior, Decentralization and Security; the Minister of Foreign Affairs; the General Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces;

47

• • •

the Chief of Staff of Land Forces; the Chief of Staff of Air Forces; the Chief of Staff of Naval Forces.

Article 190 The High Council of Defense gives its assent to a declaration of a state of emergency, a state of siege and of war. Without prejudice to applicable laws, the High Council of Defense gives advice on all matters regarding:
• • • •

the creation of a restructured and integrated national army; the disarming of armed groups; supervising the withdrawal of foreign troops; all other issues concerning national defense.

TITLE V INTERNATIONAL TREATIES AND AGREEMENTS Article 191 The President of the Republic ratifies or approves international treaties and agreements. The Government concludes international agreements that are not subject to ratification after discussion in the Council of Ministers. It informs the National Assembly of such matters. Article 192 Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties and agreements relating to international organizations and to international dispute resolution, those that involve use of the public resources, those that modify legislative provisions, those concerning the state of people and those that involve exchange and addition of territory can only be ratified or approved by virtue of a law. No cession, exchange or addition of territory is valid without the consent of the population concerned, to be voted on by referendum. Article 193 Upon their publication, regularly ratified or approved international treaties or agreements have superior authority to laws, provided each treaty or agreement is adhered to by the other party. Article 194

48

When the Supreme Court of Justice, having been consulted by the Government, National Assembly or Senate, declares that an international treaty or agreement contains a clause that is contrary to this Constitution, its ratification or approval may occur only after the revision of the Constitution. Article 195 The Democratic Republic of the Congo may conclude joint treaties or partnerships that entail a partial relinquishment of sovereignty for the purpose of creating the African Union. TITLE VI FINAL AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS Article 196 The Transition shall last twenty-four months. It starts upon the creation of the Transition Government and ends with the nomination of the President of the Republic elected as a result of elections marking the end of the transitory period in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, due to specific problems related to the organization of elections, the Transition may be extended for a period of six months renewable once, if circumstances require so, on proposal from the Independent Electoral Commission and by a joint and properly justified decision of the National Assembly and Senate. Article 197 The President of the Republic, Vice-Presidents of the Republic, the National Assembly President and the Senate President remain in office throughout the entire Transition period, without prejudice to the implementation of the provisions of the first paragraph of Articles 66 and 84 and of the second paragraph of Articles 101 and 107 of this Constitution. Article 198 The Governors and Vice-Governors in office remain in place until the appointment of the new Governors and Vice-Governors by the Government of the National Union. The Government of Transition appoints Ambassadors during the first semester by taking into account the proportion of the different political tendencies among the Government. Career Ambassadors shall be taken into account during appointments.

49

The Government of the National Union nominates the managers of the public and mixed economy companies by taking into account the morality, competence and experience criteria. In the meantime, the managers in office remain in office (restent en fonction). Article 199 During its first session, the National Assembly of the Transition shall pass, in accordance with universal principles and international legislation, a law of amnesty for acts of war, political and opinion offenses, with the exception of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. On a temporary basis, until the passing and promulgation of the law of amnesty, the amnesty shall be promulgated by presidential decree. Article 200 With the exception of the President of the Republic currently in office, the political institutions that came from the Constitutional Order No. 003 of May 27, 1997 shall cease to function upon effective installation of the corresponding institutions provided by this Constitution. Article 201 The initiative for the revision of the Constitution of the Transition belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic upon Government proposal and to half of the Deputies or the Senators. The project or proposal (proposition) for the revision of the Constitution shall be (est) adopted by consensus in identical terms by the National Assembly and Senate. The President of the Republic promulgates the adopted text, in conformity with Article 129 of this Constitution. Article 202 All prior constitutional provisions, in particular Constitutional Order No. 003 of May 27, 1997 on the organization and exercise of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as modified and completed to date, are abrogated and replaced by this Constitution of the Transition of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Article 203 Legislation currently in force, insofar as it is not contrary to the Constitution of the Transition, remains applicable for as long as it is not amended or abrogated. Article 204

50

The Constitution of the Transition is adopted by the Plenary Session of the InterCongolese Dialogue. It comes into effect on the date of its promulgation by the President of the Republic within three days following its adoption. Article 205 The Constitution of the Transition ceases to have effect upon the entry into force of the Constitution adopted at the end of the Transition period. Made in Kinshasa on April 4, 2003. Joseph KABILA

51

