MODERN CONSTITUTIONS
A Collection of the Fundamental Laws of Twentytwo of the Most Important Countries of the World, with Historical and Bibliographical Notes

By

WALTER FAIRLEIGH DODD

VOLUME I

THE UNIVERSITY	 OF CHICAGO PRESS A DELPHI TERRACE
I t) It)

LOND

CHIAGO

COPYRIGHT 1908 BY THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO

Published January 1909

Composed and Printed By The University of Chicago Press Chicago, Illinois, U. S. A.

CONSTITUTION OF DENMARK 1
(June 5, 1849; revised July 28, 1866) ARTICLE I. The form of government is that of a limited monarchy. The royal power is hereditary. The order of succession to the throne is that established by Arts. I and 2 of the law of July 3o, 1853. ART. 2. The legislative power is vested in the King and the Rigsdag acting together. The executive power is vested in the King. The judicial power is exercised by the courts. ART. 3. The Evangelical Lutheran church is the national church of Denmark and as such it is supported by the state. II

4. The King shall not be the ruler of any other country without the consent of the Rigsdag. ART. 5. The King shall belong to the Evangelical Lutheran church. ART. 6. The King shall be of age when he has completed his eighteenth year. The same rule applies to the princes of the royal house. ART. 7. Before assuming office, the King shall make in writing before the Council of State an assurance under oath that he will maintain inviolable the constitution of the kingdom. Two identical originals of this act of assurance shall be prepared, one of which shall be delivered to the Rigsdag to be preserved in its archives, the other being deposited in the royal archives. If, immediately upon his succession to the throne,
ART.

the King cannot take this oath, because of absence or for any other reason, the Council of State shall govern until it is done, unless the law provides otherwise. If the King has aready taken such oath as heir to the throne, he shall enter upon the government immediately after his succession to the throne. ART. 8. Provisions shall be made by law with reference to the conduct of the government in case of the King's minority, illness, or absence. Until such a law is enacted the government shall be temporarily conducted by the Council of State in the aforesaid cases. The Council shall immediately summon the Rigsdag, which shall decide in joint session in what manner the government shall be carried on until the King can assume his functions. If when the throne becomes vacant there is no successor, the Rigsdag in joint session shall elect a King and establish the future order of succession. ART. 9. The King's civil list shall be fixed by law for the term of his reign. Such law shall at the same time designate what palaces and other state property form a part of the civil list. The civil list shall not be pledged for debt. ART. 10 . Appanages may be assigned by law to the other members of the royal family, but they shall not be enjoyed beyond the kingdom without the consent of the Rigsdag.
III
ART. 11.TheKing,wt lmaosprecibdy

this constitution, shall have supreme authority over all of the affairs of the kingdom, and shall exercise it through his ministers. ART. 12. The King is not responsible; his person is sacred and inviolable. The ministers are responsible for the conduct of the government ; their responsibility shall be more particularly defined by law. ART. 13. The King appoints and dismisses his ministers. He determines their number and the distribution of business among them, The King's signature gives validity to laws and to the resolutions relating to the government, if it is

DENMARK

269

accompanied by the signature of one or more ministers. Each minister is responsible for the resolutions which he signs. ART. 14. Ministers may be called to account by the King or by the Folkething because of their conduct in office. The Court of Impeachment tries the accusations brought against ministers on account of their official acts. ART. 15. The ministers together form the Council of State, in which the heir to the throne has a seat, if he is of age. The King acts as president, except in the cases mentioned in Arts. 7 and 8. ART. 16. All laws and important matters of government shall be discussed in the Council of State. If, in a particular case, the King is prevented from holding a Council of State he may have the matters discussed in a council of ministers. This council shall consist of, all of the ministers, under the presidency of one whom the King appoints president of the council. Each minister shall record his Vote in the minutes and a 'decision shall be reached by a majority of votes. The president of the council shall lay before the King the minutes of the proceedings, signed by the members present, and the King decides whether he will immediately approve the recommendation of the council of ministers or consider the matter in the Council of State. ART. 17. The King appoints to all offices in the same manner as heretofore. Alterations with respect to this matter may be made by law. No one shall be appointed to office who is not a citizen. Every civil and military officer shall take an oath to the constitution. The King may dismiss the officers appointed by himself. Their pensions shall be fixed in accordance with the pension law. The King may transfer public officers without their consent, provided that their official income is not diminished and that they have the choice between such transfer and retirement with a pension provided by general rules.

Exceptions for certain classes of officers besides those designated in Art. 73 shall be determined by law. ART. 18. The King declares war and makes peace; he concludes and annuls treaties of alliance and of commerce; however, he shall not, without the consent of the Rigsdag, cede any territory or enter into any engagement which changes the existing international relations. ART. 19. The King shall each year convene the Rigsdag in regular session. Without the King's consent it shall not remain in session longer than two months. This provision may be modified by law. ART. 20. The King may convene the Rigsdag in extraordinary session, and decides how long such session shall continue. ART. 21. The King may, without the consent of the Rigsdag, adjourn its regular sessions for a period not exceeding two months, but not more than once between two regular sessions. ART. 22. The King may dissolve the whole Rigsdag or either of its houses ; if only one house is dissolved, the meeting of the other house shall be postponed until the whole Rigsdag can be again assembled. Such reassembling shall take place within two months after the dissolution. ART. 23. The King may submit to the Rigsdag projects of laws and of other measures. ART. 24. The King's consent is necessary to give legal force to the resolutions of the Rigsdag. The King orders the publication of laws and sees that they are executed. If a law passed by the Rigsdag is not approved by the King before the next session of the Rigsdag, it shall be considered lost. ART. 25. In cases of special urgency the King may, when the Rigsdag is not in session, issue laws of temporary application, which, however, shall not be contrary to the constitution, and which shall be submitted to the Rigsdag at its next session.

DENMARK

271

ART. 26. The King shall have the right to grant pardon and amnesty. He shall have no right, without the consent of the Folkething, to relieve ministers of the punishment imposed upon them by the Court of Impeachment. ART. 27. The King grants, directly and indirectly through the proper governmental authorities, such licenses or exceptions from the laws as are customary in accordance with the rules in force before June 5, 1849, or for which authority is contained in laws passed since that date. ART. 28. The King has the right to coin money in accordance with the law. IV

29. The Rigsdag is composed of the Folkething and the Landsthing. ART. 3o. Every male citizen of good reputation who has reached the age of thirty years shall have the right to vote for members of the Folkething, unless he : a) Is in the service of another and has no household establishment of his own. b) Is receiving or has received assistance from public charity, which he has neither returned nor reimbursed. c) Has not the control of his own property. d) Has not resided for one year in the electoral district or city where he is staying at the time of the election. ART. 31. Every male citizen of the age of twenty-five years is eligible to the Folkething, with the exceptions mentioned in a), b) , and c) of Art. 30. A RT. 32. The number of members of the Folkething shall be about in the proportion of one member to 16,000 inhabitants. The elections shall take place in election districts ; the apportionment and manner of election shall be determined by the election law. Each district elects one member from among those who offer themselves as candidates. ART. 33. Members of the Folkething shall be elected for

ART.

three years. They shall receive a daily compensation the amount of which shall be fixed by the election law. ART. 34. The Landsthing is composed of 66 members. Twelve members are appointed by the King, seven are elected in Copenhagen, forty-five are elected by the larger election districts comprising rural districts and towns, one by Bornholm, and one by the Lagthing of the Faroe Islands. ART. 35. No one shall take part, directly or indirectly, in the election of members of the Landsthing unless he has the qualifications required of those entitled to vote for members of the Folkething ; however, residence for the year preceding the election is only required either in one of the towns or in a country district of the particular Landsthing district. ART. 36. In Copenhagen the voters choose one elector for each 120 voters, a fraction of 6o being counted as 120. An equal number of electors is chosen by the voters who, during the preceding year, had been assessed upon a taxable income of not less than 2,000 rix-dollars. These electors together choose the members of the Landsthing for Copenhagen. ART. 37. In the country all of the voters choose one elector in each parochial district. For the towns, including therein Frederiksberg, Frederiksvaerk, Marstal, Silkeborg, LOgstiir and NOrre-Lundby, there shall be chosen half as many electors as there are parochial districts ; if the number of electors is uneven it shall be raised to an even number. Onehalf of the electors of each town shall be chosen by all qualified voters ; the other half shall be chosen by the voters of the town , who, within the preceding year, have been assessed upon a taxable income of not less than i,000 rix-dollars or have paid not less than 75 rix-dollars in direct taxes to the state and commune. The apportionment of electors among the several towns in proportion to the number of their voters shall be made by the government for each general election of the Landsthing, in such manner that each town shall have one elector for each class of voters. From among the voters of

DENMARK

273

the country districts who have, during the preceding year, paid the highest state and provincial taxes, a number equal to the number of the parochial districts in the Landsthing district shall meet with the electors to choose members of the Landsthing. ART. 38. Every person eligible to the Folkething is eligible to the Landsthing if he has resided in the election district during the preceding year. ART. 39. The King's appointment of members of the Landsthing shall be made for life from among those who are or have been elected members of former or of the existing representative assemblies of the kingdom. However, every member shall be free to resign from his seat in the Landsthing, and he shall lose his seat if he ceases to be eligible. The other members of the Landsthing are elected for eight years ; however, one-half shall retire every four years. Members of the Landsthing shall receive the same daily, compensation as members of the Folkething. ART. 40. The elections of members of the Landsthing shall take place according to the principles of proportional representation. The election law shall prescribe the details regarding such elections. V The Rigsdag shall meet in regular session on the first Monday in October unless the King summons it to meet before that date. ART. 42. The Rigsdag shall meet at the seat of government. Under extraordinary circumstances the King may, however, summon it to meet in another place. ART. 43. The Rigsdag is inviolable. Whoever assails its security and freedom, issues or obeys an order for such a purpose is guilty of treason. ART. 44. Each house shall have the right to propose laws and to act upon them.
ART. 41.

45. Each house may present addresses to the King. 46. Either house may appoint committees of its members to examine matters of general importance. Such committees shall have power to require verbal or written information from public authorities and from private citizens. ART. 47. No tax shall be imposed, altered, or abolished except by law ; nor shall troops be levied, public loans raised, or state property alienated, except by virtue of a law. ART. 48. As soon as the Rigsdag convenes in regular session the project of the budgetary law for the next financial year shall be submitted to it, containing estimates of the receipts and expenditures of the state. The project of the budgetary law and the supplementary appropriation laws shall be first considered in the Folkething. ART. 49. No taxes shall be collected until after the budgetary law is passed. No expense shall be incurred which is not authorized by the budgetary law or by a supplementary appropriation law. ART. 50. Each house shall appoint two salaried auditors. These auditors shall examine the yearly public accounts and take care that all of the revenues of the state are included therein, and that no expenditures have been made without the authority of the budgetary law. They may require that all necessary information and documents be submitted to them. The yearly financial accounts, with the comments of the auditors, shall then be submitted to the Rigsdag for its approval. These provisions may be altered by law. ART. 51. No foreigner may be naturalized except by virtue of law. ART. 52. No law shall be finally passed until after it has been three times considered by the houses. ART. 53. If a bill is passed in one house it shall be submitted to the other house in the form in which it was passed ; if it is there amended it shall be returned to the first house; if
ART. ART.

DENMARK	

275

the first house again amends it, it shall be again returned to the other house. If agreement is not then reached, and either house requests it, an equal number of members shall be appointed by each house to meet in committee; the committee shall give its opinion concerning the points of difference and report to the houses, each of which shall finally decide with reference to the report of the committee. ART. 54. Each house shall decide for itself on the validity of the election of its members. ART. 55. Each new member shall take the oath to the constitution as soon as the validity of his election has been recognized. ART. 56: Members of the Rigsclag shall be bound by their own convictions alone and not by any instructions from their electors. Public officers who are elected to the Rigsdag do not have to obtain the permission of the government to accept the election. ART. 57. While the Rigsdag is in session no member shall, without the consent of the house to which belongs, be imprisoned for debt, or arrested or prosecuted, unless he be taken in the commission of an offense. Without the consent of the house to which he belongs, no member shall be held responsible outside of the Rigsclag for statements made in that body. ART. 58. Should a person properly elected become ineligible, he shall lose the rights resulting from such election. A law shall determine specifically in what cases a member of the Rigsdag appointed to a salaried state office must submit to re-election. ART. 59. Ministers by virtue of their office shall have access to the Rigsclag and shall be entitled to speak upon the matters under discussion, as often as they wish, provided that they otherwise observe the order of business. Ministers shall have no vote unless they are also members of the Rigsdag.

ART. 6o. Each house shall elect its own president and the person or persons who shall preside during his absence. ART. 61. Neither house shall pass any measure unless more than half of its' members are present and take part in the voting. ART. 62. Every member of the Rigsdag may, in the house to which he belongs and with its consent, submit any public matter for consideration and request explanations from the ministers concerning it. ART. 63. No petition shall be submitted to either house except through one of its members. ART. 64. If the house does not see fit to act upon a petition it may refer such petition to the ministers. ART. 65. The sessions of the houses shall be public. However, the president or the number of members prescribed by the order of business may demand that all strangers be excluded, after which the house shall decide whether to consider the matter in public or in secret session. ART. 66. Each house shall make its own regulations concerning its order of business and the maintenance of order. ART. 67. The united Rigsdag is formed by the joint meeting of the Folkething and Landsthing. It shall not act unless at least one-half of the members of each house are present and take part in the voting. The united Rigsdag shall elect its own president and make regulations concerning its order of business. VI ART. 68. The Court of Impeachment (Rigsret) shall be

composed of the regular members of the Supreme Court of the country, and of an 'equal number of members of, the Landsthing, elected by that body as judges for a term of four years. If, in a special case, any of the members of the Supreme Court cannot take part in the trial and adjudication of . a case, an equal number of the members chosen by the Landsthing (the

ones last elected or those having the least number of votes) shall abstain from sitting. The Court shall choose its president from among its own members. Should the Landsthing be dissolved after a case has been brought before the Court of Impeachment, the members of the dissolved Landsthing shall; nevertheless, retain their seats in the Court for the consideration of such case. ART. 69. The Court of Impeachment shall try charges brought against ministers by the King or by the Folkething. The King may, with the consent of the Folkething, cause other persons to be prosecuted before the Court of Impeachment for crimes which he considers especially dangerous to the state. ART. 70. The exercise of the judicial power shall not be regulated except by law. ART. 71. The judicial power shall be distinct from the executive power, in accordance with the rules to be established by law. ART. 72. The courts shall have power to decide all questions regarding the extent of the powers of the public authorities. However, the person raising such a question cannot, by bringing it before the courts, avoid a preliminary compliance with the orders of the public authorities. ART. 73. The judges shall exercise their functions strictly in compliance with law. They shall not be dismissed except after judicial sentence, nor transferred against their wishes unless in the case of a reorganization of the courts. However, a judge who has reached the age of sixty-five years may be retired without loss of income. ART. 74. Publicity and oral procedure in the entire administration of justice shall be introduced as soon and as far as possible. Trial shall be by jury for criminal cases and for political offenses.

VII ART. 75. The organization of the national church shall be regulated by law. ART. 76. Citizens shall have the right to organize themselves into societies for the worship of God according to their convictions, provided that their doctrines and conduct do not violate good morals or public order. ART. 77. No one shall be bound to contribute personally toward the support of any other form of divine worship than his own, but everyone who does not prove that he is a member of a religious denomination recognized by the state shall pay into the educational funds the personal taxes authorized by law for the use of the national church. ART. 78. The position of denominations dissenting from the national church shall be further regulated by law. ART. 79. No one shall, on account of his religious belief, be deprived of admission to complete enjoyment of civil and political rights, or decline to perform any general civil obligation.

VIII

80. Every person who is arrested shall be brought before a judge within twenty-four hours. If the prisoner cannot be released immediately, the judge shall order his imprisonment by a decision which states the reasons therefor, and which shall be rendered as soon as possible, within three days at the latest; if he may be released on bail, the judge shall determine its character and amount. The interested party may immediately appeal from this decision to the higher court. No one shall be detained in confinement before trial for an offense which can be punished only by a fine or simple imprisonment. ART. 81. The domicile is inviolable. The search of a house, the seizure and examination of letters and other papers
ART.

shall take place only by virtue of a legal warrant, unless a special exception be authorized by law. ART. 82. The right of property is inviolable. No one shall be deprived of his property except for a public purpose. Such deprivation shall take place only in accordance with law and in consideration of adequate compensation. ART. 83. All restrictions upon the free and equal opportunity to engage in any industry shall be abolished by law, unless they are established for the public welfare. ART. 84. Everyone who is not able to support himself or those dependent upon him and whose support is not incumbent upon some other person, shall be entitled to receive aid from the public, but he must submit to the obligations imposed by law. ART. 85. Children whose parents are unable to provide for their education shall receive free instruction in the public schools. ART. 86. Everyone shall have the right to publish his opinions through the press, but under responsibility for them before the courts. Censorship and other preventive measures shall never be re-established. ART. 87. The citizens shall have the right, without previous authorization, to form associations for any lawful purpose. No association shall be dissolved by an order of the government. However, associations may be forbidden temporarily, but in such cases an action shall immediately be brought for the dissolution of such associations. ART. 88. The citizens shall have the right to assemble without arms. The police shall have the right to attend public meetings. Meetings in the open air may be prohibited, if there is reason to fear a breach of the public peace by them. ART. 89. In case of riot, the armed force, unless it is attacked, shall not interfere until the crowd has been three times summoned, in the name of the King and of the law, to disperse and has not done so.

9o. Every man capable of bearing arms is bound personally to assist in the defense of the country, in accordance with the special regulations provided by law. ART. 91. The right of the communes to manage their local affairs, under the supervision of the state, shall be regulated by law. ART. 92. All privileges granted by law in connection with nobility, title, or rank are abolished. ART. 93. No feudal tenures, entails, or trusts in real property shall hereafter be created ; a law shall determine how property now so burdened may be made freely transferable. ART. 94. The provisions of Arts. 8o, 87, and 88 are applicable to the military forces only within the restrictions established by the military laws.
ART.
IX

ART. 95. Proposals regarding the alteration of or additions to the present constitution may be made either in a regular or in an extraordinary session of the Rigsdag. Should a proposal for a new constitutional provision be adopted by the two houses and should the government wish to forward the matter, the Rigsdag shall be dissolved and a general election held both for the Folkething and for the Landsthing. If the newly elected Rigsdag, in regular or extraordinary session, adopts the proposed amendment without change and the King approves it, it shall become a part of the constitution.
TEMPORARY PROVISIONS I. The present members of the Landsthing, appointed by the King, shall retain their seats in the Landsthing of the Rigsdag for the term of twelve years from the dates of their respective appointments. The validity of their appointment is not affected by the dissolution of .the Landsthing. 2. With respect to the procedure in the Court of Impeach-

ment, until a new law is issued the law of March 3, 1852, shall remain in force, with the modifications required by the altered composition of the Court and by the provision of the last part of Art. 68. 3. The provisions of Art. 73 that judges shall not be dismissed except after judicial sentence, nor be transferred against their wishes, shall not apply to the present judges who also exercise administrative functions. 4. Until a reorganization of criminal procedure has been effected, the appeal from a sentence of imprisonment referred to in Art 8o shall take place as in civil cases, but with additional notice; the appellant shall also be exempt from the use of stamped paper and from the payment of judicial fees. On the occasion of such an appeal the appellant shall be allowed access to counsel, and additional evidence may be laid before the superior court.2

