
DJIBOUTI
Issued March 1979

LAW NO. 77-625 of June 20, 1977, Relative to the Independence of the French Territory of Afars and Issas The National Assembly and the Senate have adopted, The President of the Republic promulgates the law the text of which follows:
Article 1. The French Territory of Afars and Issas shall cease to be part of the territory of the French Republic and shall accede to independence as of June 27, 1977. Article 2. Title VII of the French Nationality Code is not applicable to the effects on French nationality of the acquisition of independence by the French Territory of Afars and Issas. Article 3. The following shall retain French nationality, although resident in the territory of Afars and Issas on June 27, 1977:

1. French who were born in the territory of the French Republic as consituted June 28, 1977; 2. Persons having acquired French nationality before this date outside of the French Territory of Afars and Issas; 3. Persons having acquired French nationality by decree while they were resident in the French Territory of Afars and Issas. The same provisions hold true for spouses and offspring, as well as for widows and widowers of these persons. tory of Afars and Issas, those who acquired French nationality automatically or by declaration, as
Article

4. Persons born in the French Terri-

1


well as their offspring, may have such French nationality recognized or become reinstated in this nationality by declaration according to the following distinctions. Article 5. They may have their French nationality recognized by declaration provided they have established and maintained residence on May 8, 1977, in the territory of the French Republic other than in the Territory of Afars and Issas. This option shall expire June 27, 1978.
58 and 79 of the French Nationality Code, they

Article 6. While still subject to Articles

may be reinstated in French nationality by declaration provided they have established residence in France on the date of this declaration and if they show proof of having, prior to June 27, 1977, served in a public office or in a unit of the French Army or in a unit of territorial police or, in wartime, enlisted in the French or Allied Armed Forces. Article 7. Application may be made for the declarations provided for in Articles 5 and 6 above by interested parties in accordance with the provisions of Article 101, and those which follow, of the French Nationality Code; such parties must have reached eighteen years of age; application may not be made through an agent. These declarations apply to the children of the declarant within the provisions of Articles 84 and 85 of the French Nationality Code, if they conform to Article 5 and Articles 84 to 86 of said Code, and if they conform to Article 6 of this law. This law will be executed as a law of the State. Paris, June 20, 1977. By the President of the Republic, VALERY GISCARD D'ESTAING. Prime Minister, RAYMOND BARRE. Minister of the Interior, CHRISTIAN BONNET.

2


REPUBLIC OF DJIBOUTI LAW NO. LR/77-001 June 27, 1977 Known as Constitutional Law No. 1

By proclamation of the Republic of Djibouti, one and indivisible, independent and sovereign. On June 27, 1977, at zero hour, the National Assembly, having met in extraordinary session, having deliberated and solemnly approved, The President of the Republic promulgates the constitutional law the text of which follows, in accordance with the popular will expressed on May 8, 1977. Article 1. National independence is declared. The Republic of Djibouti, one and indivisible, independent and sovereign, is proclaimed. Its motto shall be "UNITY, EQUALITY, PEACE." Article 2. The Republic of Djibouti adheres to the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man. It affirms the necessity of establishing a political order where the rights and liberties set forth in this declaration may have full force. Article 3. The Chamber of Deputies shall retain its functions under the name "National Assembly." Its members shall enjoy parliamentary immunity within conditions which shall be determined at a later date. The Assembly shall continue to exercise its rights and prerogatives until the institutions under the future constitution are established. Article 4. The Chief of State shall take the title and exercise the duties of President of the Republic.


He shall represent and guarantee unity, indivisibility, independence and national sovereignty, internally and abroad. He shall ensure continuity in the operation of the Republic's institutions. He shall determine and conduct the general policy of the Nation. He shall appoint and accredit diplomatic and consular representatives; foreign diplomatic and consular representatives shall be accredited with him; he shall negotiate and approve treaties and international conventions, which shall be submitted to the National Assembly for ratification. Article 5. Laws and regulations in effect on the day of promulgation of this constitutional law shall remain in force in all of their provisions which do not conflict with national sovereignty, until their abrogation or modification be legally ruled upon. Article 6. Justice shall be rendered in the name of the people of Djibouti. The Republic of Djibouti shall order the execution of juridical decisions and acts which are to be executed according to law. The title and manner of executing said decisions and acts shall thereby be modified. Decisions and acts previously applicable shall continue to be respected and executed with no further official notice than the seal of this law certified by any judge, or ministerial officer, or representative of the legitimate authority responsible for their declaration, establishment or execution. Article 7. This constitutional law shall be executed immediately, It shall be registered under No. LR/77-001 and shall be published in the Journal Officiel of the Republic of Djibouti, of which there shall be a special edition to be distributed wherever necessary. Djibouti, June 27, 1977. President of the Republic Hassan Gouled Aptidon -2-


REPUBLIC OF DJIBOUTI LAW NO. LR/77002 June 27, 1977 Known as Constitutional Law No.2

On June 27, 1977, at zero hour; The National Assembly adopted and the President of the Republic promulgates the constitutional law the text of which follows: Article 1. Until the establishment of all the republican institutions resulting from ratification of the future National Constitution, the President of the Republic, by means of prdinances discussed in the Council of Ministers, shall exercise the powers necessary to carry out the mission which is entrusted to him by Constitutional Law No. 1. Article 2. In order to create and work progressively for the institutions necessary to the regular democratic functioning of the Republic and to the organization of powers, the President of the Republic shall set forth constitutional bills within the framework of the following principles and objectives: 1. National sovereignty shall be vested in the community of people of the Republic of Djibouti. This community shall consist of all persons who are recognized as members and who accept its duties, without distinction as to race, language, sex or religion. No one may be arbitrarily deprived of the status of member of the national community. 2. Popular legitimacy, expressed by secret, equal, and universal suffrage, shall be the basis and source of all power. Executive power and legislative power shall originate in universal suffrage or in the elected authorities.


3. The institutions of the Republic must have as their goal the effective achievement of the following: - the principle of government of the people, by the people, and for the people; - a political order which promotes the full force of the individual and collective rights and liberties set forth in the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man; - the economic and social development of the national community. 4. Executive power shall be exercised by the President of the Republic assisted by a Council of Ministers which is responsible to him. The President of the Republic shall designate the prime minister, shall appoint the other members of the government; under the same conditions, he may terminate their duties. 5. Legislative power shall be exercised by a National Congress and a Legislative Council, assuring fair representation of the population and its groups. Until the establishment of the Legislative Council, this power will continue to be exercised by the National Assembly. 6. The judicial power shall be exercised by independent magistrates, assisted by juries representing the population, under conditions which will be established by law. 7. Each of the powers set forth above will assume full responsibility for its prerogatives and duties, under conditions which assure the continuity and regular functioning of republican institutions, all under the authority and arbitration of the President of the Republic. 8. Fundamental rights and liberties and the management of accounts and institutions of the Republic shall be placed under the authority of the President of the Republic and, in addition, under the supervision of

-2-


the chancellor of the Republic a Constitutional Court, and the judiciary, according to the respective jurisdictions which will be assigned to them. An appeal procedure shall be instituted. 9. Territorial administration shall be conducted in such a way that the powers of the Republic contribute to harmonious regional development and reduce internal imbalances. Municipalities and popular communities shall be established. They shall have wide administrative and financial autonomy, permitting the organization and diversification of economic, cultural and social development, with the evolution of traditional structures and cultures. A national defense and development service shall be instituted. 10. The Institutions must allow the Republic to participate in regional and international organizations, while respecting national sovereignty, provided that these organizations benefit: - the establishment of peace and international justice; - the economic, cultural and social development of all people, - the stengthening of national identity through cooperation. Article 3. The Constitutional bills provided for in Article 2 shall be set forth by the President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers for discussion by the National Assembly, with the consent of a Constitutional Commission consisting of representatives of the executive power, the legislative power, and the judicial power, or persons designated by reason of their special competence. Article 4. This constitutional law shall be executed immediately. -3-


It shall be registered under No. LR/77-002 and shall be published in the Journal Officiel of the Republic of Djibouti to be distributed wherever necessary. Djibouti, June 27, 1977. President of the Republic, Hassan Gouled Aptidon

