BRITISH AND FOREIGN

STATE PAPERS
WITH WHICH IS INCORPORATED HERTSLET'S COMMERCIAL TREATIES

1940-1942
VOL. 144
Compiled and Edited in the Librarian's Department of the Foreign Office

LONDON: HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE 1952

1136	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

CONSTITUTION of the Dominican Republic.—Ciudad Trujillo, January 10, 1942(')

(Translation) THE Revisory Assembly, in the name of the Dominican Republic, after having introduced into the articles comprised in the law summoning it the modifications which they considered practicable, declare in force the following text of the Constitution of the Dominican Republic.
CHAPTER I

Section I.—The Nation and its Government 1. The people of Santo Domingo constitute a nation organised as a free and independent State, with the name of the Dominican Republic. 2. Its Government is essentially civil, republican, democratic and representative. (') Original text in Gaceta Oficial, January 10, 1942.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1137

It is divided into the Legislative Power, the Executive Power and the Judicial Power. Those three powers are independent in the exercise of their respective functions. The persons entrusted with those powers are responsible and may not delegate their authority, which is solely that laid down by this constitution and the laws. Section II.—The Territory 3. The territory of the Republic, including that of the adjacent islands, is and shall be inalienable. 4. The territory of the Republic is composed of the District of Santo Domingo and the Provinces which the law may determine. The Provinces, in turn, are divided into communes. Note. The law shall fix the number and the boundaries. of the Provinces, as well as those of the communes into which. they are divided, and may also create under other denominations new political divisions of the territory. 5. The ancient city of Santo Domingo, now Ciudad Trujillo, is the capital of the Republic and the seat of the national Government.
CHAPTER II

Individual Rights 6. The following are consecrated as inherent in human. personality : (1) Inviolability of life. The death penalty may not be enacted, nor any other which implies loss of the physical integrity of the individual. The law may, however, enact the death penalty for persons who, in time of war with a foreign nation, are guilty of crimes contrary to the welfare of the national armed forces, or of treason or espionage in favour of the enemy. (2) Freedom of work, the establishment of monopolies for the benefit' of individuals being consequently prohibited. The law may, according as the general interest requires, establish a maximum day's work, days of rest and holidays,: minimum salaries and wages and their manner of payment, social insurance, the preponderant participation of nationals in all work, and in general all the measures of State protection and. assistance which are considered necessary in favour, of, workers.

1138	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

(3) Liberty of conscience and worship, without any limitation other than the respect due to public order and good customs. (4) Liberty of education. Primary instruction shall be subject to the supervision of the State and shall be obligatory for children of school age, in the manner which the law may establish. In official establishments such instruction, as well as that given in agricultural, technical and domestic science schools, shall be gratuitous. (5) The right to express opinions without previous censorship. The law shall lay down the sanctions applicable to individuals who impugn the honour of persons, social order or public peace. (6) Liberty of association and meetings for peaceful purposes. (7) The right of private property. The latter may, however, be expropriated on duly justified grounds of public utility or social interest, and upon prior payment of equitable compensation. In cases of public disaster, compensation need not be paid in advance. General confiscation of property is prohibited, except as a penalty for persons guilty of treason or espionage on behalf of the enemy in time of war with a foreign nation. (8) Inviolability of correspondence and other private documents, which may not be seized or inspected except in virtue of legal proceedings as evidence of matters which are sub judice. The secrecy of telegraphic, telephonic and cable communication is likewise inviolable. (9) Inviolability of domicile. No domiciliary search may be made except in cases contemplated by law, and in accordance with the formalities prescribed therein. (10) Freedom of transit, without prejudice to the restrictions which may result from the execution of judicially imposed penalties, or from the laws of immigration and health. (11) Exclusive property rights, for the time and in the manner that the law may lay down, in inventions and discoveries, as well as scientific, artistic and literary productions. (12) Individual security. Therefore: (a) Physical constraint shall not be enacted for debt not originating in fraud or infraction of the penal laws ; (b) no one may be imprisoned or have his liberty restrained without a warrant stating the

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1139

reason, drawn up by a competent judicial official, except in the case of flagrante delicto ; (c) no one may be tried twice for the same charge, or be obliged to testify against himself,. or be condemned to any penalty, whatever its nature, without. having been given a public hearing, or without having been duly summoned. Cases in respect of which the law creates disciplinary tribunals are excepted from public hearings ; (d) every person deprived of his liberty shall be brought before the competent judge or court within 48 hours of his detention,. or else be set at liberty. Every arrest shall be without effect or shall be changed to imprisonment within 48 hours after the arrested person has appeared before the competent judge or court, the interested person having to be notified, within the same period, of the ruling on his case ; (e) every person deprived of his liberty without cause or without the legal formalities, or apart from the cases contemplated by law, shall immediately be set free at his own request or that of any other person. The law shall determine the manner of summary proceedings in such a case. 7. The enumeration contained in article 6 is not exhaustive, and therefore does not exclude the existence of other rights of a like nature.
CHAPTER III-POLITICAL

RIGHTS

Section I—Nationality 8. The following are Dominicans: (1) Persons who at present enjoy such capacity by virtueof previous constitutions and laws. (2) All persons who were born in the territory of the Republic, with the exception of the legitimate children of foreigners resident in the Republic as diplomatic representatives or who are in transit through it. (3) All persons born in a foreign country of , a Dominican father or mother, provided that, in accordance with the laws of the country of their birth, they have not acquired a foreign nationality or that if they have acquired it, they manifest by a deed drawn up before a public official and submitted to the Executive Power, after attaining their political majority and within a year after having attained civil majority, as laid' down by Dominican law, their intention of retaining Dominican nationality.

1140	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

(4) Persons naturalised in accordance with the law. Note. No Dominican may claim the status of foreigner by naturalisation or for any other reason. The law may enact penalties for persons who being Dominicans, claim to possess a foreign nationality. A Dominican woman married to a foreigner, however, may acquire the nationality of her husband. Section II	 Citizenship 9. All Dominicans of either sex are citizens over 18 years of age, and those who are or have been married, even though they may not have attained that age. 10. The rights of citizenship are: (1) That of voting. (2) That of being eligible for elective positions, subject to the restrictions specified by this constitution. 11. The rights of citizenship are lost: (1) By taking arms against the Republic or aiding in any attempt against it. (2) By big sentenced to a criminal penalty, so long as such lasts. (3) By judicial interdiction. (4) By accepting employment in Dominican territory from any foreign Government without the previous permission of the Executive Power. (5) By having adopted another nationality.
CHAPTER IV-SOVEREIGNTY

12. The people alone are sovereign.
CHAPTER V

Section I—The Legislative Power 13. All the legislative powers conferred by this constitution are entrusted to a Congress of the Republic composed of.'a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. 14. The election of senators, as well as that of deputies, shall be by direct vote. 15. The offices of senator and deputy are incompatible with any other public or employment position of a permanent character, with the exception of honorary positions and those of professors. Those last are not incompatible with any other public or position employment.

1142	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

The Senate may not pronounce a condemnatory sentence except when a vote is passed to that effect by at least threequarters of the total number of its members. The provisions contained in this article do not exclude, with regard to the members of the Judicial Power, the disciplinary authority of the Supreme Court of Justice. Section 11I.—The Chamber of Deputies 20. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of members elected every 5 years by the people of the Provinces and of the District of Santo Domingo on the basis of one for every 60,000 inhabitants or fraction of over 30,000. Note. No Province shall have less than two deputies. 21. In order to be a deputy it is required : To be a Dominican in full possession of civil and political rights and to have attained the age required by this constitution. Note. Naturalised persons may not be elected deputies until 8 years after having acquired nationality, and provided they have resided continuously in the country during the 2 years preceding their election. 22. The following are exclusive powers of the Chamber. of Deputies : — (1) To exercise the right of charging before the Senate public officials in the cases mentioned in article 19 (4). The charge may not be made except by vote of three-quarters of the total number of members of the Chamber. (2) To authorise, or otherwise, municipal councils to alienate real property, and to approve or disapprove contracts which they may enter into involving real property or communal revenues as a guarantee. Section IV.—Functions common to both Chambers 23. The Chambers shall meet in National Assembly in the cases specified by the constitution, more than one-half of the members of each Chamber being necessary to form a quorum. The decisions shall be made by an absolute majority of votes. 24. Each Chamber shall make rules concerning its own procedure and the handling of affairs peculiar to it ; in its rules of discipline it may prescribe punishments for its members in proportion to the misdemeanours which they may commit.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1143

25. The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall hold their sessions separately, except when they meet in National Assembly. 26. In each Chamber the presence of at least more than half of its members shall be necessary for the validity of its deliberations. Decisions shall be made by an absolute majority of votes, except in cases previously declared urgent, in which event decisions shall be made by a two-thirds vote. 27. Members of both Chambers shall enjoy the fullest immunity from penalty for the opinions which they may express in its session. 28. No senator or deputy may be deprived of his liberty during the legislative session without the authorisation of the Chamber to which he belongs, except in the event of his being apprehended at the moment of committing a crime. In all cases the Senate or the Chamber of Deputies, or if these are not in session, or if a quorum is not present, any, member thereof, may require that any member who may have been detained, arrested, imprisoned or deprived in any, way of his liberty be set free for the length of time which the legislative ,session lasts, or any portion thereof. For this purpose a demand shall be made by the President of the Senate or of the Chamber, or by the senator or deputy as the case may be, to the AttorneyGeneral of the Republic ; and if it should be necessary the order for release shall be given directly, in which event assistance may be required and must be rendered by every trustee of the public force. 29. The Chambers shall meet ordinarily, on February 27 and August 16 each year, and each legislative session shall last 90 days, and may, be extended up to a further 60 days. Note. They shall meet in extraordinary session when convoked by the Executive Power. #30.. On August 16 of each year each Chamber shall elect from among its members a President, a Vice-President and two secretaries for the term of one year.. Note I. Each Chamber shall appoint its subordinate employees, who shall remain,in their positions so long as they are not expressly removed therefrom. Note II. The. President of the Senate and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall have disciplinary powers during the sessions ; and they shall represent their respective Chambers in all legal acts.

1144	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

31. When the Chambers meet in National Assembly the person who is then President of the Senate shall assume the presidency : the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall occupy the vice-presidency, and the secretaries of both Chambers shall act as secretaries. 32. The duties of the National Assembly shall be : To examine the records of election of the President of the Republic, to proclaim him and, if necessary to administer to
him the oath and to accept his resignation.
CHAPTER VI.-CONGRESS

33.

The followin g are the powers of Congress :

(1) To enact general taxation or imposts and to determine the manner of their collection and legal investment. (2) To approve or disapprove, after examination of the report of the Bureau of Accounts, the statement of collection and disposal of the revenues which the Executive Power must present to it. (3) To take cognisance of any observations which the Executive Power may' make concerning the laws.	 (4) To devise means for the conservation and exploitation of national property, and for the alienation of property belonging to the private domain of the nation. (5) To determine all measures concerning the preservation of ancient monuments and the acquisition of all kinds of historic and pre-historic objects which may serve to constitute the national archaeological resources. (6) To create or abolish Provinces, communes or other political divisions of territory, and to decide all matters concerning their boundaries and organisation. (7) In the event of a breach of the public peace, to declare a state of siege and where such breach exists, and for the period of its duration, to suspend the individual rights embodied in article 6, paragraphs (5), (6), (10), and (12) (b), (d) and (e). (8) In the event of the national sovereignty being exposed to a serious and imminent danger, Congress may declare that a state of national emergency exists and suspend the individual rights embodied in paragraphs (2) to (12) inclusive of article, of this constitution. If Congress is not in session, the President of the Republic shall have the power to enforce the same measure, with the obligation of convoking Congress, by t same act, to meet within the next 10 days, for the purpose

1145 deciding whether the said measure shall be maintained or revoked. Should he not do so, or should Congress not assemble, the said measure shall automatically cease to be in force. (9) To legislate on all matters concerning immigration. (10) To regulate all matters appertaining to the customs service. (11) To increase or reduce the number of courts of appeal, and create or abolish ordinary or extraordinary tribunals. (12) To create or abolish special tribunals for the trial and decision of contested administrative /matters, and to legislate on all matters in regard to their organisation and jurisdiction. (13) To vote extraordinary public expenditure in respect of which the Executive Power may ask for an appropriation. (14) To float loans based on the credit of the Republic through the Executive Power. (15) To approve or disapprove international treaties and conventions concluded by the Executive Power. (16) To legislate in all matters concerning the national debt. (17) To declare by law the necessity for =constitutional reform. (18) To grant permission to the President of the Republic to leave the country for more than 30 days. (19) To interpellate Secretaries of State regarding matters within their jurisdiction. (20) To examine annually all the acts of the Executive Power and to approve them if they are in accordance with the constitution and the laws. (21) To approve, or otherwise, contracts which the President of the Republic submits to it in conformity with articles 49 (10) and article 90. (22) To create or abolish departments and sub-departments of State when, in the opinion of the Executive Power, such action may be necessary for the purposes of public administration. (23) To decree the transfer of the Legislative Chambers to a place outside the capital of the Republic, for reasons of force majeure or as the result of the convocation of the President of the Republic. (24) To legislate concerning all matters which are not within the competence of any other Power of the State or are not contrary, to the constitution.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1146	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

CHAPTER VII-THE ENACTMENT OF LAWS 34. In the enactment of laws the following have the right of initiative : (a) Senators and deputies. (b) The President of the Republic. (c) The Supreme Court of Justice in judicial matters. 35. Every draft law introduced in one of the Chambers shall be submitted to two different discussions with an interval of at least one day between each discussion ; in the event of a prior declaration of urgency, it may be discussed in two consecutive sessions. 36. A draft law having been approved in either of the Chambers shall be sent to the other for appropriate discussion, the same legal formalities being observed. If the latter. Chamber make amendments, it shall return the draft with observations to the Chamber in which it originated. Should the amendments be accepted, it shall send the law to the Executive Power; but if they are rejected it shall return the draft to the other Chamber with observations. If the latter approves them, it shall in its turn send the law to the Executive Power. If the observations are rejected, the draft shall be considered as rejected. 37. Every law approved in both Chambers shall be sent to the Executive Power. If the latter does not raise objections to the law he shall promulgate it within 8 days of receipt thereof and shall cause it to be published within 15 days of its promulgation. If he objects to it, he shall return it to the Chamber whence it originated within the exact period of 8 days from the date on which it was sent to him, provided that the matter was not declared to be urgent, in which case he shall communicate his observations within the period of 3 days. The Chamber which has received the observations shall place them on the agenda of the next session and shall discuss the law afresh. If after that discussion two-thirds of the whole membership of that Chamber again approve it, it shall be sent to the other Chamber and if by a like majority it be approved the it shall be finally considered to be law. Note I. The President of the Republic shall be obliged to promulgate and publish the law within the periods specifiedNote II. Draft of laws which may be pending in either of the two Chambers at the close of the legislative term must

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1147

follow the constitutional procedure until they are approved by the following legislature. When this is not done, the draft will be considered as not having been presented. Note III. Every draft law received in one Chamber after having been approved in the other will be placed on the agenda. 38. Whenever a law is forwarded to the President of the Republic for promulgation and the period of the legislative term remaining is less than that prescribed in the preceding article for making observations on it, the legislature will remain in session to have cognisance of the observations until the termination of the periods and of the procedure laid down in article 37. 39. After publication the laws are obligatory on all the inhabitants of the Republic, if the legal time for their becoming known has elapsed. 40. All laws, decrees, regulations and acts contrary to the present constitution shall be legally null and void. 41. Draft laws rejected in one Chamber may not be submitted in the other, again in either of them, until the following legislative session. 42. Laws have no retroactive effect, except in the event of their being favourable to a person who is sub judice or serving a sentence. 43. Laws shall be headed thus : "The National Congress on behalf of the Republic ".
CHAPTER VIII

Section I - The Executive Power 44. The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic, who shall be elected every 5 years by direct vote. 45. In order to be President of the Republic it is necessary : (1) To be Dominican by birth or origin and to have resided for at least 20 years in the country.	 (2) To have attained the age required by this constitution and to be in full exercise of civil and political rights. 46. The President of the Republic cannot, resign except before the National Assembly. 47. In ordinary elections, the President-Elect of the Republic shall take office at the end of the term of the outgoing President. When, owing to absence from the country or by reason of infirmity or any other case of 'force majeure, he is unable to do so, the. President of the Supreme Court of Justice

1148	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

appointed for the term which is about to begin shall take charge of the presidency ad interim. In. the case of the definitive incapacity of the President-Elect of the Republic before the 16th August, the National Assembly, consisting of senators and deputies elected at the same time as the President, shall meet on the 16th August in order to appoint a new President of the Republic, in a session which may not be closed or declared in recess until the election has taken place. In the case of the definitive incapacity of the President-Elect of the Republic without having taken office, after the 16th August, the National Assembly shall meet within 30 days after the occurrence of the definitive incapacity in order to appoint a new President of the Republic, with the same requirements as previously indicated. 48. The President of the Republic, before entering on his duties, shall take the following oath before the National Assembly or before some public official or functionary : " I swear by God, by the fatherland and on my honour to
obey and to enforce the constitution and the laws of the Republic, to uphold and defend its independence, to respect its rights and to fulfil faithfully the duties of my office".

49. The President of the Republic is the head of the public administration and the supreme chief of all the armed forces of the Republic. The President of the Republic has power : (1) To appoint, the Secretaries of State, to accept their resignations and to remove them from office. (2) To preserve the nation from all foreign attack. (3) To promulgate and cause to be published the laws and resolutions and to see to their faithful execution. To issue regulations, decrees and instructions whenever it is necessary. (4) To supervise the proper collection and faithful expenditure of the national revenues.. (5) To appoint all the public employees whose appointment is not vested in any other Power or autonomous authority, and. the members of the Diplomatic Corps with the approval of the Senate. (6) To receive the heads of foreign States and their repre-sentatives. (7) To preside over all national solemnities, to direct. diplomatic negotiations and to conclude treaties with foreign nations with the obligation of submitting such treaties t o the , aprovl

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1149

of Congress, without which they shall be neither valid nor binding on the Republic. (8) In the event of a breach of the public peace at a time when neither of the Chambers is assembled, he may decree a state of siege and suspend the individual rights which Congress, according to article 33 (7) of this constitution, is permitted to suspend ; he' may also, when Congress is not assembled, declare a state of national emergency, with the results and requirements specified in article 33 (8). (9) To fill temporarily vacancies which occur among the judges or the courts and tribunals and the Bureau of Accounts when Congress is in recess, with the obligation of informing the Senate of those appointments in the next legislative session in order that final appointments may be made. (10) To conclude contracts, submitting them for the approval of the National Congress when they contain provisions relating to the disposal of the national revenues, alienation of real property and floating of loans, or when they contain stipulations exempting from taxes in general in accordance with article 90 ; and without such approval in other cases. (11) To fill vacancies which occur in municipal governments, when the number of substitutes is exhausted. (12) To issue navigation certificates. (13) To control, in time of peace or of war, all matters concerning the armed forces of the Republic, to command the national army and navy himself, or through, the person or persons whom he may appoint to do so, to determine the size of the forces of the army and the navy, and to dispose of the same in time of peace or of war for purposes of public service. (14) To declare war, on a previous decree by Congress, and to negotiate peace, when it may be necessary, subject to the approval of Congress. (15) In the event of international war, he may cause to be arrested or deported from the national territory individuals belonging to the nation with which the Republic is at war, and in general foreigners whose activities, in the opinion of the Executive Power, are or may be prejudicial to the national interest. (16) To request from Congress the funds necessary to carry on the war. (17) To appoint and remove members of the councils of war in accordance with the law.

1150	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

(18) To deal with all matters concerning maritime, river and military areas. (19) To decide all matters in connexion with the equipment of ports and sea-coasts. (20) To prohibit when he deems it appropriate, the entry of foreigners into the national territory and to expel them, when he considers it in accordance with the public interest. (21) To change the place of his official residence when he deems it necessary. (22) To submit to the National Congress, when the ordinary legislative session begins on February 27 of each year, a mesag,copnidbythersfScaiote, in which he shall render an account of his administration during the previous year. (23) To submit to Congress, during the legislative session which begins on August 16, the draft budget of revenue and the low of public expenditure for the following year. (24) To authorise, or otherwise, Dominican citizens to accept foreign public positions, and to accept and wear decorations and use titles granted by foreign governments. . (25) To approve, or otherwise, excise taxes established by municipalities. (26) To grant pardon in whole or in part, on February 27, August 16, September 24 and December 23, to prisoners whoa are serving sentences in the gaols of the Republic. (27) To appoint the President and other members of the Administrative Council of the District of Santo Domingo. 50. The President of the Republic may not leave the; country for more than 30 days without the permission of Congress. 51. In the case of temporary default of the President of the Republic, the Secretary of State for War and Navy shall exercise the Executive Power while the default lasts ; in default of the latter individual, the Secretary of State for the Interior and Police, and in default of those two, the Secretary of State for the President's Bureau. In the event of final default the person invested with the office of Secretary of State for War and Navy shall occupy the presidency for the remainder of the term ; in default of the latter individual, the person invested with the office of Secretary of State for the Interior and Police, and in default of those two, the person invested with the office of Secretary of State for the President's Bureau.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 	

1151

These Departments of State must always be mentioned in the law which institutes them and to fill them the same qualifications are required as for the President of the Republic. 52. By virtue of decree of the President of the Republic, and so long as he does not revoke it by another decree, any Secretary of State designated by him, who possesses the qualifications required by this constitution to be President of the Republic, may also exercise the Executive Power temporarily. 53. In case of default on the part of all the substitutes for the President who are contemplated in article 51, the President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall assume the Executive Power ad interim, and within 30 days after assuming those duties, he shall summon the National Assembly to elect a definitive substitute at a session which may not be adjourned or declared in recess until such election has been made. In case such summons is not made within those 30 days, the National Assembly shall meet of its own right to effect the election in the form prescribed above. Section II—The Secretaries of State For the discharge of affairs of public administration 54. there shall be Departments of State as laid down by law. 55. To be a Secretary of State it is required: To be a Dominican • in full exercise of civil and political rights and to have attained the age of 25 years. Note. Naturalised citizens may not be Secretaries of State for 10 years after having acquired nationality. 56. The powers of the Secretaries of State shall be laid down by law.
CHAPTER IX

Section 1—The Judicial Power. 57. The Judicial Power shall be exercised, by the Supreme Court of Justice, the Courts of Appeal, the Land, Courts, the Courts of First Instance, the Courts of Justices of the Peace (Alcaldias) and other , tribunals of a judicial nature created by the laws. Section II—The Supreme Court of Justice 58. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of at least seven judges, but it may meet, deliberate, and deliver valid judgments with' the quorum laid down by the law, which shall regulate its organisation.
•

1152	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Note I. Pending the enactment of such law, the quorum referred to shall be five members. Note II. When appointing the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Senate shall choose which of them shall occupy the presidency and a first and second substitute to replace the President in the event of his default or disability. In the case of the retirement of a judge invested with one of the capacities mentioned above, the Senate shall appoint a new judge with the same capacity or shall confer such capacity on another of the judges. Note III. The Attorney-General of the Republic is the head of the judicial police and of the Office of the Public Prosecufor and represents the same, either personally or by means of the substitutes whom the law may create, before the Supreme Court of Justice ; he has the powers, duties and prerogatives which the laws confer upon him and the same rank as the President of the Supreme Court of Justice. 59. In order to be a judge of the Supreme Court of Justice or Attorney-General of the Republic, it is necessary to be a Dominican by birth or origin, in full enjoyment of civil and political rights, to have attained the age required by this constitution and to be a lawyer or a doctor of law with at least eight years practice of the profession, or to have been a judge of some court or tribunal or Attorney-General for four years. 60. The position of judge of the Supreme Court of Justice is incompatible with any other public appointment or employment, permanent or temporary, with the exception of honorary positions and those of professors. 61. The following are exclusive powers of the Supreme Court of Justice, without prejudice to the other powers which the law may confer on it:— (1) To try in original and final instance actions instituted against the President of the Republic, senators, deputies, Secretaries of State, Under-Secretaries of State, members of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney-General of the Republic, judges and prosecutors of the courts of appeal and members of the national Diplomatic Corps. (2) To try appeals in conformity with the law. (3) To try in last resort actions cognisance of which first instance appertains to the courts of appeal.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1153

(4) To exercise the highest disciplinary authority over all the members of the Judicial Power, with faculty to suspend or dismiss from office in the manner determined by law. (5) To transfer provisionally or definitively from one jurisdiction to another, when it is deemed appropriate, the judges of first instance, the resident judges of the land courts, and the examining judges. Section III—The Courts of Appeal 62. There shall be at least three courts of appeal for the entire Republic ; the number of judges which shall comprise these, as well as the judicial districts corresponding to each court, shall be determined by law. 63. Only Dominicans over 25 years of age, in full exercise of their civil and political rights, who are lawyers or doctors of law with at least 4 years' practice of the legal profession. or who have been for 2 years judges of first instance may be judges of the courts of appeal. Note. Naturalised citizens may not be judges of the courts of appeal until 8 years after acquiring Dominican citizenship. 64. The Office of the Public Prosecutor is represented in each court of appeal by an Attorney-General, or by substitutes whom the law may create, all of whom must satisfy the same requirements as the judges of these courts. 65. The following are the powers of the courts of appeal: (1) To try appeals from judgments delivered by the tribunals and courts of first instance. (2) To try in first instance actions instituted against the magistrates and prosecuting attorneys of the tribunals and courts of first instance and Governors of Provinces. (3) To try other matters determined by law. Section IV—The Land Courts 66. The powers of the land courts shall be determined by law. Note. In order to be president or judge of. the Superior Land Court the same qualifications are required as those for a judge of a court of appeal ; and the qualifications for other posts of judge of a land court are the same as those of a judge of first instance.
144	 2P

1154	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Section V—Courts

of

First Instance

67. For each judicial district there shall be tribunals or courts of first instance, with the powers conferred on them by law.	 Note. The law shall determine the number of judicial districts, the number of judges who must compose the tribunals or courts, and the number of chambers into which they may be divided. 68. To be judge of a tribunal or court of first instance it is required : To be. a Dominican in full exercise of his civil and political rights, to be 25 years of age and to be an advocate of the tribunals of the Republic. 69. To be a prosecuting attorney or examining judge, the qualifications shall be the same as for a judge of a tribunal or court of first instance. Section VI—Municipalities 70. In each commune there shall be one or more mayors with two deputies, respectively, appointed by the Executive Power. 71. To be a mayor or deputy it is required :To be a Dominican, at least 25 years of age and to be in full exercise of civil and political rights. Note. They shall have the powers laid down by law and shall be subject to the requirements of capacity prescribed therein.
CHAPTER X.-THE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS

72. There shall be a permanent Board of Accounts, consisting of at least live citizens appointed by the Senate, chosen from lists of three names submitted by the Chamber of Deputies.. 73. It shall have power, In addition to those conferred by law (1) To examine the general and special accounts of the Republic. (2) To present to Congress in the first regular session the report with regard to the accounts of the preceding year.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1155

74. The members of the Board of Accounts shall hold office for 5 years. 75. To be a member of the Board, of Accounts it is required : to be a Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights and to have attained the age fixed by this constitution.
CHAPTER XI.-MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODIES

76. The government of the communes shall be in the hands of municipal councils whose members, in number fixed by law in proportion to population, shall be elected by direct vote. 77. The municipal councils are independent in the exercise of their duties, without prejudice to the restrictions and limitations laid down by the laws on economic matters. 78. Tile councillors and syndics of municipal councils shall hold office for 5 years. When vacancies occur in the office of councillors or syndics, their substitutes shall hold office for the remainder of the term for . which their predecessors were elected. Note. Male aliens of full age, with a residence of over 5 years in the commune which elects them may be councillors on the conditions laid down by the laws.
CHAPTER XII.-THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROVINCES

79. There shall be in each Province of the Republic a civil Governor appointed and removable by the Executive Power. Note. In order to be Governor it is required to be a Dominican, to have attained 25 years of age and to be in full exercise of civil and political rights. 80. The organisation and administration of the Provinces, as well as the powers and duties of the Governors, shall be laid down by law.
CHAPTER XIII.---ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES

81. All citizens have the right of suffrage; 'with the following exceptions. (1) Those who have lost their rights of citizenship by virtue . of article 11 of this constitution. (2) Members of the armed forces and police bodies.
144	 2P2

1156	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

82. The electoral assemblies shall meet of their own right three, months before the expiration of the constitutional period and shall proceed to exercise the functions which the constitution and the law determine. In cases of extraordinary summons they shall meet at the latest 60 days after the date of the summons. 83. The following are the duties of the electoral assemblies : to elect the President of the Republic, senators and deputies, Councillors and syndics of the municipalities and their deputies, and any other official as may be determined by-law. 84. Elections shall be by direct vote with registration of the voters ; and with representation of minorities when more than two candidates are to be elected. 85. Elections shall be directed by a central electoral board and by boards subordinate thereto, which shall have the powers of judging and regulating in accordance with the law. Note. The central electoral board shall assume the direction and command of the public forces in localities where elections take place.
CHAPTER XIV.-THE ARMED FORCES

86. The armed forces are essentially subordinate and have no power of deliberation in any case. The object of their creation is to defend the independence and integrity of the Republic,. and to maintain public order, the constitution and the laws. Note. In no case may privileged corps be created. 87. In order to belong to any armed corps of the Republic it is necessary to be a Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights.
CHAPTER XV.—GENERAL PROVISIONS

88. No person may be obliged to do what the law does not command, or prevented from doing what the law does not prohibit. 89. All usurped authority is without validity and its acts are null and void. Every decision obtained by the use of armed force is null and void. 90. No exemption shall be recognised, nor shall any exoneration, reduction or limitation of fiscal or municipal imposts, taxes or duties be granted in favour of individuals except by virtue of the law. Nevertheless, individuals may acquire by means of concessions authorised by law, or of contracts approved by the National Congress, the irrevocable right

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1157

to benefit, during the full time stipulated by such concession or contract, and on compliance with the obligations thereby imposed on them, from exemptions, exoneration, reductions or limitations of fiscal or municipal imposts, taxes or duties incidental to specified works or enterprises of public utility, or to specified works or enterprises to which it is desirable to attract the investment of new capital for the encouragement of the national economy, or for any other purpose of social interest. 91. No expenditure of public funds shall be valid unless it is authorised by law and ordered by the competent official. 92. Annually, in the month of April, the general account of the receipts and expenditures of the Republic in the preceding year shall be published. 93. The relations of church and State shall continue to be the same as they are at present, as long as the Apostolic Roman Catholic religion is that professed by the majority of Dominicans. 94. The issue of paper money by the State is permanently prohibited. 95. The national coinage may not bear the effigy of any person and must express its value, weight and year of coinage on the obverse side, and the coat of arms of the Republic on the reverse side. 96. Mineral deposits belong to the State and may only be exploited by individuals in virtue of concessions or contracts which are granted under conditions determined by law. 97. The 27th February, the anniversary of independence, the 16th August, the anniversary of the restoration, and the 24th September, the anniversary of the financial restoration of the Republic, are national festivals. 98. The national flag is composed of ultramarine blue and vermilion red colours, in alternate quarters, placed in such a way that the blue occupies the upper corner next the staff, separated by a white cross in width half the height of one quarter, and bears in the centre the coat of arms of the Republic. Note. The mercantile marine flag is the same as the national flag, without the coat of arms. 99. The coat of arms of the Republic bears the colours of the national flag, in the centre the book of the gospels, open, surmounted by a cross, both issuing from a trophy of lances and national flags without coats of arms, with branches of laurel and palm on the outside, and crowned with a ribbon
144	 2 P3

1158	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

bearing the motto : Dios, Patria y Libertad ; and at the base another ribbon with these words : Republica Dominicana. It must have the form of a rectangle, with two small angles below, ending in a point at the base and set up in such a manner that if a horizontal line is drawn uniting the two vertical sides of the rectangle, from where the acute angles begin, a perfect square will result. Note. The law shall regulate the use and dimensions of the national flag and of the national coat of arms. 100. A person appointed to exercise a public office must take an oath to respect the constitution and the laws, and to discharge faithfully his trust. This oath shall be taken before any public functionary or official. 101. A: minimum age of 30 years is required to exercise the functions of President of the Republic, Secretary of State for War and Navy, Secretary of State for the Interior and Police, Secretary of State for the President's Office, senator, deputy, member of the Revisory Assembly, judge of the Supreme Court of Justice, Attorney-General of the Republic, member of the Board of Accounts and head of diplomatic missions. 102. The term of all elected officials, whatever the date of their election, shall end uniformly on the 16th August every five years, the date on which the' constitutional period begins, and consequently, they must be the subject of a fresh election in order to continue validly in office. Note. When any elective official ceases to discharge his duties owing to death, resignation, removal, incapacity or any other reason, his substitute shall remain in office until the term is completed. 103. The organisation of political parties and associations in accordance with the law is free, provided that their principles are in conformity with the principles laid down in the second article of this constitution. 104. The law of public expenditure shall be divided into chapters which correspond to the different branches of the administration, and sums may not be transferred from one chapter to another or from one budgetary item to another, except by virtue ' of a law. Such law, when not initiated by the Executive Power, must receive the vote of two-thirds of the total number of the members of each Chamber.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC	

1159

Note I. No law shall have effect or validity which orders or authorises a payment or creates a financial obligation to be borne by the State, unless the same law creates special funds for its execution, or provides that the payment be made from the estimated revenues for the year, and that a sufficient balance thereof remains, at the time of publication of the law, to cover it. Note II. Congress may not legally vote any appropriation unless it is included in the draft law of public expenditure submitted by the Executive Power, in virtue of article 49 of this constitution or unless it be requested by the Executive Power after having submitted the draft, except if the law which authorises the said appropriation has been approved by two-thirds of the total members of each Chamber : all without prejudice to the general rule established in the first paragraph of the present article. Note III. Congress may not modify the items which appear in the draft laws appropriating funds or in the law of public expenditure submitted by the Executive Power, except with the vote of two-thirds of the total members of each Chamber and in accordance , pith the provisions contained in the first paragraph or the pre nt article. Note IV. When for any reason whatsoever Congress concludes the session without having voted the budget of revenue and law of public expenditure, the law of public expenditure for the preceding year shall c ontinue in force. Note V. When Congress is in recess, the Executive Power may order by means of a decree-law transfers of sums within the law of public expenditure as may be required by urgent necessities of the administrative service, and also create or abolish administrative positions of public services which may affect that law, with the obligation of submitting to Congress in the next session, for its approval, the provisions referred to. 105. Justice shall be administered without charge throughout the territory of the Republic. 106. The development and establishment of Ciudad Trujillo, the capital of the Republic, are declared a work of high national interest. Consequently the State shall assign and apply annually for this purpose, in the law of public expenditure, a sum not less than one-third of the budget of the District of Santo Domingo.
144	 2 P4

1160	

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

107. Tales which establish differences between citizens shall not be recognised in the Republic. Titles of h our which the National Congress may confer or may, have conferred on citizens who render or have rendered eminent services to the Republic to ensure its peace and wellbeing, or to guarantee or retrieve its liberty and independence, shall be valid for life.
CHAPTER XVI.-MODIFICATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION

108. The constitution may not be modified except with the agreement of two-thirds of the members of both Chambers. 109. When the necessity for modification is declared, Congress shall order by a law, to which the Executive Power may not make objection, the convening of a Revisory Assembly to decide the modification. In the convening law there shall be inserted the articles whose modification is proposed. 110. The election of the members of the Revisory Assembly shall be made by direct vote of the people of the Provinces, in the same proportion as for the election of deputies. Note I. No Province shall have less than two representatives. Note II. The same qualifications are necessary for members of the 'Revisory Assembly as for deputies. Note III. The members of the Assembly shall enjoy the same immunities as the members of both Chambers of Congress. 111. No modification may deal with the form of government, which must always be civil, republican, democratic and representative. 112. Modifications of the constitution may be made only in the manner indicated therein, nor may it ever be suspended or annulled by any power or authority, or by popular acclamation.
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

1. The provisions concerning the duration of the constitutional period and the proportion of deputies to the number of inhabitants of each Province do not affect the constitutional period now in course, which ends on August 16, 1942. 2. The political capacity which the present constitution grants to Dominican women shall be full and effective as soon as the constitution is published.

ECUADOR AND PERU	

1161

Given and proclaimed in Ciudad Trujillo, District of Santo Domingo, capital of the Dominican Republic, the 10th day of January, 1942. The President of the Revisory Assembly, JULIO ORTEGA FRIER, Representative for the District of Santo Domingo, [Other signatures.]

