CO CONSTITUTIONS

of
NATIONS
SECOND EDITION The first compilation in the English language of the texts of the constitutions of the various nations of the world, together with summaries, annotations, bibliographies, and comparative tables

VOLUME I AFGHANISTAN to FINLAND

by

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Formerly Ambassador of the United States of America to Australia, Secretary General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the SanFrancisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author of INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONSTHEIR CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS (Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague; and Justice House, New York, 1956), A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams, 1942), UNITED NATIONS GOVERNMENT (Putnams, 1945), and co-author of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

Copyright 1956 by Martinus Nijhoff , The Hague, Netherlands All rights reserved, including the right to translate or to reproduce this book or parts thereof in any form

PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS

CONSTITUTION of the DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
January 10, 1947 1
TITLE I

Section I The Nation and Its Government Art. 1. The people of Santo Domingo form a nation organized into a free and independent state under the name of Dominican Republic. Art. 2. Its government is essentially civil, republican, democratic, and representative. It is divided into legislative, executive, and judicial powers. These three powers are independent in the exercise of their respective functions. Those entrusted with these powers are responsible and cannot delegate their attributes, which are solely those determined by this Constitution and the laws. Section II The Territory Art. 3. The territory of the Republic, including the adjacent islands, is and shall be inalienable. Art. 4. The territory of the republic is composed of the District of Santo Domingo and the provinces determined by law. The provinces, in turn, are divided into communes. The law shall fix the number and the boundaries of the provinces and those of the communes into which they may be divided and it may also create new political divisions of the territory under other denominations. Art. 5. The ancient city of Santo Domingo, now Ciudad Trujillo, is the capital of the Republic and the seat of the national government.
TITLE II

Section I Individual Rights Art. 6. There are consecrated as inherent in the human personality 1. Inviolability of life. Capital punishment shall not be imposed or
any other penalty which implies loss of the physical integrity of the individual. The law can nevertheless impose the penalty of dealt for Spanish text supplied by the Embassy of the Dominican Republic in Washington, D.C. Translation by Dorothy W. Peaslee.

those who, in time of war with a foreign nation, become guilty of crimes against the fortune of the national arms or of treason or espionage in favor of the enemy. 2. Freedom of work. Consequently, there is prohibited the establishment of monopolies for the benefit of private parties. The law may, in accordance with the requirements of the general interest, establish the maximum days of work, days of rest and vacations, minimum wages and salaries and their forms of payment, social security, the preponderant participation of nationals in all work, and in general, all the means of protection and assistance of the state that are considered necessary in favor of the workers. 3. Freedom of conscience and of worship, without other limitation than the respect due to public order and good customs. 4. Freedom of education. Primary instruction shall be subject to the vigilance of the state and shall be obligatory for the minor of school age in the form established by law. In official establishments, this instruction as well as that given by schools of agriculture, manual arts, and domestic economy, shall be gratuitous. 5. The right to express thought without subjection to previous censure. The law shall establish sanctions applicable to those who attack the honor of individuals, the social order, or the public peace. 6. The liberty of association and meeting for peaceful ends. 7. The right of property. Nevertheless this may be expropriated for public utility or social interest by due process of law and with prior payment of equitable indemnification. In case of public calamity, the indemnification need not be prior. The general confiscation of property is prohibited except as a penalty for persons guilty of treason or espionage in favor of the enemy in time of war with a foreign nation. 8. Inviolability of correspondence and other private documents, which cannot be seized or inspected except as the result of legal proceedings in connection with matters which are then before the courts. Also inviolable is the secrecy of telegraphic, telephonic, and cablegraphic communication. 9. Inviolability of domicile. No domicile may be searched except in cases provided by law, and with the formalities prescribed by law. 10. Freedom of transit, subject to the restrictions resulting from the execution of penalties judicially imposed, or of the immigration and sanitary laws. 11. Exclusive ownership, for the period and in the form determined by law, of inventions and discoveries and of scientific, artistic and literary productions. 12. Individual security. Therefore : (a) physical constraint for debt not originating in fraud or infraction of the penal law shall not be established; (b) no one shall be imprisoned or restrained of his liberty without warrant assigning cause and in writing from a competent judicial authority, except in the case of flagrante delicto ; (c) no one shall be tried twice for the same cause, or be obliged to testify against himself, or be sentenced to any penalty, whatever may be its nature, without having been heard in a public hearing, or within having been regularly summoned. Excepted from being heard in public are the cases for which the law establishes disciplinary tribunals ; (d) every person deprived of his liberty shall be brought before a competent judge or court within forty-eight hours of his detention, or be set free. Every arrest shall be without effect unless it shall result in imprisonment within forty-eight hours of the time the arrested is brought before a competent judge or court, notification within a like period to the person interested in the decision rendered being obligatory; (e) every person deprived of his liberty without cause or without legal formalities or outside of the cases provided by the laws shall be immediately set free on his own demand or that of any other person. The law will determine the manner of summary proceeding in such a case.

Art. 7. The enumeration contained in Article 6 is not limitative and therefore does not exclude the existence of other rights of a like nature.
TITLE

III

POLITICAL RIGHTS

Section I
Nationality Art. 8. The following are Dominicans:
1. Persons who at present enjoy that status by virtue of former constitutions and laws ; 2. All persons who were born in the territory of the Republic with the exception of the legitimate sons of foreigners who are resident in the Republic as diplomatic representatives or who are in transit across the Republic ; 3. Persons born abroad of Dominican fathers or mothers, provided that they have not acquired foreign nationality in accordance with the laws of the countries of their births, or, if they have acquired it, that after coming of political age, or at the latest within a year of coming of civil age, fixed in Dominican legislation, they shall, by sworn statement before a public official commissioned by the executive power, declare their intention of retaining Dominican nationality; 4. Those naturalized according to the law.

No Dominican can claim the position of foreigner through naturalization or through any other cause. The law can apply sanctions for those who, being Dominicans, claim the possession of a foreign nationality. Nevertheless, a Dominican woman married to a foreigner may acquire the nationality of her husband.

Section II
Citizenship Art. 9. All Dominicans of either sex above eighteen years old, and such as may be or may have been married, although not having reached that age, are citizens. Art. 10. The rights of citizens are:
1. To exercise the suffrage ; 2. To be eligible to elective offices, under the restrictions indicated in this Constitution.

Art. 11. The rights of citizens are lost :
1. By bearing arms against the Republic or lending aid to any attempt against it; 2. By sentence to criminal punishment and during the term of punishment; 3. By judicial interdiction ; 4. By accepting employment while in Dominican territory from any foreign government without authority from the executive power ; 5. By having adopted another nationality. TITLE

IV

SOVEREIGNTY

Art. 12. The people is the only sovereign.

TITLE V

Section I
The Legislative Power Art. 13. All the legislative powers conferred by the present Constitution are entrusted to a Congress of the Republic composed of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. Art. 14. The election of senators as also of deputies shall be made by direct vote. Art. 15. The office of senator and that of deputy are incompatible with all other permanent public employment or office with the exception of honorary ones and professorships. These last are not incompatible with any other public office or employment. Art. 16. When vacancies of senator or of deputy occur, they shall be filled by the corresponding chamber, which shall choose the substitute from a list of three names presented by the proper organ of the political party to which the senator or deputy whose seat is vacant belonged. The list of three names must be submitted to the proper chamber within thirty days following the occurrence of the vacancy if Congress be in session; and in case it be not in session, within thirty days after the day it convenes. If the thirty days shall have elapsed, and the proper organization of the party has not submitted the list, the corresponding chamber shall make the designation without restriction.

Section II
The Senate Art. 17. The Senate shall be composed of members elected at the rate of one for each province and the District of Santo Domingo, and the term of office shall be five years. Art. 18. For the office of senator it is required: to be a Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights and to have attained the age required by this Constitution. Naturalized persons may not be senators except ten years after having acquired nationality and provided that they have resided continuously in the country for two years prior to their election. Art. 19. The exclusive attributes of the Senate are:
1. To appoint the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the courts of appeal, of the tribunals or magistracies of first instance, of the land courts, judges of instruction, and judges of any other tribunals of a judicial character created by law; 2. To appoint the members of the bureau of accounts ; 3. To approve, or not, nominations of a diplomatic character submitted by the executive power; 4. To try accusations preferred by the Chamber of Deputies against public officials elected for a determined period, on grounds of bad conduct or of offenses in the exercise of their functions. The Senate, in the matter of the accusation, cannot impose other penalties than those of removal from office or of disqualification for all offices of trust, honor, or profit in the Republic. The convicted person shall remain, nevertheless, if there be occasion for it, subject to being accused and tried according to law.

The Senate cannot pronounce a condemnatory sentence except when approved by at least three-fourths of all the members thereof. The provisions contained in this Article do not exclude, with respect to the members of the judicial power, the dicisplinary authority of the Supreme Court of Justice. Section III The Chamber of Deputies Art. 20. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of members elected every five years by the people of the provinces and of the District of Santo Domingo at the rate of one for every sixty thousand inhabitants or fraction greater than thirty thousand. No province shall have less than two deputies. Art. 21. For the office of deputy it is required: to be a Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights and to have attained the age required in this Constitution. Naturalized persons may not be elected deputies except eight years after having acquired nationality and provided that they have resided continuously in the country for the two years prior to their election. Art. 22. The exclusive attributes of the Chamber of Deputies are:
1. To exercise the right to impeach public officials before the Senate in the cases determined in paragraph 4 of Article 19. The impeachment cannot be made without the vote of three-fourths of the total of the members of the chamber; 2. To authorize, or not, the municipalities to alienate real property and to approve, or not, contracts which they may enter into involving communal real property or revenues as a guaranty.

Section IV Provisions Common to Both Chambers Art. 23. The chambers shall unite in National Assembly in the cases indicated by the Constitution and there must be present for the purpose more than one-half of the members of each chamber. The decisions shall be taken by absolute majority of the votes. Art. 24. Each chamber shall make rules in respect to its own pro. ceedings and the despatch of affairs peculiar thereto; being authorized it) the rules of discipline to provide punishments for its members proper. tionate to the faults they may commit. Art. 25. The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall hold their sessions separately except when united in National Assembly. Art. 26. In each chamber the presence of at least more than half of its members shall be necessary for the validity of its deliberations. Deci sions shall be taken by absolute majority vote except in the matters previously declared of urgency, which shall be decided by two-thirds vote Art. 27. The members of either chamber shall enjoy the fullest immunity for the opinions they may express in the sessions. Art. 28. No senator or deputy shall be deprived of his liberty during the legislative term without authority of the chamber to which he belongs,

except in the case of his being apprehended while in the commission of a crime. In all cases the Senate or the Chamber of Deputies, or if they are not in session or there is no quorum, any member thereof, may require that any member, who may have been detained, arrested, imprisoned, or in any other way deprived of his liberty, shall be set free during the sitting of the legislature or any period thereof. To this end a requisition shall be made on the attorney general of the Republic by the president of the Senate or of the Chamber, or by the senator or deputy, as the case may be; and if it becomes necessary, the liberating order shall be given directly, in which case assistance may be required and must be rendered by every depositary of the public force. Art. 29. The chambers shall meet ordinarily on February 27 and August 16 of each year and each legislative session shall continue ninety days, which may be extended for sixty days more. Extraordinary sessions shall be at the call of the executive power. Art. 30. On the sixteenth of August of each year each chamber shall name from among its membership a president, a vice-president, and two secretaries for the term of one year. Each chamber shall designate its auxiliary employees, who shall remain in their posts so long as they are not expressly removed. The presidents of the Senate and of the Chamber of Deputies shall have disciplinary powers during the sessions; and they shall represent their respective chamber in all legal acts. Art. 31. When the chambers are united in National Assembly, the presidency will be assumed by the person who at that time is entitled to preside in the Senate; the vice-presidency will be occupied by the president of the Chamber of Deputies, and the secretariat by the secretaries of both chambers. Art. 32. It appertains to the National Assembly:
To examine the election returns of the President and of the Vice-President of the Republic, to announce the results, to administer the oaths of office and, in the event, to receive their resignations. TITLE VI

Section I The Congress Art. 33. Attributes of the Congress are:
1. To levy general taxes and contributions and to determine the method of legally collecting and expending the same ; 2. To approve or disapprove, after examination of the report of the bureau of accounts, the report of collections and expenditures of the revenues which the executive power must present ; 3. To take account of the observations respecting the laws which the executive power may make ; 4. To devise means for conserving the national property and making it productive, and for the alienation of property under the private ownership of the Nation ; 5. To determine all measures for the preservation of ancient monuments and for the acquisition of all kinds of prehistoric and historic objects which constitute national archaeology;

6. To create or abolish provinces, communes, or other political divisions of the territory, and to determine everything concerning their limits and organization ; 7. In case of a breach of the public peace, to declare a state of siege and, where the same exists and for the period of its duration, to suspend the individual rights guaranteed in Article 6, paragraphs 5, 6, 10 and 12, subheadings (b), (d) and (e); 8. In case the national sovereignty is exposed to grave and imminent peril, Congress may declare that a state of national emergency exists, suspending the individual rights guaranteed in paragraphs 2 to 12, inclusive, of Article 6 of this Constitution. If Congress is not in session, the President of the Republic may take the same measure, with the obligation to summon Congress, by the same act, to meet within the next ten days in order to decide whether to maintain or support said measure. If Congress decides against it, or does not meet, the said measure shall automatically cease ; 9. To legislate in full respecting immigration ; 10. To regulate whatever appertains to the customs service ; 11. To increase or reduce the number of courts of appeal and to create or abolish ordinary or exceptional tribunals ; 12. To create or abolish tribunals to hear and decide matters of administrative litigation and to make full provision for their organization and jurisdiction; 13. To vote extraordinary public expenditures for which the executive may have asked an appropriation ; 14. To raise loans upon the credit of the Republic acting through the executive power; 15. To approve, or disapprove, international treaties and conventions entered into by the executive power ; 16. To legislate in respect to whatever concerns the national debt; 17. To decree by law the necessity of constitutional reform ; 18. To grant permission to the President of the Republic to absent himself from the territory of the Republic when it is for more than thirty days ; 19. To interrogate secretaries of state regarding matters in their jurisdiction ; 20. Annually to examine all the acts of the executive power and to approve the same if in accordance with the Constitution and the laws ; 21. To approve or not the contracts that may be submitted to it by the President of the Republic in conformity with subhead 10 of Article 49 and with Article 90; 22. To create, or discontinue, secretariats and under secretariats of state when according to the judgment of the executive power it is necessary for the purposes of the public administration ; 23. To decree the transfer of the legislative chambers outside the capital of the Republic for justified reasons of force majeure or by convocation of the President of the Republic ; 24. To legislate regarding any matter that many not be within the competence of another power of the state or contrary to the Constitution. TITLE VII

Section I The Enactment of Laws Art. 34. In the enactment of laws the following have the right of initiative:
(a) Senators and Deputies ; (b) The President of the Republic ; (c) The Supreme Court of Justice, in judicial affairs.

Art. 35. Every proposal of law introduced in one of the chambers shall be submitted to two distinct discussions, with an interval of a day at least between the first and second; in case of a prior declaration of urgency the proposal may be discussed in two consecutive sessions. Art. 36. A proposal of law approved in either of the chambers shall be sent to the other for appropriate discussion, the same legal formalities being observed. If this chamber make amendments, it shall be returned with comments to the chamber in which it was first introduced; and in case the amendments be accepted, the law will be forwarded to the executive power; but if they be refused, the proposal shall be returned to the other chamber with comments, and if these be approved, the law will then be forwarded to the Executive Power; if the comments be disapproved, the proposal will be considered rejected. Art. 37. Every law approved in both chambers shall be forwarded to the executive power. If the executive power does not veto the law, he shall promulgate it within eight days of receipt thereof and shall cause it to be published within fifteen days of its promulgation; if, vetoed, it shall be returned with objections to the chamber from which it came in the same period of eight days counting from the date on which it was sent, provided the matter be not one declared as of urgency, in which case the veto shall be made within the period of three days. The chamber which may have received the veto shall assign the matter to the calendar of the next session and shall discuss the law anew. If after this discussion, two-thirds of the whole membership of this chamber again approve it, it shall be forwarded to the other chamber, and if by a like majority it be there approved, it shall be considered as definitively a law. The President of the Republic shall be obliged to promulgate and publish the law within the period above prescribed. Proposals of law which may be pending in either of the chambers at the close of the legislative term must follow the constitutional procedure until converted into law in the following legislature. When this is not done, the project shall be regarded as if it had not been initiated. Every proposed law received in a chamber after having been approved in the other shall be assigned to the calendar. Art. 38. Whenever a law is forwarded to the President of the Republic for its proclamation, and the period of the legislative term remaining is less than that prescribed in the preceding Article for presentation of objections, the legislature shall remain open to hear the objections until the termination of the period and of the procedure established by Article 37. Art. 39. Laws after publication are obligatory on all the inhabitants of the Republic if the time within which they are by law considered to be known has elapsed. Art. 40. All laws, decrees, regulations, and acts contrary to the present Constitution are null ipso jure. Art. 41. Proposed laws rejected in one chamber cannot be introduced in the other, or anew in either of the chambers, except at the following legislative term.

Art. 42.. Laws do not have a retroactive effect, except when they are favorable to one who is sub judice or serving a sentence. Art. 43. All laws shall begin thus, "The National Congress, in the Name of the Republic."
TITLE

VIII

Section I

The Executive Power Art. 44. The executive power shall be exercised by the President of the Republic, who shall be elected every five years by direct vote. Art. 45. In order to be President of the Republic it is required:
1. To be Dominican by birth and origin and to have resided in the country during the five years immediately before his election ; 2. To be of the age required in this Constitution and in the full exercise of civil and political rights.

Art. 46. The President of the Republic cannot resign except before the National Assembly. Art. 47. The President of the Republic elected in the regular elections shall take possession of his office at the end of the term of the outgoing incumbent. When, by reason of not being in the country, or on account of illness or any other case of force majeure, the President is unable to do this, the president of the Supreme Court of Justice named for the term about to begin shall take possession in the interim. In case of definite default of the President-elect of the Republic, before the sixteenth of August, the National Assembly, made up of the senators and deputies elected with the President, shall meet the sixteenth of August to designate a new President of the Republic, in a session that may not be recessed until it has concluded the election. If the President-elect of the Republic defaults definitively without taking possession of his office after the sixteenth of August, the National Assembly shall reconvene within thirty days of the definite default to designate a new President of the Republic with the same requirements before stated. Art. 48. The President of the Republic, before entering on the discharge of his duties, shall take the following oath before the National Assembly or before any functionary or public official : I swear before God, my country, and my honor, to execute and cause to
be executed the Constitution and laws of the Republic, to uphold and defend its independence, to respect its rights and to fulfill faithfully the duties of my office.

Art. 49. The President of the Republic is the chief of the public administration and the commander-in-chief of all the armed forces of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall have power:
1. To appoint the secretaries of state, to accept their resignations, and remove them from office ; 2. To preserve the Nation from all foreign attack; 3. To promulgate and cause to be published the laws and resolutions and care for their faithful execution ; to issue rulings, decrees, and instructions when necessary;

4. To watch over the proper collection and faithful expenditure of the national revenues ; 5. To appoint all public officials whose appointment is not given to another power or autonomous organization, and to appoint the members of the diplomatic corps with the approval of the Senate ; 6. To receive the foreign chiefs of state and their representatives ; 7. To preside at all national solemnities, direct diplomatic negotiations and conclude treaties with foreign countries, being obliged to submit the latter to the approval of Congress, without which they shall have no validity nor be binding on the Republic; 8. In case of a disturbance of the public peace, the two chambers not being assembled, the executive may decree a state of siege and suspend the individual guarantees which, by Article 33, paragraph 7, of this Constitution, Congress is allowed to suspend ; he may also, when Congress is not assembled, declare a state of national emergency, with the effects and subject to the requirements indicated in paragraph 8 of the same Article ; 9. To fill temporarily the vacancies that may occur among the judges of the tribunals, the peace courts and the Chamber when . Congress is in recess, with the obligation of informing the Senate with respect to the said appointments in the next legislative session in order that definitive appointments may be made ; 10. To conclude contracts, submitting them to the approval of the National Congress when they contain provisions affecting the national revenues, the alienation of immovables, or the raising of loans, or when they stipulate exemptions from taxes in general in accordance with Article 90; and without such approval in other cases ; 11. To fill vacancies which may occur in the municipal councils when the number of alternates is exhausted ; 12. To issue navigation patents ; 13. To issue orders, in time of peace or of war, concerning the armed forces of the Republic, to command the national army and navy himself or through the person or persons he may designate to do so, to fix the number of the forces of the army and navy and dispose of the same in time of peace or war for the ends of public service ; 14. To declare war, after decree of Congress, and to conclude peace when it may become necessary, subject to obtaining the approval of Congress ; 15. In case of foreign war, he may cause to be arrested or expelled from the national territory individuals of the nation with which the country may be at war, and in general those foreigners whose activities in the judgment of the executive power, are or may be prejudicial to the national interest ; 16. To ask the necessary credits of Congress for carrying on war ; 17. To name and dismiss members of the councils of war in accordance with the law; 18. To regulate all matters with respect to maritime, river and military zones ; 19. To determine all matters with respect to the qualification of ports and maritime coasts ; 20. To prohibit, when he deems it necessary, the entrance of foreigners into the national territory and to expel them when he judges it necessary for the public interest ; 21. To change the place of his official residence when he deems it necessary; 22. To deposit before the National Congress at the beginning of the ordinary legislature, on February 27 of each year, a message accompanied by the reports of the secretaries of state, wherein he shall give account of his administration during the preceding year; 23. To submit to the Congress, during the legislature beginning August

16, a draft of budget of income and law of public expenditures for the following year; 24. To grant or not authorization to Dominican citizens that they may be empowered to exercise foreign public offices and that they may accept and use decorations and titles granted by foreign governments ; 25. To annul, by decree assigning reasons, the excise taxes established by the administrative council of the District of Santo Domingo or the municipal councils when they are contrary to the general economy of the nation ; 26. To grant total or partial pardon, on February 27, August 16, September 24, and December 23, to prisoners who may be serving sentences in the prisons of the Republic; 27. To name the President and other members of the administrative council of the District of Santo Domingo.

Art. 50. The President of the Republic may not leave the country for more than thirty days without authority from Congress. Art. 51. In case the President of the Republic is temporarily absent the executive power shall be exercised during his absence by the secretary of state for war and the navy; in the absence of the latter, by the secretary of state for the interior and police, and if both are absent, by the secretary of state for the Presidency. In case of permanent vacancy, the Presidency for the remainder of the term shall be occupied by the person invested with the office of secretary of state for war and navy; in default of him, by the person invested with the office of secretary of state for the interior and police, and in default of both, by the person invested with the office of secretary of state for the presidency. These secretariats of state must always figure in the law which establishes them, and to exercise their functions, the same conditions shall be required as for President of the Republic. Art. 52. By virtue of a decree of the President of the Republic, and while this is not revoked by another decree, a secretary of state designated by him and possessing the conditions required • by the Constitution to become President of the Republic may also exercise the executive power temporarily. Art. 53. In case of default of all the substitutes provided for in Article 51, the president of the Supreme Court of Justice shall assume the executive power in the interim, and, within thirty days of the date on which he assumed these functions, he shall convoke the National Assembly to name a permanent substitute in a session that may not close or declare a recess until it shall have concluded the election. In case it is not convoked within those thirty days, the National Assembly shall convene in its own right to carry out the election in the manner provided for above. Section II The Secretaries of State Art. 54. For the discharge of matters of the public administration, there shall be secretaries of state as established by law. Art. 55. In order to be a secretary of state, it is required to be a Dominican in the full exercise of civil and political rights and to have arrived at the age of twenty-five years.

Naturalized citizens cannot be secretaries of state except after ten years of having been naturalized. Art. 56. The powers of the secretaries of state shall be determined by law.
TITLE IX

Section I The Judicial Power Art. 57. The judicial power shall reside in the Supreme Court of Justice, the courts of appeal, the land courts, the courts of first instance, the peace courts, and the other tribunals of the judicial order created by the laws. Section II The Supreme Court of Justice Art. 58. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of seven judges, at least; but it can meet, deliberate, and judge validly with the quorum determined by the law which shall regulate its organization. Until the said law is voted, the quorum under reference shall be five members. On the designation of the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Senate shall choose which of them is to occupy the presidency and a first and a second substitute to replace the president in case of default or impediment. Upon the end of the service of a judge who has been accorded one of the above-mentioned positions, the Senate shall name a new judge with the same position, or give it to one of the other judges. The attorney general of the Republic is the chief of the judicial police and the public ministry and represents it before the Supreme Court of Justice personally or through the substitutes the law may provide; he has the attributes, duties, and prerogatives which the laws confer upon him and the same rank as the president of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 59. In order to be judge of the Supreme Court or attorney general of the Republic, it is necessary to be Dominican by birth or origin, to be in full possession of civil and political rights, to have completed the age required by this Constitution, and to be a lawyer or a doctor of laws who has pursued his profession at least for eight years, or to have been the judge of some court or tribunal or attorney general for four years. Art. 60. The office of judge of the Supreme Court is incompatible with any other public office or employment, permanent or occasional, with the exception of honorary ones and professorships. Art. 61. The Supreme Court, without prejudice to other attributes conferred by law, has exclusive power :
1. To have cognizance in first and final instance of cases instituted against the President of the Republic, senators, deputies, secretaries of state, sub-secretaries of state, members of the Supreme Court of Justice, the attorney general of the Republic, judges and attorneys of the courts of appeal, and the members of the national diplomatic corps ; 2. To judge appeals in cassation in conformity with the law;

3. To have cognizance in final jurisdiction of cases whose original jurisdiction belongs to the courts of appeal; 4. To exercise the highest disciplinary authority over all the members of the judicial powers with authority to suspend or dismiss from office in the form determined by law; 5. To move provisionally or definitely from one jurisdiction to another when it deems it useful, the judges of the first instance, the resident judges of the land court, and the judges of instruction.

Section III The Courts of Appeal Art. 62. There shall be at least three courts of appeal for all the Republic; the number of judges to compose the same, as also the judicial districts corresponding to each court, shall be determined by law. Art. 63. Only Dominicans above twenty-five years of age, who are in the full exercise of civil and political rights and who are members of the bar or doctors of law with at least four years of practice of law, or who have been judges of the first instance for two years can be judges of the courts of appeal. Naturalized citizens can become judges of the court of appeal only eight years after having acquired Dominican nationality. Art. 64. The public ministry is represented in each court of appeal by an attorney general or by the substitutes the law may create all of whom must possess the same qualifications as the judges of those courts. Art. 65. The courts of appeal have the following jurisdiction :
1. To hear appeals from decisions handed down by tribunals and courts of first instance ; 2. To have cognizance in first instance of cases instituted against magistrates and attorneys of the tribunals and courts of first instance and governors of provinces ; 3. To hear other matters as may be determined by law.

Section IV The Land Tribunals Art. 66. The jurisdiction of the land tribunals shall be determined by law. To be president or judge of the supreme land tribunal, the same conditions are required as to be judge of a court of appeal; and to fill the other offices of judge of the land tribunal, the same conditions as to be judge of first instance. Section V The Tribunals of First Instance Art. 67. For each judicial district there shall be tribunals or courts of first instance with such jurisdiction as may be conferred on them by law. The law will determine the number of judicial districts, the number of judges to compose the tribunals or courts, and the number of chambers into which they may be divided.

Art. 68. In order to be a judge of a tribunal or court of first instance it is required : to be a Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights and to be twenty-five years of age and a member of the bar of the courts of the Republic. Art. 69.. Fiscal attorneys and judges of instruction must have the same requirements as are necessary to be judge of a tribunal or court of first instance. Section VI Of the Peace Courts Art. 70. In each commune and in the District of Santo Domingo, there shall be one or more justices of the peace with two substitutes, respectively, all appointed by the Senate. However, the Supreme Court of Justice, when it considers it necessary, may provide for the provisional or definitive transfer of the justices of the peace from one jurisdiction to another. Art. 71. To be a justice of the peace it is required : to be a Dominican, to be at least twenty-five years of age, and to be in the full exercise of civil and political rights. They shall have the jurisdiction determined by law and shall be subject to the requirements as to capacity prescribed thereby.
TITLE X

Section I The Bureau of Accounts Art. 72. There shall be a permanent bureau of accounts composed of five citizens at least, appointed by the Senate from lists of three names presented by the Chamber of Deputies. Art. 73. Its jurisdiction shall be, in addition to powers conferred by law:
1. To examine the general and special accounts of the Republic ; 2. To present to Congress at the first ordinary term a report in respect to the account of the preceding year.

Art. 74. Members of the bureau of accounts shall hold office for five years. Art. 75. To be a member of the bureau of accounts, it is required to be a Dominican in the full exercise of civil and political rights and to have reached the age fixed by this Constitution.
TITLE XI THE MUNICIPAL COUNCILS

Art. 76. The government of the communes shall be in the hands of municipal councils, whose members in a number fixed by law in proportion to population, shall be elected by direct vote. Art. 77. The municipal councils shall be independent in the exercise of

their functions, except for such restrictions and limitations as may be prescribed by law in economic matters. Art. 78. The members and trustees of the municipal councils shall remain for five years in the exercise of their duties. When vacancies occur, they shall serve to the end of the term for which their predecessors were elected. Foreign men who have attained their majority and who have resided more than five years in the commune which elects them may be municipal councilors in accordance with such conditions as the laws may prescribe.
TITLE

XII

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROVINCES

Art. 79. There shall be in each province of the Republic a civil governor designated and revocable by the executive power. In order to be governor, it is required to be a Dominican of more than twenty-five years of age and to be in the full exercise of civil and political rights. Art. 80. The organization and administration of the provinces, as well as the attributes and duties of the civil governors, shall be determined by law.
TITLE

XIII

Section I

The Electoral Assemblies Art. 81. All citizens have the right to vote, with the following exceptions:
1. Those who have lost their rights of citizens in accordance with Article 11 of this Constitution ; 2. Members of the armed forces and of the police.

Art. 82. The electoral assemblies shall meet in full right three months before the expiration of the constitutional period and shall proceed to exercise the functions prescribed by the Constitution and by law. In cases of extraordinary convocation, they shall meet not more than sixty days after the date of the law of convocation. Art. 83. It appertains to the electoral assemblies: to elect the President of the Republic, senators, and deputies, members, trustees, and alternates of the municipal councils, and any other functionary determined by law. Art. 84. The elections shall be held by direct vote with inscription of the electors; and with representation of minorities, when more than one candidate is to be elected, according to the standard fixed by law. Art. 85. The elections shall be directed by a central electoral board and by boards dependent thereon, which shall have the power of judging and regulating in accordance with the law. The central electoral board shall assume the direction and control of ti public forces in those places in which the votes are cast.

TITLE

XIV

Section I

The Armed Forces Art. 86. The armed force is essentially obedient and has in no case the right to deliberate. The object of its creation is to defend the independence and integrity of the Republic and to maintain public order, the Constitution, and the laws. In no case may privileged corps be created. Art. 87. In order to belong to any armed body of the Republic, it is required to be a Dominican in the full exercise of civil and political rights.
TITLE XV GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 88. No one may be obliged to do what the law does not command or prevented from doing what the law does not prohibit. Art. 89. All usurped authority is without efficacy and its acts are void. Every decision procured by armed force is null. Art. 90. No exemption shall be recognized, nor shall any release, reduction, or limitation of taxes, contributions, or fiscal or municipal duties be granted for the benefit of private parties except by virtue of the law. Nevertheless, through concessions authorized by law, or through contracts approved by the National Congress, private parties may acquire the irrevocable right, for the whole time stipulated by the concession or contract, and in compliance with the obligations that the one or the other imposes, to enjoy exemptions, releases, reductions, or limitations of taxes, contributions, or fiscal or municipal duties incidental to specified works or enterprises for which they are necessary to attract the investment of new capital, to promote the national economy, or for any other object of social interest. Art. 91. No expenditure of public funds shall be valid if it be not authorized by law and ordered by a competent official. Art. 92. Annually, in the month of April, shall be published the general account of receipts and expenditures of the Republic for the preceding year. Art. 93. The relations of church and state shall continue as at present, since the Roman Catholic Apostolic religion is that professed by the majority of the Dominicans. Art. 94. The national monetary unit is the gold peso.
1. Legal circulation and validity as legal tender shall be accorded only to the bills issued by a single and autonomous issuing body, the capital of which shall belong to the State, provided that the said bills are fully supported by reserves in gold and by other real and effective value in the proportions and conditions prescribed by law and under the unlimited guaranty of the State. However, the law may maintain in force the provisions which now regulate the circulation of foreign bills and it may restrict, suspend, or reestablish the terms of the said provisions. 2. The metallic money shall be issued in the name of the State through the same issuing body and shall be put into circulation only by way of replacing an equivalent value in bills. The legal tender value of the

metallic money in circulation and of that to be issued in the future shall be determined by the law. 3. The regulation of the monetary and banking system of the Nation shall be the function of the issuing body, the supreme organ of which shall be a monetary board composed of members who shall be designated and may be removed only in accordance with the law and shall be responsible for the faithful fulfillment of their functions in conformity with the criteria established in the said law. 4. The issuance or the circulation of paper money, as well as of any other monetary symbol not authorized by this Constitution, either by the State or by any other public or private person or body, is prohibited.

Art. 95. Any modification in the legal monetary or banking system shall require the support of two-thirds of the entire membership of both chambers, unless it has been initiated by the executive power on the proposal or with the favorable vote of the monetary board. Art. 96. Mineral deposits belong to the state and can be exploited by private persons only by virtue of concessions or contracts granted under conditions determined by law. Art. 97. The twenty-seventh of February, anniversary of independence, the sixteenth of August, anniversary of the restoration, and the twenty-fourth of September, anniversary of the financial restoration of the Republic, are national holidays. Art. 98. The national flag is composed of the colors ultramarine blue and vermillion red, in alternating quarters, placed in such manner that the blue is toward the upper part of the staff, separated by a white cross in width half the height of a quarter, and bears in the center the coat of arms of the Republic. The merchant flag is the same as the national flag without the coat of arms. Art. 99. The coat of arms of the Republic carries the colors of the national flag; in the center the book of the Gospels, open, with a cross thereon, both issuing from out of a trophy of lances and national flags, without coat of arms, with branches of laurel and palm surrounding, and crowned with a ribbon on which is this legend: Dios, Patria, y Libertad (God, Country, and Liberty), and at the base another ribbon with these words: Republica Dominicana (Dominican Republic). It must have the form of an oblong with two smaller angles, ending in a point for the base and placed so that if a horizontal line is drawn uniting the two verticals of the oblong, from where the inferior angles begin, a perfect square results. The law will regulate the use and the dimensions of the national flag and shield. Art. 100. The person chosen to exercise a public function shall make oath to respect the Constitution and laws and to discharge faithfully his office. This oath shall be taken before any functionary or public officio 1. Art. 101. The minimum age of thirty is required to exercise the functions of President of the Republic, secretary of state for war and navy, secretary of state for the interior and the police, secretary of state for the presidency, senator, deputy, member of the revisory assembly, judge of the Supreme Court of Justice, attorney general of the Republic, member of the bureau of accounts, and chief of diplomatic missions.

Art. 102. The tenure of all elective officials, whatever may be the date of their election, terminates uniformly on the sixteenth day of August every five years, the date on which the constitutional term begins; and, consequently, they shall require to have been the object of a new election in order to be able validly to exercise their functions. When any elective official whatever ceases in the exercise of his office by death, resignation, removal, incapacity, or other cause, his substitute shall remain in office until the completion of the term. Art. 103. The organization of political parties and associations is free in accordance with the law, provided that its tendencies conform with Article 2 of this Constitution. Art. 104. The law of public expenditures shall be divided into sections which correspond to the different services of the administration, and no money may be transferred from one branch to another, nor may funds voted for a special object be diverted, except as expressly provided by law. Such a law, when not initiated by the executive power, must receive the vote of two-thirds of the total of the members of each chamber. Any law shall be null and void which orders or authorizes a payment or which establishes a liability for the state, unless the same law creates special funds for its execution, or provides that the payment be made from the estimated revenues for the year, of which a balance remains sufficient for the payment at the time the law is published. Congress cannot legally vote any appropriation unless it is included in the law of public expenditures submitted by the executive power in accordance with Article 49 of the Constitution, or unless it be requested by the executive power after having submitted that proposal, except when the law which authorizes that appropriation has been concurred in by two-thirds of the total of the members of each chamber; and all this without prejudice to the general rule established in the first paragraph of the present Article. Congress may not modify the items in the bills which appropriate funds or in the law of public expenditures submitted by the executive power, except by vote of two-thirds of the total of the members of each chamber; and in accordance with the stipulations of paragraph one of this article. When for whatever circumstance Congress closes the legislature without having voted the budget of income and the law of public expenditure, the law of public exependitures of the preceding year shall continue in force. When Congress is recessed, the executive power may by means of a decree-law order the transfer of sums within the law of public expenditures that urgent necessities of the administrative service require, as also the creation or suppression of administrative positions or public services affecting that law, with the obligation to submit such orders to Congress for its approval in the next session. Art. 105. Justice shall be administered without cost in all the territory of the Republic. Art. 106. The development and beautifying of Ciudad Trujillo, capital of the Republic, are declared to be work of high national interest. Therefore the state shall destine and apply annually for this end in the law of

public expenditures a sum not less than the third part of the budget of the District of Santo Domingo. Art. 107. Titles that establish differences between citizens shall not be recognized in the Republic. But titles of honor that the National Congress shall grant or has granted to citizens who will give or have given eminent service to the Republic to assure its peace and wellbeing, or to finance or restore its liberty and independence, shall be valid for a lifetime.
TITLE XVI CONSTITUTIONAL REFORMS

Art. 108. The Constitution cannot be changed except when two-thirds of the members of each chamber so agree. Art. 109. The necessity for the reform being declared, Congress, by a law which cannot be the subject of objections by the executive power, shall order the meeting of a revisory assembly to pass upon the reform. The articles whose reform is proposed shall be inserted in the law of convocation. Art. 110. The election of members of the revisory assembly shall be made by direct vote of the people of the provinces, in the same proportion as for the election of deputies. No province shall have less than two representatives. The same qualifications are necessary in order to be elected a member of the revisory assembly as for being a deputy. Members of the Assembly shall enjoy the same immunities as the members of the two chambers. Art. 111. The Constitution may not be so amended as to change the form of the government, which must always be civil, republican, democratic, and representative. Art. 112. Reform of the Constitution shall be made only in the manner indicated therein, and it shall never be suspended or annulled by any power or authority nor by popular acclamation.
TRANSITORY PROVISION

Pending the adoption and promulgation of the Monetary Law, an Organic Law of the issuing body and a General Banking Law, which are to constitute the new legal monetary and banking system, the present legal monetary system shall continue in force.

