THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

U. S DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE OFFICE OF TECHNICAL SERVICES JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE Building 1-30 Ohio Drive, and Independence Avenue,S.W. Washington 25, D. C.

THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ollowing is a translation of the text of the new constitution of the Dominican Republic as published by the Ministry of Education, Arts, and Culture on 30 May 63 at Santo Domingo • Upon publishing herewith the text of the Constitution that was solemnly proclaimed on Monday, 29 April, 1963, the Ministry of Education, Arts, Culture fulfills a duty to which it attaches great 'portance as much as a work of civic orientation as one of the democratic action that inspired it. The process of historical legitimization that is visible in our destinies has in democracy and culture two of its basic objectives, and has in the Cstiuonhabeg-vsirchalpowe ktheysonfplica,mndsol transformations that are so urgent for our country. The Ministry of Education, Artes, & Culture hopes that this new fundamental document of the Dominican State will penetrate our national schools and all levels of our society as an eloquent expression of social justice and human unity.
Introduction	

F

Buenaventura Sanchez Feliz Minister of Education, Artes, & Culture Fundamental Principles Article 1: The basic aims of the public power are: a) To protect human dignity and to promote and guarantee respect for it; b) To strive for the elimination of economic and social obstacles that limit the equality and the liberty of Dominicans and that obstruct the development of the human personality and the effective participation of everyone in the political, economic, -

1-

and social organization of the nation; and c) The harmonious development of society within the normative principles of the social ethic. Article 2: The existence of the Dominican nation is based principally in work; this is declared to be the primordial basis of its social, political, and economic organization, and to be the unavoidable obligation of all competent Dominicans. As a consequence; a) The right of all persons to work is recognized, and it is the obligation of the State to further and to guarantee the indispensible conditions to make the exercise of this right effective; b) It is the duty of every citizen to development, within the limits of his own choice and according to his own possibilities, an activity or function that will contribute to the material and spiritual progress of society; and c) Vagrancy, mendicity, and any other social vice that conflicts with consecration to work as the fundamental principle of the nation are declared to be public misfortunes. 	 . Article 3: Private economic enterprise is declared to be free. Nevertheless, it cannot be exercised to the deteriment of security, liberty, or human dignity. The law wilI determine the measures and controls necessary to assure the existence of complete compatibility between private economic activity and the interests of society. Article 4: As a general rule, property should serve for the progress and 'well-being of the peeple. Article 5: They are declared to be transgressions against the people those acts undertaken by those who for their own profit may steal public funds or may take advantage of their positions within the organizations of. the Government, its dependencies, or its autonomous entities, to obtain unlawful economic advantages. Those persons will be guilty of the same transgressions who may, from their positions as just referred to may deliberately afford advantages 'to their associates, families, relations, friends, or acquaintances. To those convicted of such offenses will be applied, without prejudice of other penalties imposed by the law, the penalty of civic degratation as the law shall specify; moreover, they shall be obliged to return any funds illegally acquired. Article 6: No person shall be obliged to commit any unlawful act, nor shall any person be prevented from committing any act not prohibited by law. Article 7: All decrees, regulations, or laws contrary to the present Constitution shall be null and void under. the law. Articl e 8: Every usurpation of authority is ineff ctive and its acts are null and void. Every decision taken by requisition of the armed forces is null and void.

- 2 -

Article 9: The law is not retroactive except in those cases in which it would be favorable to the accused or convicted person. Article 10: The national flag is composed of the colors of ultramarine blue and vermilion red in alternating q uarters situated in such fashion that the blue is in the upper quarter next to the flagpole, the quarters being separated by a white cross whose width is half the height of the colored quarter, and that carries in the center the coat of arms of the Republic. The merchant flag is the same as the national one, but without the coat of arms. Article 11: The coat of arms of the Republic will have the same colors as the national flag, disposed in the following fashion; it will have in the center an open bible with a cross above it, both of these elements rising from an emblem made up of two lances and four national flags without coat of arms arranged on both sides; it will carry a laurel branch on the left side and a palm branch on the right; it will be crowned with a ribbon of ultramarine blue on which will be the words "Dios, Patria, Libertad" (God, Country, Liberty), and at the bottom another ribbon of vermilion red color with the words "Republica Dominicana" (Dominican Republic). The form of the coat of arms will be rectangular with projecting upper corners and rounded lower ones, the base finishing in a point at the center, and it will be so proportioned that if a horizontal line is drawn between the two vertical lines of the rectangle from the beginning of the two lower angles, a perfect square will result. The law will determine the use and the dimensions of the national flag and the coat of arms. Article 12: No constitutional reform can change the form of the Government, which must always be civil, republican, democratic, and representative.
First Part	 I

Economic & Ethico-Social Relations Section

I --

Work

Article 13: Work in all its forms and applications will be

under the supervision and protection of the State. It is the duty of the State to see to the training and improvement in their skills of the workers and to promote and favor agreements with international organizations dedicated to confirm and regulate the right to work. Article 14: Those who are crippled or unfit to work have the right to education, training, or rehabilitation, either professional or technical. The State will assist in providing maintenance and social assistance to all those unfit for work who are without the resources or assistance necessary for their support. — 3—

Article 15: Trade-unions may be organized freely, provided the statutes of the union provide for a democratic internal organize tion, besides which they must be duly inscribed and registered in th local and the central offices of the Department of Labor in accordan with the law. In contractual relations between the management and the workers of one enterprise, in the case of unions of the same kind and covering the same trade or skill, the State will recognize only the union that has the largest number of workers as members: Article 16: Freedom to work is held sacred. The law will establish, as general interest may dictate, the maximum length of the working day, the days of rest and vacations, the minimum salaries and wages and the forms of payment for them, social insurance, the employ ment of a preponderance of nationals in all pursuits, and, in general all the requirements for protection and assistance on the part of the State that may be considered necessary or useful to the workers. Article 17: Equal wages shall be paid for equal work without discrimination as to sex, age, or civil state. Article 18:. The State recognizes the right and the duty of labor to collaborate with enterprises within the form and limits that may be established by law with the object of improving work and working conditions both socially and economically, and of responding to production needs. Article 19: In all agricultural, indistrial, commercial, or mining enterprises, the workers will have the right to share in the profits thereof, taking into consideration the legitimate interests of the owner(s) and other factors of production. The law will fix the extent and form of this participation. Article 20: The right of the workers to strike and of the ownership to stop operations in recognized, except in the case of public services. Regulations concerning strikes and stoppages of operations shall be laid down by law in accord with the interests of workers and owners, with social needs, and with national security. Article 21: The rights and profits of the workers that are established in this Section as well as those that may be laid down by law cannot be abrogated. Section II -- Property Article 22: : The State recognizes and guarantees the right of property; since property must contribute to the progress and wellbeing of the public, expropriation may be accomplished in the public interest according to procedures that shall be laid down by 'the law. In order to fix the indemnity to be paid, account will be taken on the one hand and principally of the public interest, and on

-4-

the other of the interest of the affected owners. Litigation regarding the amount of the indemnity shall be heard by the courts according to law, which will take into account the principles established in the preceeding paragraph. In these cases, the State may be permitted to take possession of the property without waiting for the decision of the court. In the case of auctions and forced sales, the State may acquire real estate or the values corresponding to the real estate at the auction price, within the time and standards that may be set by law, and will take such measures as may be necessary to return the real estate to the expropriated persons by means of embargo. Article 23: It is declared to be against the public interest for persons or private enterprises to own land in an excessive amount. Consequently, large private estates are forbidden, regardless of the way in which the holdings may have originated. The law will determine the maximum amount of land that may be owned by a private person or entity, taking into account agricultural, social, and economic factors. Personal enterprises may not acquire ownership of land except in the case of land destined to the improvement of communities and the erection of industrial and commercial establishments, according to the corresponding legal regulations. In the same way, such enterprises may acquire the necessary land in rural areas for their factories and annexes. Excluded from these regulations are credit institutions in the nation, who may acquire ownership of real estate that has been put up as collateral or guarantee for credits, and cooperative institutions, for high socio-economic purposes, who operate under the regulations that may be prescribed by law. The law may prescribe other exceptions for valid reasons. Article 24: The ownership and cultivation of excessively small plots of land is declared uneconomic and anti-social. The law will determine the meaning of this section and will take the necessary steps to obtain the integration of such plots into units that can be exploited with economic and social profit. Article 25: It is declared that only persons of Dominican citizenship have the right to acquire ownership of land. However, Congress may authorize by law, when it may be of advantage to the national interest, that foreign persons may acquire real estate in urban areas. The law may may regulate the lease of real estate by Dominican property owners to personal or legal entities that are not of Dominican nationality. The wealth of the subsoil and of offshore submerged land belongs to the State, which may grant concessions for its exploitation to nationals or to foreigners. The right of ownership of the State to mineral deposits is inalienable and non-transferable.

—5—

Article 26: Declared of high public interest is the establishment of each Dominican home on suitable land and dwellings. Each. Dominican family should have a suitable comfortable and sanitary home that, if the family group does not have the means, will be furnished to it by the State in cooperation with the beneficiaries to the extent of their income and economic possibilities, the whole in accordance with plans laid out by the competent authorities. Article 27: The property that serves as the family seat shall be inalienable and not subject to embargo. The law will fix the extent composition, and family patrimony of the part of the property that cannot be alienated or embargoed. Article 28: Each rural family without land, or without sufficient land, shall have the right to be provided with plots of a size proportional to the conditions of the soil and the needs and capacity for work, and shall be supplied with adequate means to assure the economic and social progress of the community. The State will collaborate with agrarian institutions, associations, or trade unions to assure the most productive cultivation of the soil.	 In accordance with this principle and the-aims proposed in the present disposition, declared of high social interest is the dedication of State lands to agrarian reform, and the breaking up of those private holdings that may exceed the - maximum amount of land of which an individual or an entity may be owner within the term to be fixed by law, and the sale of the resulting fractions to the peasants in the form and conditions established by the-same-law; If buyers are not forthcoming, the State, will acquire said fractions for eventual distribution to the peasants. The State shall promote the creation of both rural and urban cooperatives that will tend to increase by common effort the socio-economic level of the people, and shall also convert State 'enterprises to cooperatives enterprises or to enterprises with a cooperative economic base. Section III -- The Social Economy Article 30: Private monopolies are forbidden. Those persons or entities will be prosecuted and punished according to law who: a) Dedicate themselves to hoarding or cornering of comsumption items or necessities for the purpose of causing an increase in the price of said articles; b) In concert, maneuver, agreement, or otherwise, as producers, indistrialists, merchants, or managers of services to the public, tend to fix prices above normal, devide up markets, refuse commercial dealings with others, or make the sale or rental of one product or service

-6 -

dependent on the sale or rental of another, or limit or obstruct in anyway free competition in industry, in domestic or foreign commerce, or in services in the public; c) Directly or indirectly discriminate as regards prices between different buyers of products or merchandise of the same category or quality. Whether in domestic or foreign commerce, when such discrimination has the effect of limiting free competition or of creating a total or partial monopoly in any branch of industry of commerce, or of impeding, destroying, or impairing free competition with any person or entity; and d) By any act, maneuver, or combination tending to p roduce an abusive increase in utilities or an exclusive advantage to the benefit of one or more specific persons, to the prejudice of the public, of a social class, or of the collective interest. Article 31: It is the duty of the State to guarantee to farmers an assured and advantageous market. Unless the interested parties are able to obtain a more advantageous price, the State will be responsible for the obtention of a suitable one for agricultural products. Article 32: Whenever the value of land or real estate may rise without the efforts of work or private capital, but only because of the action of the State, the owners will be required to cede to the State a proportional part of the profit as may be determined by law. Article 33: The Bay of Samana is declared a tourist area. The law will establish measures looking toward the development of said area as well as others that may be designated. Article 34: The State will authorize the creation of ports and free ports And will concede tax exemptions that may favor the industrial development of the nation.
Section IV -- Education & Culture

Article 35: The right of all Dominicans to an education is

recognized, and the obligation of the State is established to take the
necessary steps to guarantee this important right. Article 36: The eradication of illiteracy is declared to be of public interest. The law will establish institutions and organisms charged with setting up in the nation an effective private and public campaign aimed at disseminating culture throughout the entire national territory and with teaching all its illiterate inhabitants to read and write. In order to put this teaching plan into effect, the Government will provide for the distribution of the corresponding funds, and will require the intellectual and economic collaboration of individuals. Article 37: The liberty of teaching is guaranteed, and science . is proclaimed as the basis of education. The State will be in charge of the organization, inspection, and vigilance over the school system

7

in order to achieve the social goals of culture and better intellectual, moral, and physical formation of the students. Article 38: Because of its social transcendence, teaching is elevated to a public function. 	 As a consequence, the Public Power is made responsible for the elevation of the living standards of every teacher, for providing him with the necessary means to perfect his knowledge, for his protection, and for the safeguarding of his dignity, so that he may consecrate himself to his lofty mission without economic, moral, religious, or political pressures. Article 39: The State will provide primary and secondary education without cost to all inhabitants of the national territory. Primary education is declared obligatory for all residents of the nation who are of school age. Article 40: The State will provide for the propagation and the improvement of university teaching and for professional, vocational,, and technical education of workers and peasants.
Section V -- The Family

Article 41: The State will provide through economic measures and other adequate dispositions for, the formation and stabilization of the family and the just compliance with its objectives. Article 42: The State will provide special protection to spouses and the family; to mothers who are pregnant, to maternity, andto the child from his birth to is complete development. Article 43: Sons and daughters will enjoy the same opportunities for social, spiritual, and physical development: Article 44: The father and mother have the duty to feed, assist, educate, and instruct their children, and the children have the duty to 	 law will establish guarfeed, respect, and assist their parents. antees and penalties in order to assure compliance with these duties. Article 45: The State will establish special measures to proabandonment. tect infants and youths from exploitation and from moral or material Article 46: Matrimony is recognized as the legal foundation of the family, and it is declared that is presupposes absolute equality in rights of the spouses, including economic_ Article47: The married woman will enjoy full civil rights. Real estate that is the common property of a married couple can be disposed of only with the consent of both spouses. Article 48: Whatever, may be its nature, legal status,or condition, a marriage may be dissolved by mutual consent of the two spouses, or upon the demand of either one of them in the form and for the causes that may be established The law will determine in which situations common-law marriages between persons in 'condition to - have Married legally may, for reasons -8-

of equity or social interest, enjoy economic privileges similar to those of legal marriage. Article 49: It is forbidden for public officials or function. aries to issue certificates showing the civil state of persons in which any mention is made on the certificate that the person was born in or out of wedlock, or, in general, any statement concerning the parentage other than what may be established by law. Section VI -- Health Article 50: The State shall watch over the conservation and protection of the health of the individual and of society as one of their fundamental rights. Indegent persons and those lacking sufficient resources shall receive' free medical treatment at the State clinics. Article 51: All matters pertaining to public hygiene and health shall be the responsibility of the State, which shall see that legislation on this matter is directed to obtaining the physical and mental perfection of the inhabitants of the Republic. development of rural hygiene is declared to be of public The interest. Article 52: It shall be a basic duty of the State to assure that the people are provided with nutritious and abundant food at low cost. For this purpose, the State shall do its utmost to assure at all times that necessities may be bought at equitable prices. Article 53: In certain cases, when a reduction in the prices of necessities required for the nourishment and well-being of the public is contrary to the financial interest of the State, the State renounce in the public interest its collections from taxes and other constributions. The prices of said necessities shall be reduced in proportion • to the reduction in taxes and contributions made by the State. In establishing and putting into effect the tax laws and the Schedules of customs duties, the norms established above shall be taken into account. Article 54: The State shall combat social vices by appropriate means,tions organizaincluding the help of international conventions and

shall

Title II - Human Rights Article 55: The inviolability of life is sacred. The death penalty cannot be established, nor any other penalty that implies the loss of the physical integrity of the individual. The law can, however, establish the death penalty for those who in the case of actions of legitimate defense against a foreign power may be

9

guilty of crimes against the safety of the national arms or of treason or espionage in favor of the enemy. Article 56: Personal liberty is declared to be inviolate. Considered arbitrary and illegal is any form of arrest, inspection, or personal search that does not proceed from a competent authority acting only according to the forms established by law. Article 57: The liberty of belief and of conscience, and the liberty of religious belief and of ideology are inviolate. The exercise of all religions and cults may be limited only by respect for morality, for public order, and for good taste. Article 58: Ali inhabitants of the Dominican territory may have recourse to the courts of law to safeguard and defend their own rights and their legitimate interests. The administration of justice is free. Article 59: Imprisonment for debt shall not be permitted unless it results from infraction of criminal law. Article 60: No person may be imprisoned or deprived of his liberty without the issuance of a written sentence by a competent member of the judiciary, except in cases of flagrante delicto. Article 61: Any person deprived 'of his liberty without cause or without the necessary legal formalities, or outside of cases foreseen by law, shall be set at liberty immediately at his ,demand or at the demand of any other person. The law of habeas corpus will determine the proper summary procedure for these cases. Article 62: Any person deprived of his liberty shall appear before the competent judicial authority within 48 hours of his detention, or if not he shall be set free. _Article 63: Any arrest shall become null and void or shall result, in imprisonment within 48 hours of the arrested person's being brought before a competent judicial authority, the accused person being notified within the same term of the decision in his case. Article 64: No person may be judged without having been heard or duly summoned, or without the observance of the procedures established by law to assure an impartial judgment and the exercise of the right of defense. Trials shall be public except as - may be prescribed by law in cases in which the publicity would be prejudicial to public order or good taste. Article 65: No person may be tried twice for the same cause, nor obliged to testify against himself. Article 66: No Dominican may be expelled from the country. The deportation or expulsion of any foreigner from Dominican territory may take place only as a result of a sentence handed down by the competent court of law, and after compliance with all legal formalities and procedures. Article 67: The right 'of all citizens is recognized to associate themselves in political parties, which may be formed freely. without

- 10

other requirement than that they be organized for peaceful and democratic purposes. Article 68: All inhabitants of the national territory have the right to form associations and societies. Those associations or societies are forbidden that have as their purpose the exercise of activities contrary to law or that attack public order, good taste, or the institutional systems organized by this Constitution, and those that are organized on the basis of privileges or discriminations of class, race, or social position. Article 69: The domicile is inviolate. No search or entrance of a person's domicile may be effected without an order from the competent judicial authority. When delay may imply certain or imminent danger, such search and entrance may be carried out by the organizations or functionaries designated by law, complying strictly to the terms thereof. Every procedure that affects the inviolability of the domicile or that restricts, it can be justified only by evidence of a collective danger or a risk to human life. It is established as a general rule that, no person may enter the domicile of another by night without the consent of the owner, except when hastening to succour victims of transgressions or disasters. By day, the domicile may be entered only under the conditions prescribed by law. The law may prescribe also that such procedures may be exercised with the object of preventing imminent dangers to security and public order', especially to combat the threat of an epidemic or to protect minors from danger. Article 70: Every person may, without subjection to previous censure, express freely his thoughts by speech, in writing, or by any other graphic or oral means of expression, always provided the thought does not tend to, attack morals, public order, or good taste, cases in which the penalties of .the law will be imposed. Anonymous communications, war propaganda, and anything having as its object disobedience of the law are forbidden, without this being interpreted to mean the restriction of analysis or criticism of legal precepts. Article 71: The press may not be submitted to any kind of coercion or censure. The liberty of the press is limited only by respect for individual privacy, morality, public peace, and good taste. Article 72:. Correspondence and other private documents are declared inviolate:. They may not be seized or inspected except by legal process in substantiation of matters that are before the court. Equally, inviolate is the secrecy of communication by telephone, tele-graph, and cable. Article 73: Liberty of movement is declared. As a consequence, every inhabitant of the Republic has the right to leave or enter the

•national territory at will; to travel and change his, residence without need for authorization, safe-conduct, passport, or other requisite, always provided he carries with him his identification documents. The exercise of this right may be restricted by the competent judicial authorities in the case of persons subject to criminal, civil, or commercial authority, or of those who may have cases pending before the administrative authorities. The right may be restricted also by dispositions of the laws on immigration concerning the public health or on undesirable foreigners in the country. Article 74: The inhabitants of the Republic have the right to assemble peacefully for all legitimate purposes in life, without other limitation than the need to assure the maintenance of public order. Article 75: All persons have the right of access to the books of register of arrested and incarcerated persons. Article 76: Any act affecting personal integrity, the security, or the honor of a person who has been arrested or condemned may be opposed by said person's apprehenders or guardians, who may submit proof to the contrary. The right, of subordinates is recognized to refuse to carry out orders article. of their superiors that are contrary to the guaranties of this Article 77: Persons arrested or held for political reasons shall be placed in a section separate from that for common delinquents. They shall not be obliged to undertake, any sort of labor, nor shall 'they be subject to the regulations covering such delinquents. Article 78: Detained persons may not be held incommunicado, nor may vexatious publicity be issued about them. Article 79: The exercise is prohibited absolutely of violence, torture, or coercion of any kind on persons in order to oblige them to confess.' Infraction of this disposition will result in any such declaration being null and void, and in the perpetrators being subject tohecrspndigalt. Article 80: The State will see to it that prisons are converted'. into modern penal institutions destined to the rehabilitation of the delinquent and the prevention of crime. The objective of every penal institution should be to develop in the prisoner an aptitude for work, good habits, and social customs:: In no case shall prisons be used for the humiliation or brutalization of the prisoner. Article 81: Declared legitimate is resistance directed toward the protection of human rights detailed above, which do notexclude such others as this Constituion establishes, nor others of-the same 'nature or that may result from the sovereignty of the - people and of the democratic regime. Article 82: The lower courts along shall hear cases involving infractions of the preceding articles, whatever may be the place, the

-12-

circumstances, or the persons involved in the detention or incarceration. The law will prescribe the applicable penalties. Article 83: The right of citizens and private entities is recognized to petition the Government regarding measures of public or private interest. The Government has the obligation to reply to such petitions through its representatives within a reasonable term, which may not exceed 30 days. Article 84: The prosecution of infractions of this Title is declared to be of public interest. Such prosecution may be undertaken officially or by simple denouncement by any person or private entity. second Part -- Organization of the Republic Title I Section I - The Nation and Its Government Article 85: The Dominican people constitute a nation organized a as a free and independent state with the name "Republica Dominicana" (Dominican Republic). Article 86: Its government is essentially civil, republican Democratic, and representative. 	 The Government is divided into the Legislative Branch, the executive Branch, and the Judicial Branch. These three branches are independent in the exercise of their respective functions. Their reprepresentatives are responsible and cannot delegate their attributions, which are solely those determined by this Constitution and the law. Section II - The Territory Article 87: The territory of the Dominican Republic is and shall remain inviolate. It is made up of the eastern part of the island of Santo Domingo and its adjacent islands. Its definitive and immutable territorial limits are those fixed by the Frontier Treaty of 1929 and its revision of 1936. It is divided politically into a district, the National District, which includes the capital of the republic, and into the provinces prescribed by law. The provinces, in turn, are divided into municipalities. Also part of the national territory are the territorial waters, the submerged off-shore land, and the covering air space. The extention of the territorial waters, s submerged off-shore land, and the covering air space shall be pre scribed by law. The law will determine the number of provinces and their limits as well as those of the National District and of the municipalities into which the provinces are divided, and will have the power to create

-

13

new political divisions of the territory with new denominations. The city of Santo Domingo is the capital of the Republic and the seat of the National Government. Article 88: Declared of supreme and permanent national interest is the economic and social development of the territory of the Republic along the length of its frontier, as well as the dissemination of culture and traditions of the Dominican people. The agricultural and industrial use of the rivers along the frontier continue to be regulated by the principles laid down in Article 6 of the Revision of 1936 of the Frontier Treaty of 1929 and Article 10 of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Arbitration of 1929. Title II - Political Rights Section I -- Nationality Article 89: Dominicans are: 1) Those person who at present enjoy this quality as a result of previous constitutions and laws. All those 2) persons born on territory of the Republic,-with the exception of the legitimate children of foreigners resident in the Republic as diplomatic representatives or as persons in transit: 3) Every person born abroad of a Dominican father and mother who, in accordance with the laws of the nation in which he was born, may not have acquired a foreign nationality, or every such person who may have acquired a foreign nationality but who after reaching his civil majority appears before a public official and signs a declaration. to be remitted to the Executiv e Branch by which he affirms .his intention to have Dominican nationality. 4) Naturalized persons. The law will specify the conditions and formalities required for naturalization. Section II -- Citizenship 'Article 90: Citizens are all Dominicans of either sex who are 18 years of . age, and all those who are or may have been. married who have not yet reached that age. Article 91: The rights of citizens are: .1) That of electing. 2) That of being eligible to elective posts within the restrictions indicated in this Constitution. Article 92: The rights of citizenship are lost:	 . 1) Upon bearing arms or helping in any attempt against the -

Republic.
2) Upon 'criminal condemnation, until rehabilitation. 3) Upon judicial prohibition, so long as it may last.

-14-

4) Upon collaborating with or being employed by a foreign government without previous authorization from the Executive Branch. 5) Upon adopting another nationality. In the two last cases, citizenship may be regained as may be determined by law. Section III -- Sovereignty Article 93: Sovereignty resides inherently in the people and is exercised by means of the powers recognized in the present Constitution. The interference of foreigners in political matters of the nation is prejudicial to the sovereignty of the State. At the same time, Dominicans who call upon foreign governments or military forces for the solution of internal disputes shall be declared violators of the national sovereignty and shall be punished as prescribed by law. Title III Section I -- The Legislative Power Article 94: All legislative powers are conferred by the present Constitution on a Congress of the Republic composed of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. Article 95: The election of senators and deputies shall be by direct, secret, popular vote. Article 96: The posts of senator and deputy are incompatible with any other paid public employment by the State or Municipality, except for the posts of minister, vice-minister, head of a department dependent on a ministry, or diplomatic or consular agents, in which cases the salary of the legislator shall be paid to his substitute in the Senate or Chamber until such time as the legislator resumes his legislative duties. As soon as a legislator has accepted any of the posts indicated in this article, he shall communicate with the legislative body of which he is a member, so that it may have knowledge of the fact and may proceed to call upon the corresponding substitute. Article 97: When vacancies occur among the senators or deputies, they shall be filled by the elected substitutes. If no substitute is available to fill a vacancy, the legislative body in which the vacancy occurred shall choose a substitute from among a triad presented by the party to which the original legislator belonged. Article 98: The names of the three persons shall be submitted to the legislative body in which the vacancy occurred within 30 days of such occurrence if Congress is then in session, or if it is not in session, then within 30 days of its next reunion. If the prescribed

-15-

term has lapsed without the party's having presented the list of three names, the corresponding legislative body shall proceed freely to the election of the substitute. Section II -- The Senate Article 99: The Senate shall be composed of members elected on the basis of one for each province and one for the National District. They shall be elected for a term of four years. Each senator shall have a substitute elected in the same way and at the same time as he. Article 100: A senator or substitute of a senator must be Dominican, in full possession of his political and civil rights, at least 25 years of age, and a native of the circumscription that elected him, province or the National District, or have lived in said province or District in a permanent fashion for the five years preceeding his election. Naturalized persons may not be elected as senators c substitutes for senators within less than ten years of having acquired nationality, and must have lived within the circumscription that elects them for five years preceeding their election. Article 101: The attributions of the Senate are: 1) To elect judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the Appellate Courts, of the Electoral Courts, of the Land Courts, and of the lower courts, justices of the peace and their substitutes, and judges of any other court or judicial order created by law, as well as the members of the Office of Accounts, from the triads elected by the 'Chamber of Deputies. 2) To approve the diplomatic appointments made by the Executive Power. To judge 3) accusations formulated by the Chamber of Deputies against-public. officials-elected for a prescribed, term, because of bad conduct or dereliction in the exercise of the duties. The Senate, in ' judging such cases, may not impose other penalties than those of re moval of the person from his post and prohibition from his holding any other salaried post or post of honor or confidence of the Republic. .Neverthelessthe convicted person shall remain subject, if there is cause, to being accused and judged by law. The Senate may not-pronounce a sentence of condemnation without an affirmative vote of at least three-quarters of its total membership. The dispositions of this article do not exclude the disciplinary powers of the Supreme Court of Justice as regards members of the Judiciary Power. Section III -- The Chamber of Deputies Article 102: The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of members elected every four years by the electroate of the provinces and

-16-

the National District on the basis of one deputy for every 50,000 inhabitants or fraction of more than 25,000. Each deputy shall have a substitute elected in the same way and at the same time as he. Article 103: A deputy or substitute of a deputy must be Dominican, in full possession of his p olitical and civil rights, at least 25 years of age, and a native of the circumscription that elected him, province or District, or have lived in said province or District in a permanent fashion for the five years preceeding his election. Naturalized persons may not be elected as deputies or substitutes for deputies within less than ten years of having acquired nationality, and must have lived within the circumscription that elects them for five years preceeding their election. Article 104: Attributes of the Chamber of Deputies are the selection of the triads for the election of public officials referred to in Paragraph 1 of Article 101, as well as the exercise of the right to accuse public officials before the Senate in accordance with Paragraph 3 of the same article. . The accusation may not be made except by affirmative vote of three-quarters of the total membership of the Chamber. Section IV -- Common Attributions of Both Chambers Article 105: The Chambers shall meet in National Assembly in the cases specified by this Constitution; more than half of the members of each;body being required to be present for this purpose. Decisions shall be made on the basis of an absolute majority of votes. Article 106: Each Chamber shall regulate its internal services and the conduct of business peculiar to it, being impowered to establish a disciplinary code of penalties for its members in consonance with the faults they may commit. Article 107: The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall meet separately, except when they may be united in a National Assembly. They may meet jointly to receive the message from the President of the Republic and the Reports from the ministers as referred to in Paragraph 20 of Article 128, to celebrate commemorations, or to take up business that may not be related to the legislative attributions of each Chamber or that may not be indicated by this Constitution as the exclusive function of one or another of them. Article 108: Each Chamber requires a quorum of at least onehalf of its members in order for its deliberations to be valid. Decisions shall be taken-on the basis of an absolute majority of votes, except in matters previously declared to be urgent, which shall be decided by two-thirds of the votes. The members of each Chamber shall enjoy the most absolute immunity before the law for all opinions expressed by them in the

- 17 -

Sessions

erty during a session of the legislature without authorization of th Chamber to which he belongs, except when he may be apprehended in the moment of commission of a crime. In any case, the Senate or the Cha
m-ber of DeputiesaqoDureifpthmesn,p-aori,nymebad thmebr

Article 109: No senator or deputy may

be

deprived .of his lib-

placedtibryfohuantelgisroapft,whmyvebndai,rstmponed rivfayomhslbert.Fipuo,ademnshlb toeArny the Senate or Chamber of President General of the of Republic Deputies, or by the the P Senator of Deputy, as the case may be; and if it may be necessary, the Attorney General shell give the order for libe ation directly, for which purpose he may require and shal received the sup ort of every member of the public forces. Article 110: The chambers shall meet in ordinary Session on 27 February and 16 August of each year, and each session shall last 90 days, Which term may be extended by another 60 days. bytheExcuivPowr. The chambers shall meet in ex traordinary session when convoked Article 111: On 27 February, each Chamber shall elect from for a term one year. members a president, a vice preresident, and two secretaries among its of Each Chamber shall designate its auxiliary employees, who sha ll remain the presidents in of their the posts so long as they are not expressly removed. lrepsnthi-cvbodesnalgt. Senate and Chamber of Deputies shall have disciplinary powers during the sessions, and shal Article 112: The President of the Senate shal sumeth presidncywhent woChambersmetinNationalAsemblyorjintly;hevic-presidncyshalbeasumedbytheprsonpresidngath mo enti heCamberofDeputies,andthepost fsecrtayb thoset whomthepost fsecrtaycorespondsath mo enti eachCamber.
•

In case of the temporary or permanent absence of both the President of the Senate and the Presidnet of the Chamber of Deputies, the Vice President of the Senate shall preside, and in his absence the Vice President of the Chamber of Deputies.

In case of the temporary or permanent absence of the President of the Senate, and, in the lat er case, so long as a new president of the Senate has not be n elected, the President of the Chamber of Deputies shal preside at the National Assembly or joint ses ion.

Article Assembly with of the election of t113: he PresidentThe and Vice National President of the Republ ic, with proclaiming theiis r elecharged ction, and, as the case presents iexaming tself, with receiving ththe e oath ofcertification office, with accepting or

rejecting their resignation, and with the exercise of the faculties conferred on it by the present Constitution. Title IV The Congress Article 114: Attributes of the Congress are: 1) To establish general taxes and rates and to prescribe the means for, their collection and legal inversion. 2) To approve or disapprove, in accordance with the report of the Office of Accounts, the situation of the tax collections and inversion of revenue , to be presented to the Executive Power. 3) To take note of the recommendations for le gislation made by the Executive Power. 4) To determine suitable means for conserving and developing the national wealth, and for the alienation of private wealth of the nation, except as prescribed in Paragraph 9 of Article 128 of this Constitution. 5) determine all matters regarding conservation of ancient monuments and the acquisition of all kinds of prehistoric and historic objects.hat may serve to build up a national archaeology. 6) ,To create or do away with provinces, municipalities, or other political divisions and to prescribe everything concerning their limits and organization after study has shown that social, political and economic benefits will result from the change. 7) In cases of disturbances of the peace or public catastrophe, to declare a state of siege and to suspend, where it exists and for the duration. of said state, the exercise of human rights ordained in Articles 56, 60, 61, 62, 63, 70, 73, and 74 of the present Constitution. 8) In case the national sovereignty should be exposed to grave and imminent danger, the Congress may declare the existence of a state of national emergency, suspending all exercise of human rights, except the inviolability of life, as ordained in Article 55 of this Constitution. If the Congress should not be in session, the President of the Republic may issue the same decree and shall convoke the Congress to inform it of the state of emergency and the dispositions that may have been taken. 9) To decide every matter concerning immigration. 10) To increase or reduce the number of Appellate Courts, and to create or do away with lower and other courts. 11) To create or do away with courts that try and judge complaints on administrative matters and to prescribe all matters concerning their organization and powers. 12) or disapprove all extraordinary public disburseTo approve ments for which credits have been requested by the Executive Power.

—1 9—

13) To authorize or refuse borrowings on the credit of the Republic through the Executive Power. 14) To approve or disapprove international treaties and corm( tions entered into by the Executive Power. 15) To legislate on all matters concerning the national debt. 16) To declare by law the need to reform the Constitution and the laws. 17) To grant authorization to the President of the Republic t leave the country for periods that may exceed 15 days. 18) To question the ministers on matters within their competence. 19) To examine annually all acts of the Executive Power and t approve them, if they are in conformity with the Constitution and the law. 20) To approve or disapprove contracts submitted by the Presi dent of the Republic in accordance with Paragraph 9 of Article 128. 21) To decree the removal of the legislative chambers from the capital, of the Republic for justified causes of force majeure, or because of a convocation of the President of the Republic. 22) To authorize or deny to the municipal councils the right . real estate and to approve or disapprove contract that the councils may enter into when these contain a guarantee in real estate or municipal income of a value in excess of five thousand gold pesos. 23) To legislate on all matters that may not be within the competence of another power of the State or contrary to the Constitu-

The Formulation of Laws

Article 115: The right and initiative in the formulation of' . laws is held by: a) Senators and Deputies; b) The President of the Republic, and c) The Supreme Court of Justice in juridical matters. The one who may exercise this right may support his motion in the other chamber if the case is one covered by Paragraph (a) of this Article, and in both Chambers through a representative if covered by one or another of the two paragraphs. Article 116: All bills presented in one of the. Chambers shall •be the subject of two separate discussions, with an interval of at least one day between them; if a bill has been declared previously to be urgent, it may be debated in two consecutive sessions. Article 117: When a bill has been approved in one of the two Chambers, it shall pass to the other for discussion, using the pre

-20-

viously mentioned procedure. If the second Chamber should modify the bill, it shall be returned with the necessary observations to the Chamber in which it originated; and if it is accepted as modified it shall then be sent to the Executive Power; but if the modifications should be rejected, it shall be returned to the other Chamber with the necessary observations, and if this Chamber then approves it, it shall be sent to the Executive Power; if the observations are rejected, the bill shall be considered as defeated. Article 118: Every law approved by both Chambers shall be sent to the Executive Power, which, if not in opposition to it, shall approve it within eight days of its receipt and shall publish it within 15 days of its approval; if opposed to the bill, the Executive Power shall return it to the Chamber in which it originated within eight days of its transmission to the Executive Power, unless the matter was declared to be urgent, in which case it shall be returned within three days. The Chamber that may have received the rejected bill from the Executive Power shall place the bill on the agenda of the next session at which time it shall debate the bill. If after debate, two-thirds of the total membership of said Chamber shall ap prove the bill anew, it shall then be sent to the other Chamber, and if the same two-thirds of the membership of this Chamber approve it, it shall be considered a law. The President of the Republic shall be obliged to proclaim and publish the law within the indicated, time limits. Bills that remain pending in either of the two Chambers at the close of a legislative session shall be held over to the next session and approved or disapproved definitely at that time. If this should not be done in this manner, the bill shall be considered as not having been presented. -Every bill received in one Chamber after approval in the other shall be placed on its agenda. Article 119: When a bill may have been sent to the President of the Republic for proclamation and the time until the end of the legislative session may be less than that prescribed in the preceeding article for its veto, the bill shall continue in being for the decision of the President of the Republic until the expiration of the time limits and procedure prescribed in Article 118. Article 120: Upon their publication, the laws apply to all inhabitants of the Republic, if the legal time has elapsed in which they shall have been made public. Article 121: Bills presented and defeated in one Chamber may not be presented in the other, or presented anew in either Chamber, until the next session. Article 122: Laws shall be headed: "The National Congress, in the Name of the Republic."

- 21 -

Title VI Section I -- The Executive Power Article 123: The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic, who shall be elected for four years by direct, secret popular vote, and who may not be re-elected or stand as candidate to the vice-presidency in the following term. Article 124: The requirements to be President of the Republic are: 1) To be Dominican by birth or origin; 2) To have reached the age of 30 years; and 3) To be in full exercises of civil and political rights. Article 125: There shall be a Vice President of the Republic, who shall be elected in the same way and for the same term as the President, and at the same time as he. The requirements to be Vice President as the same as for President. The Vice President of the Republic cannot be re-elected or sten( as candidate to the presidency of the Republic in the following term. Article 126: The President and the Vice President as elected in the ordinary elections shall be sworn in on the following 27 February, the date on which the term of office of the retiring President and Vice President shall terminate. In case of the absence and failure to take the oath of office of the elected President of the Republic, the elected Vice President shall take is place,in the presidency until such time as the National Assembly, made up of-the senators and deputies elected at the same time as the President, shall designate a definitive President of the Republic in a session that may not erminate or declare a recess until such des ignation as been made. If the elected Vice President of the Republic should not be able to take the oath of office to the presidency, in cases of the temporary or definite absence of the elected President of the Republic because of absence from the country, illness, or for any other cause of force majeure, the person who may be elected by the Senate in its first session -- which should take place on 27 February -- to exercise the func tions of President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall exercise provisionally the functions of the presidency of the Republic. In case of the definitive absence of both the elected President and Vice President of the Republic before 27 February, the National Assembly, made up of the senators and deputies elected at the same time as the President, shall meet on 27 February to elect a new President of the Republic in a session that may not terminate or declare a recess until such election has been made. Until such election has been made, the presidency of the Republic shall be exercised by the person who may have been elected by the

- 22 -

Senate for the presidency of the Supreme Court of Justice, and if such a person is lacking, by the person who may have occupied the presidency of the Supreme Court of Justice at the end of the term of office just finished. In every case, the election of the new President of the Republic by the National Assembly shall be made from the ranks of the political party to which the President who did not take oath of office belonged. Article 127: Before entering upon their duties, the President and Vice President of the Republic shall take the following oath before the National Assembly, or before any public employee or official. "I SWEAR BEFORE GOD, MY COUNTRY, AND MY NOR TO FULFILL AND TO REQUIRE TO BE FULFILLED THE CONSTITUTION AND THE LAWS OF THE REPUBLIC, TO SUPPORT AND DEFEND ITS INDEPENDENCE; TO RESPECT ITS RIGHTS, AND TO FULFILL FAITHFULLY THE DUTIES WITH WHICH I AM CHARGED." Article 128: The President of the Republic is the supreme authority of public administration and of all the armed forces of the nation, as well as of all the police forces and of security. As such, he shall determine all matters of organization and operation of said institutions. The following functions, then, pertain to the President of the Republic: 1) To appoint the ministers and vice ministers, and the other public officials and employees whose appointment is not attributed to any power or autonomous organization that is recognized and designated by this Constitution or by law, and to accept their resignations or to - remove them from office. 2) To proclaim and publish the laws and resolutions and see to their execution. To issue regulations, decrees, and instructions wen it may be necessary. 3) To watch over the proper collection of taxes and the proper use of the national income. 4) To name, with the approval of the Senate, the members of the diplomatic corps, and to accept their resignations and to remove them from office. 5) To receive foreign chiefs of state and their representatives. 6) To preside over all solemn rituals of the nation, to direct diplomatic negotiations, and to arrange treaties with foreign countries, said treaties to be approved by Congress, without which approval they shall have no validity nor shall the Republic have any obligation concerning them. In case of disturbance of the peace or of public catastro7) phe, if the Congress should not be in session, to decree, wherever such situations may arise, a state of siege and to sus p end the exercise of human rights that according to Paragraph 7 of Article 114 of this

—23—

Constitution the Congress has the right to suspend; and in case of grave or imminent danger, to declare a state of national emergency, with the effects and prescriptions indicated in Paragraph 8 of the sa article. 8) To fill provisionally, when the legislative bodies are recessed, the vacancies that may occur among the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Appellate Courts, the Land Courts, and the lowe] courts, and the Justices of the Peace, and of any other courts create( by law, as well as the Office of Accounts, with the obligation to inform the Congress of his appointments at the next legislative session in order for it to give its definitive approval. 9) To negotiate contracts, which shall be submitted to the approval of the National Congress whenever they may contain provisions concerning the national revenue, the hypothecation of real estate of a value in excess of ten thousand gold pesos, or the arrangement for loans, or whenever they may stipulate exemption from taxes in general, according to law. 10) To issue or deny navigation rights. 11) To regulate all matters concerning the customs. 12) To command at all times the armed forces of the nation, individually or through the person or persons whom he may designate to do so, to set the number of such forces, and to make use of them for the purposes of public service. 13) To take the required steps to provide for the legitimate defense of the nation in case of imminent or actual armed attack by a foreign nation, having the obligation to inform the Congress of the measures adopted by him. 14) In the case of the previous paragraph, to arrest or subject to trial those foreigners whose activities may have been or may be prejudicial to the national interest. 15) To approve or disapprove of the appointment or dismissal of the members of the. Council of War by the Minister of the Armed Forces, in accordance with the law. 16) To determine all, matters concerning maritime zones and river and military areas. 17) To determine all matters concerning the improvement and maintenance of ports and sea coasts. 18) To forbid, whenever he may judge it convenient, the entrance of foreigners on national territory, as well as to submit to expulsion proceedings, those who are in the country, whenever he may judge it convenient to do so in the public interest. 19) To change the place of his official residence whenever he may find it necessary. 20) To attend on 27 February of each year the opening of the National Congress, and to present a message at that time in which he shall give an account of his administration during the course of the

--24-

previous year, accompanying it with reports from the ministries on their respective responsibilities. To submit to the Congress during the second legislative 21) session, which begins on 16 August, the proposed national budget of public income and disbursements for the coming year. 22) To grant or deny authorization to Dominican citizens to hold foreign public offices. To rescind by justifiable decree the rates and taxes pre23) scribed by municipal councils when they are contrary to the socioeconomic interests of the public. To grant or deny the right to municipal councils to hypo24) thecate real estate and to approve or disapprove contracts that they may execute in which municipal real estate or collections may be used as guarantees, when the value is not in excess of five thousand gold pesos. 25) To declare war and to negotiate peace with the authorization of the Congress. Article 129: The President of the Republic may not leave the country for more than 15 days without the authorization of the Congress. Article 130: The President and the Vice President may not resign their posts except before the National Assembly. Article 131: In case of the temporary or definitive of the President of the Republic, he shall be replaced by the Vice President. If the absence should become definitive, the substitution shall continue until the end of the presidential term. Article 132: In case of the temporary absence of the President and Vice President of the Republic, the Executive Power shall be exercised for the duration of the absence by the President of the Senate, and, should he not be available, by the President of the Chamber of Deputies. In case of the definitive absence of the President and Vice President of the Republic, the presidency shall be exercised provisionally by the President of the Senate, and, if he is not available, by the President of the Chamber of Deputies. Article 133: Within the term of 15 days that may follow the date on which these functions have been assumed, the President of the Senate or the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall convoke the National Assembly to meet within the following 15 days and to elect the definitive replacement in a session that cannot be terminated or declared in recess until the election has been completed. In case such a convocation should not be made within the specified 15 days, the National Assembly shall meet with full powers to carry the election to a conclusion in the form prescribed above. The person elected shall fulfill the conditions prescribed in the last part of Article 126 of the present Constitution.

-25-

Section II -- The Ministries Article 134: Ministries as may be established by law shall be charged with matters of public 'administration. In order to be a minister or vice minister, a person must be Dominican, in full possession of his civil and political rights, and at least 25 years of age. Naturalized persons cannot be ministers or vice ministers with in less than five years of their naturalization. The Executive Power shall prescribe the regulation and functions of the ministries. Title VII Section I -- The Judiciary Power Article 135: The Judiciary Power shall be exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice and by the other courts of law prescribed by this Constitution and by law. The National Congress shall pass an organic law for the Judi ciary Power in which the judiciary careers may be fixed, in order that, judges and magistrates may enter upon their careers through competitive examinations, and their advancement and promotion may be based on seniority or on further competition based on merit, in addition to the conditions established in this Constitution. Members of the judiciary may not occupy other public posts or employment, except as prescribed in Article 168. Section II -- The Supreme Court of Justice Article 136: The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of at least nine judges, but may convene, deliberate, and pass lawful judgment with the quorum that may be determined by law, which shall regulate its composition and organization. Upon electing the judges to the Supreme Court of Justice, the Senate shall indicate which of them shall occupy the presidency, and shall designate the first and second substitutes to replace, in that order and with full powers, the President in case he should be absent or incapacitated. In case of the retirement of a judge invested with one or another of the qualities mentioned above, the Senate shall elect from • a triad submitted for the purpose by the Chamber of Deputies, a new judge with the same quality, or shall pass the quality to another of the judges. Article 137: The requirements to be a judge of the Supreme Court of Justice are: 1) To be Dominican by birth or origin, and to be at least 35

-26-

years of age. To be in full possession of civil and political rights. 2) 3) To be a licensed Doctor of Law. To have practiced law for a period of eight years, or to have discharged for the same length of time the functions of judge in the Appellate Court, the District Court, and the Land Court, or to have represented the Government as an attorney before said courts for the same length of time. The periods in which the functions of attorney and of judge were exercised shall be accumulated. Article 138: The Public Ministry shall be represented before the Supreme Court of Justice by the Attorney General himself, or by such representative as may be designated by law; he shall have the same category as the president of said court, and the attributes that may be conferred on him by: law. In order to be Attorney General of the Republic, it is necessary ..to be Dominican, and to possess the same other qualifications as are required for a judge of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article • 139: The following attributes belong exclusively to the Supreme Court of Justice, without prejudice to other attributes that may be -conferred on it by law: 1) . To hear, in that court only, charges brought against the President or Vice President of the Republic, the senators, deputies, ministers, vice ministers, judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General of the Republic, judges and attorney generals of the Appellate Courts, the state attorney before the Land Courts, and the Members of the diplomatic corps. 2) To hear the appeals of decisions of any other courts in conformity with .the Law of Appeal. • 3) To conduct the final hearing on cases heard for the first time by the Appellate. Court. To exercise the highest disciplinary authority over all the members of the Judiciary Power, including the right of suspension or removal as may be determined by law. 5) To transfer, temporarily or permanently, from on jursidiction to another as it may deem convenient for the service, the justices of the peace and the judges of the lower courts, land courts, and appellate courts. To proclaim the cancellation or suspension of writs of 6) exequatur for the exercise of professions in conformity with the law. 7) . To hear as final court of appeal the charges of 	 resolutions, regulations, ordinances, and unconstitutionality of laws, whatever other acts that may be material for judiciary controversy between parties before other courts, according to the due process of

-27-

Section III -- The Appellate Courts Article 140: There shall be at least three Ap pellate Courts in the Republic; the number of judges and the judiciary districts for each shall be determined by law. Article 141: A judge of the Appellate Court must fulfill the following requirements: . 1) Be Dominican. 2) Be in full possession of his political and civil rights. Be a licensed Doctor of Law. 3) 4) Have exercised the profession of attorney for three years, or to have fulfilled for an equal length of time the functions of a judge of the lower courts or of the Land Courts, or pleaded before the District Courts as a representative of the Government. The periods of law practice and of judiciary functions shall be accumulated. The Public Ministry is represented at each Appellate Court by an attorney general, or by such substitutes for him as the law may prescribe, all of whom shall fulfill the same conditions as the judges of these courts. Article 143: The attributes of the Appellate Courts are: 1) To hear appeals of decisions handed down by. the District Courts. 2) To , hear originally cases involving charges brought against judges of the lower courts, and land courts, district attorneys, and governors of provinces. 3) To hear other cases as may be determined by law. Section IV -- The Land Courts Article 144: The attributions of the Land Courts shall be prescribed by law. In order to be president or judge of the superior Land Cour. the same conditions are required as for a judge of the Appellate Court, and for a judge of Original Jurisdiction, the same as fora judge of the District Court. Section V -- District Courts In each judiciary district there shall be a District Court, whose attributions shall be prescribed by law. The law shall determine the number of judiciary districts, the number of judges assigned to the courts, and the number of sections into which the courts may be divided. Article 146: In order to be a judge in the District Court, it is necessary to be Dominican, to be in full possession of political and civil rights, to be a licensed Doctor of Law, and to have exercised the

- 28 -

practice of law for two years. The periods of law practice and of judiciary functions shall be accumulated. Article 147: In order to be a district attorney or a magistrate, the same condition must be fulfilled as	 a judge of the District Court. Section VI -- The Justices of the Peace Article 148: In the National District and in each municipality, there shall be the justices of the peace that may be necessary, as prescribed by law. In order to be a justice of the peace or prosecutor or substitute for one or the other, it is necessary to be Dominican, to be an attorney, and to be in full possession of political and civil rights. These posts shall have the attributions that the law may prescribe. It shall not be necessary to be an attorney in order to fill the aforementioned posts in municipalities where it may be impossible to elect to designate attorneys for them. Article 149: There shall be a permanent Office of Accounts composed of at least five members, elected by the Senate from the triads that the Chamber of Deputies may submit. In addition to those conferred by law, its attributions shall be the following: 1) To audit general and specific accounts of the Republic. 2) To present to the first session of the Congress the report on the accounts of the previous year. 3) To examine, as often as may be necessary, by means of a corps of inspectors the debits and credits of the enterprises controlled by the State and of the autonomous institutions, and to present a report to the National Congress through the Chamber of Deputies, of the result of each audit that may be made. The audit and the report must be made at least once in each year. Article 150: In order to be a member of the Office of Accounts, it is necessary to be Dominican, licensed in finance or as a Doctor of Law or to be a licensed public accountant for at least two years. Titles VIII and IX are missing from the original text Title X - The National District and Municipalities Article 151: The government of the National District and of the municipalities shall each be carried out by a council whose members as well as their substitutes, in number as may be prescribed by law in relation to the number of inhabitants, shall be elected, as shall the mayor of the National District and the mayors of the municipalities, by , the people of said District and of the municipalities respectively, every two years in the manner that may be determined by the Constitu-

tion and the law, from candidates that may be pro p osed by the political parties that take part in the electoral process. Article 152: The said councils are autonomous in the exercise of their attributions, excepting the restrictions and limitations tha may be established by the Constitution and the law, which shall prescribe their attributions, faculties, and duties. Article 153: The law shall determine the conditions that must be fulfilled by those who occupy the posts indicated in Article 151. Naturalized persons who have attained their majority may discharge said posts under the conditions that may be established by law, always provided they have resided more than two years in the corresponding jursidiction. -Title XI - The Provincial Governments

Article 154: There shall be in each province of the Republic a civil governor, who shall be designated as the Executive In order to be civil governor it is necessary to be Dominican,. at least 25 years of age, and in full possession of political and civil rights. Article 155: The organization and government of the provinces, as well as the attributions and duties of the civil governors, shall be determined by law. Article 156: To vote is a civil duty for every citizen, with the following exceptions: 1) Those who have lost their rights of citizenship in accor-dance with Article 92 of this Constitution. 2) Those who belong to the armed forces or the police forces. The vote is personal, free, secret, and popular.
Title XII - The Electoral Assemblies

Article 157: The Electoral Assemblies shall meet with all their powers three months before the expiration of the constitutional period, and shall proceed to exercise the functions that the Constitution and the law may determine. In case of extraordinary convocations, they shall meet within 60 days at most of the date of the convocation. Article 158: The Electoral Assemblies are charged with the election of the President and the Vice President of the 'Republic, the senators and deputies and their substitutes, the members and their substitutes of the municipal councils and the council of the National:: District, the mayor of the National District and the mayors o f themunicipalities and their substitutes, as well as any other public official as may be prescribed by law. Article 159: The elections shall be held according to methods

-3 0—

that the law may prescribe by direct, secret, and popular vote, and with the representation of the minorities when more than one candidate is to be elected. Article 160: The elections shall be supervised by a Superior Electoral Court and by the provincial, National District, and municipal courts, which have the power to judge and regulate them according to law. The Superior Electoral Court shall take over the management and command of the public forces in the places where said voting may take place. Title XIII - The Armed Forces Article 161: The Armed Forces are essentially obedient, nonpolitical, and non-deliberative. The object of their creation and existence is to defend the independence and integrity of the Republic, to maintain public order, the Constitution, and the law. They may be called upon by the Executive Power to collaborate in plans for the socio-economic development of the country. . Article 162: The conditions necessary for a citizen to become a member of the Armed Forces shall be contained in the law by which the Forces shall be created.
Title XIV - General Dispositions

Article 163: No outlay of public funds shall be valid unless authorized by law and ordered by the competent public employees or officials. Article 164: In June of each year, the general report of income and expenditures of the Republic for the previous year shall be published. Article 165: The national monetary unity is the gold peso. Only those bills shall be legal for circulation and for the payment of debts that may be issued by a single autonomous entity whose capital shall be the property 9f the State, said bills to be at all times guaranteed by reserves in gold or other real and effective values, in the proportions and conditions that may be prescribed by law under the unlimited guarantee of the State. Metallic coins shall be issued by the State through the same entity and shall be put into circulation only in replacement of an equivalent. value in bills. The extent to which metallic coins in circulation at present or that may be put into circulation in the future may be used as legal tender for the payment of debts shall be determined by law. The regulation of the monetary and banking system of the nation shall be under the control of the entity of issue, whose superior agency shall be the Monetary Council, made up of members who shall be

-31

designated and who may be removed only in accordance with the law, a who shall fulfill : faithfully their duties according to the provision . '	 of the Council.	 or The issue or circulation is forbidden of any paper money other monetary unit not authorized by this Constitution, whether issued by any other public or private enterprise or person. by the State or Any modification in the legal monetaryo r banking regulations shall require the approval of two-thirds of the total membership of one and the chamber, chamber it has been initiated b the Executive Power upon the recommendation of the Monetary Council c with the favorable vote thereof. ' Article 166: The right to exclusive —ownership is-recognized, for the period of time , and in the form that ,may be determine by law, of inventions and discoveries, as well as scientific , artistic literary productions. .	 -	 . Article 167: Persons chosen to exercise a public function sha take oath to respect-the 'Constitution and the law,. and to discharge faithfully their post. This oath may be taken before any public employee or official. Article 168: No public function or post shall be incompatible with honorary or teaching posts. Article 169: The term of all elective public employees and officials, whatever the date of" their election, shall end uniformly on 27 February-every four years, the date on which the constitutional period begins, except-for elective municipal posts, which shall end every two years. Whenever a public , employee or official shall cease in the exercise of his post because of death, resignation, removal, incapacity, or any other cause, his substitute shall remain-in the post , until the end of the period. Article 170: The State shall rot grant to governing officials, to public employees, or to national or foreign citizens;-honorary titles or decorations, except in case of war or by reciprocity, with the previous authorization of the National Congress. Article 171: No exemption shall be recognized nor any exoner. ation, reduction, or limitaion shal be granted on taxes, contributions, or fiscal or municipal duties and rates, in favor of private persons or groups, or groups, aesmxybpcridlatw.Nevhs, private persons or groups may acquire 	 by means of concessions authorized by law or by contracts approved . by the National Congress, the right to benefit for all the time that maybe stipulated in the con ' cession or contract, and complying with the obligations that one or the other may place on them; exemptions; exonerations, reductions, or limitations of taxes, contributions, or fiscal or municipal duties and ,rates indicent to specified works or enterprises to which it may be convenient, for the promotion 	 the national economy or any other

-- 32 -

objective of socio-economic interest, to attract the investment of new capital. Article 172: The Law of Public Disbursements shall be divided into chapters that shall correspond to the different branches of the 	 Administration and sums may not be transferred from one chapter to another, nor from one budget section to another, except by virtue of a law. This law, if not initiated by the Executive Power, shall have the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total membership of each legisla	 tive chamber. No law shall have any effect or validity that may order the payment or may create a pecuniary obligation upon the State, unless the same law provides special funds for its execution or arranges that payment shall be made from the calculated receipts during the year, and that there remain upon publication of the law a proportion sufficient to make such payment. The congress may not vote any valid outlay of funds unless it is included in the Law of Public Disbursements submitted to the Executive Power in accordance with Articl e 128 of this 'Constitution, or unless It may have been requested by the same Executive Power after having submitted said project, except in the case in which the law that authorizes said outlay, shall have been approved by two-thirds of the total. membership of each legislative Chamber; and all without prejudice to the general rule established in the first paragraph of the present article. .
Title
XV Constitutional Reforms

Constitution may be reformed if the proposal for reform is presented to the National Congress with the support of :a third of the members Of one or another of the legislative Chambers, or . if it is submitted by the executive Power.	 Article174:The necessity for reform shall be declared by a law that may be voted by only a two-thirds majority of each Chamber. This law, which cannot be vetoed by the Executive Power, shall order the reunion of the National Assembly, shall determine the objective of the reform, and shall indicate the articles of the Constitution to be "discussed. .Article 175: In order to act on the proposed reforms, the National Assembly shall meet within the following days after the publication of the law declaring the need for the reform, with the attendance of more than half of each of the Chambers; as exception to-what is prescribed in Article 105, decisions shall be taken on the basis of a majority of two-thirds of the votes. Once the National Assembly, the Constitution shall 	 published integrally with the reformed texts. Article 176: The Constitution may be reformed only in the manner indicated in it; nor can it ever be suspended or annulled by any
-

33-

authority or power, or by popular cclamation. Temporary Dispositions First From the time of publication until the reform of the present Agrarian Law, which shall contain dispositions to this effect, those persons who engage in any form of agriculture, whether cultivation or livestock raising or bop, because of a contract or for having done so for more than one year, may not be dispossessed nor expelled from the rural estates that they occupy except by authorization of the Ministry of Agriculture, which, after consultation with the agricultural trade unions, shall decide whether to proceed with the measure. Excluded from the benefits to this disposition are those persons who, taking advantage of their prerogatives, occupy illegally cultivated or grazing lands belonging to the. State or to municipalities.

The assured tenure of judges in office shall .be put into effect through a qualifying law after the purging on the part of the National Assembly of the performance of the present judges, taking account of their probity, their moral character, and the juridical capacity and experience for the exercise of juridical functions. ISSUED AND PROCLAIMED in the City of Santo Domingo, Capital of the Dominican Republics in the Palace-of the National-Congress • ated at the Center of the Heroes of Constanza, Maimon and Estero Hondo, this 29th day of the month of April, 196 3, in the one hundred and twentieth and the one hundredth year of the Res. .	 year of Independence toration. 'Dr. Jose Rafael 	 Urena, President Maximo Ares Garcia, Vice President Dr. Antonio Fernandez Secretary Dr. Manuel Emilio Ledesma Perez, Secretary MEMBERS: Lumen Manuel Alvarez, Dr. Bienvenido Aquino .Vargas, Freddy Salvador Baoz'Dr. Miguel Angel Brio Mat Mata, Dr.Pablo Juan Bruge Munoz, Miguel Angel de Camps, Dr. .Arevalo Cedeno Valdez, Domingo 'Queimis.Jr. Venustiano Remonte Liriano, Dr. Jose de Jesus AlvareZ.Perallo, Dr.Arismondy Aaristy Jimenez, Dr. Censer A.:Bobadilla-R0j140Iejandro c.E.'Bueno H., Elena Campagna deb Read, Lie. Cesar Augusto Qano Fortuna, Dr.. Francisco Cruz Nawuin, foredo Zabullon Di Enrique Dorrejo, Loc. Roger Fernandez Marmol, Dr. Jose Garcia Pranoinoos,

:,ntonic G=ez Batista, Dra. Fremia A. Germosen Cancia,	 • Ruddy Antonio Hache, Antonio Jizonzalz, 2r. 2-11Oezt :,:artinez y Martinez, Modesto Americo ,,:oneezo, 3artolo:ne 1::ocuete nndimo, Rafael Morillo Burgos, Dr. Obdulio ic Ogando, Persio Antonio CiO1z2dG5 Feliz Peguero Paulino, Israel de Pena, Dr. ::4,sto ja7., Jesus : ::ntonio Gomez • Diaz, Heriberto Frias, Jr., is.nnel 	 Rosario, Dr. Carlos Manuel Guzman Gorr.17.ras, Bienvenido C. Hazim Egel, Dr. Porfirio Lopez Rodriguez, Dr. Fracisoo Jose era Pantaleon, quintin Montero, Jose Ramon Morales 2iantini, 1):2. ...rt. u.ro Guillermo Muniz Marts, Dr. Merilio Ortiz, Francisco Pena Gonzalez, nmerico • Perez Mercedes, Rodolfo Rafael Picharao, Azr. Hafaal Reyes Valverde, MaAuel de los Reyes Rivas Batista, Dr. Ctnvio nvidio Rodriguez Lara, Cesar Augusto Roque Taverns, Eng. Juan Santos dantoni. Vivo:., Dr. VePedro Ma. Soliman Bello, Regalia Vazquez noosta, Dr. .floides 	 loz, Dr. Aristides Victoria Jose, Dr. Juan 'Francisco Perez Velazquez, Roberto Ramirez, Teofilo Juan Risk, Dr. Rafael acariguez Colon, Dr. Dr. Rafael Miguel Rodriguez, S., Juan Moises Rosario Tejada, Dr. Ramon Dario de los Santos, Miguel Soto, Dr. Bienvenido Velez Toribio, Dr. Marino Villanueva C., Rag. Jose del Carmen Victoria Jose, 	 519901 JL1123
1963 .A5

