Constitution of the DOMINICAN

REPUBLIC 1962

PAN AMERICAN UNION
General Secretariat, Organization of American States

Washington, D.C. • 1964

The Dominican Republic adopted a new Constitution on April 29, 1963. However, on September 25, 1963, this Constitution was repealed and superseded by the previous Constitution of September 16, 1962. The present text was translated from the version printed in the Gaceta Oficial of September 17, 1962.

This Series is published under the direction of the General Legal Division, Department of Legal Affairs, Pan American Union, Washington, D, C.

CONTENTS
Page
TITLE I Section I The Nation and Its Government Section II The Territory 1 Section III Frontier Economic and Social System 1 2

TITLE II

Human Rights

2

TITLE III

Concordat

5

TITLE IV

Political Rights Section I Section II Nationality Citizenship

6
6

TITLE V

Sovereignty

7

TITLE VI

Section I The Legislative Branch Section II The Senate Section III The Chamber of Deputies Section IV Provisions Common to Both Chambers

7 8 8

9
10

TITLE VII

The Congress

TITLE VIII Enactment of the Laws

12

TITLE IX

Section I Section II

The Executive Branch The Secretaries of State

13 17

TITLE X

Section I The Judicial Branch Section II The Supreme Court of Justice Section III Courts of Appeal Section IV Land Courts Section V Courts of First Instance Section VI Justices of the Peace

17 17 18 19 19 20

TITLE XI TITLE XII

Accounting Commission National District and Municipalities

20 20 21 21 22 22 25 26

TITLE XIII Administration of th e Provinces TITLE XIV Electoral Assemblies TITLE XV The Armed Forces TITLE XVI General Provisions TITLE XVII Constitutional Amendments Transitory Provisions

CONSTITUTION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

TITLE I
Section I The Nation and Its Government Article 1. The Dominican people form a nation organized into a free and independent state, with the name of the Dominican Republic. Article 2, Its government is essentially civil, republican, democratic, and representative. It is divided into the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. These three branches are independent in the exercise of their respective functions. Those entrusted with these branches are responsible for them and may not delegate their responsibilities, which are solely those specified by this Constitution and the laws. Article 3. The sovereignty of the Dominican nation as a free and \independent state is inviolable. Consequently, none of the public powers organized by the present Constitution may perform or permit or accept the performance of acts which constitute a direct or indirect intervention in the internal or external affairs of the Dominican Republic or an interference which is against the personality and integrity of the state and of -the functions recognized and affirmed in this Constitution. The principle of nonintervention affirmed in this article constitutes a rule for Dominican international policy. Article 4. The Dominican Republic shall not favor any international condemnation which, in the opinion of its Government, may result in prejudice to a brother people of the Americas.

Section II The Territory Article 5. The territory of the Dominican Republic is and shall be inalienable. It consists of the eastern part of the island of Santo Domingo and its adjacent islands. Its permanent and immutable land boundaries are fixed by the Boundary Treaty of 1929 and its Protocol of Revision of 1936. It is divided politically into one district known as the National District, which includes the capital of the Republic, and into such provinces as are determined by law. The

provinces in turn are divided into municipalities. The corresponding territorial sea and continental shelf are also parts of the national territory. The extent of the territorial sea and continental shelf shall be fixed by law. Paragraph. The law shall fix the number of provinces and their boundaries and those of the National District, as well as those of the municipalities into which they are divided, and it may also create, under other names, new political divisions of the territory. Article 6. The city of Santo Domingo is the capital of the Republic and the seat of the national government.

Section HI Frontier Economic and Social System Article 7. The economic and social development of the territory of the Republic along the frontier, as well as the dissemination there of culture and the religious tradition of the Dominican people, are declared to be of supreme and permanent national interest. The agricultural and industrial utilization of frontier rivers shall continue to be regulated by the principles affirmed in Article 6 of the 1936 Protocol revising the Boundary Treaty of 1929 and in Article 10 of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Arbitration of 1929.

TITLE II
Human Rights

Article 8. The effective protection of the rights of the human being and the creation and maintenance of the means which will permit him to improve himself progressively within a system of individual liberty and social justice, compatible with public order, the general well-being and the rights of all, are recognized as the principal aims of the state. In order to guarantee the accomplishment of these aims the following standards are set:
1) The inviolability of life. Neither the death penalty nor any other that implies loss of the physical integrity of the individual may be established. The law may, however, establish the death penalty for those who, in case of legitimate defense against a foreign State, become guilty of crimes against the success of national arms or of treason or espionage in favor of the enemy. 2) Individual security. Therefore: a) Corporal punishment shall not be established for debts that do not arise from infractions of the penal laws. b) No one may be sent to prison or restrained in his freedom without an order written and defined by a competent judicial official, except in case of flagrante delicto. c) Any person deprived of his freedom without cause or without legal formalities, or in cases not covered by law, shall be placed at

liberty immediately upon his own demand or that of any person. The law of habeas corpus shall determine the manner of proceeding summarily in these cases. d) Any person deprived of his freedom shall be submitted to the competent judicial authority or freed within forty-eight hours after his arrest. e) Every arrest shall be void or shall become imprisonment within forty-eight hours after the arrested person has been submitted to the competent judicial authority, and the interested party must be notified within the same period of the ruling handed down in the case. f) No one may be tried twice for the same offense. g) No one may be required to testify against himself. h) No one may receive sentence without a hearing or due summons, or without observance of the procedures established by law to ensure impartial judgment and the exercise of the right of defense. Hearings shall be public, unless excepted by law in cases where publicity might be prejudicial to the public order or to good customs. 3) Freedom of work. The law shall, as required by the general interest, establish the maximum working day, days of rest and vacations, minimum wages and salaries and their forms of payment, social security, the participation of nationals in all work, and in general all provisions for state protection and assistance for workers that may be considered necessary. 4) Freedom of enterprise. Monopolies may be established only in favor of the state or state institutions. The creation and organization of these monopolies shall be done by decree-law of the executive power. 5) Freedom of conscience and of worship, subject to respect for the public order and good customs. 6) Freedom of education. Elementary education shall be compulsory for children of school age and for all those who for diverse reasons have not previously been able to enjoy this right. It is hereby declared a duty of the state to furnish a basic education to all inhabitants of the national territory and to take the necessary steps to eliminate or prevent the reappearance of illiteracy. Both elementary education and the education offered in vocational, art, commercial, manual arts, and home economics schools shall be free. These duties of the state presume on the part of persons inhabiting the territory of the Republic the correlative obligation of attending the educational institutions of the country in order to acquire at least an elementary education. The state shall strive for the widest possible dissemination of science and culture, thus adequately facilitating all persons to benefit from the results of scientific progress. 7) The right to expression of thought without prior censorship. The law shall prescribe penalties applicable to those who threaten the honor of persons, the social order, or the public peace.

8) Freedom of association and of assembly for peaceful purposes. 9) The right to own property. This, however, may be taken over for a duly justified reason of public benefit or social interest, and after fair compensation. In cases of public disaster compensation need not be paid in advance. A general confiscation of property is prohibited, except as punishment of persons guilty of treason or espionage in behalf of an enemy during a time of legitimate defense against a foreign state or guilty of abuse or usurpation of power or of any public functions for purposes of enriching themselves or others. In these last cases the property acquired by the state through confiscation ordered by law will have first priority as means of repairing the moral and material damage caused by the usurpation or abuse of power or public function. The law may establish special procedures for acquisition by the state of areas' or portions of rural lands that may be needed for introducing and developing adequate systems or agrarian reforms, in which case the same law shall regulate the form of ind nity or compensation. 10) The inviolability of correspondence and all other private documents, which may not be seized or inspected except through legal procedures as evidence in matters under adjudication. The secrecy of communication by telegraph, telephone, and cable is also inviolable. 11) The inviolability of the home. No entry of the home may be made except in those cases indicated by law and according to formalities prescribed therein. 12) Freedom of transit, except for restrictions resulting from penalties imposed by a court, or by police, immigration, and health laws. 13) Exclusive ownership, for the time and in the manner determined by law, of inventions and discoveries, as well as of scientific, artistic, and literary productions. 14) With the aim of strengthening its stability and well-being, its moral, religious, and cultural life, the family shall receive the broadest possible protection from the state. The law shall provide the necessary means for protecting maternity and, in particular, mothers, during a reasonable period before and after childbirth. One of the principal objectives of the social policy of the state is declared to be the constant reduction of infant mortality and a sound development of children. The establishment of the family "homestead" (bien de familia) is also declared to be of high social interest. The state shall encourage family savings and the establishment of credit, producer, distribution, and consumer cooperatives and any others that may be useful. 15) The state shall continue the progressive development of social security so that one day every person shall enjoy adequate protection against unemployment, sickness, disability, and old age. 16) The state shall offer its protection and assistance to old people in a manner determined by law, in order that their health shall be preserved and their well-being ensured.

17) The state shall offer social assistance to the poor. This attention shall consist of food, clothing, and insofar as possible, adequate housing. 18) The state shall strive for improvement in the meals, housing, sanitary services, and hygienic conditions in work establishments; it shall seek the means for the prevention and treatment of epidemic and endemic diseases and any others, as well as the provision of free medical and hospital attention to those who require it because of their meager economic resources.

19) Husband and wife may freely arrive at their marriage agreements or elect any system adopted by law, which shall always establish the system of separation of property and prescribe what shall govern in the absence of special provisions, the following characteristics being understood to be inherent in this system of separation of property: (a) that each spouse shall retain the ownership, administration, enjoyment, and free disposition of his or her property; (b) that any renunciation by the wife of the right to recover the administration of her property which she had entrusted to her husband is void; and (c) if after ten years of a marriage under separation of property, one of the spouses dies, his or her creditors, heirs, legatees, or successors may not, for any reason, initiate any action against the surviving spouse for the restitution or return of property. 20) Every person has the right to exclude from his estate, following a declaration of unworthiness, descendants who have performed obviously prejudicial acts affecting his reputation and dignity, or who have performed acts contrary to public or private morals which might besmirch the good name of his family. Paragraph I. The law may add other causes of unworthiness and must provide that in all cases the judgment rendered by a court of first instance cannot be appealed, and that the parent may, by a later public instrument or by provision in a will, annul the judgment that was rendered. Paragraph II. The law shall regulate the procedure to be followed for obtaining the declaration of exclusion from an estate by reason of unworthiness. Article 9. No one shall be obligated to do what the law does not demand, nor be prevented from doing what the law does not prohibit. Article 10. The enumeration contained in Article 8 is not restrictive and hence does not exclude the existence of other rights of the same nature.

TITLE III
Concordat Article 11. Relations between the Church and the state are regulated by the Concordat between the Holy See and the Dominican Republic, in accordance with the law of God and the Catholic tradition of the Dominican Republic.

TITLE IV
Political Rights Section I Nationality Article 12. The following are Dominicans: 1) Persons who at present enjoy that status by virtue of former constitutions and laws. 2) All persons born in the territory of the Republic, with the exception of the legitimate children of foreigners resident in the Republic as diplomatic representatives or in transit through the country. 3) All persons born abroad of a Dominican father or mother, provided that they have not acquired foreign nationality in accordance with the laws. of their country of birth, or in the event that they have acquired it, that after attaining their civil majority, as determined by national legislation, they make a statement, sworn to before a public official and transmitted to the executive branch, declaring their intention of retaining Dominican nationality. 4) Persons naturalized. The law shall provide the conditions and formalities required for naturalization. Paragraph I. No Dominican shall be recognized as having nationality other than Dominican as long as he resides in the territory of the Republic. Paragraph II. A Dominican woman married to a foreigner may acquire the nationality of her husband.

Section II Citizenship Article 13. All Dominicans of either sex over 18 years of age, and those who have been married, although under that age, are citizens. Article 14. The rights of citizens are: 1) The right to vote; 2) The right to be eligible for elective office. Article 15. The rights of citizenship are lost: 1) By bearing arms or lending aid in any attack against the Republic; 2) By participating in acts or undertakings intended to overthrow the legally constituted Government or attacking the person of the Chief

of State or other officials who, according to law, enjoy the same prerogatives. 3) By sentence to criminal punishment, until rehabilitation; 4) By judicial interdiction, while it is in effect; 5) By accepting, while in Dominican territory, a function or employment from any foreign government, without prior authorization by the executive power; 6) By having adopted another nationality. Paragraph. In the last two cases citizenship may be reacquired if so provided by law, in the manner indicated therein.

TITLE V
Sovereignty Article 16, Sovereignty resides inherently in the people and is exercised through the intermediary of the powers recognized by this Constitution.

TITLE W
Section I The Legislative Branch Article 17. All the legislative powers conferred by this Constitution are entrusted to a Congress of the Republic consisting of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. Article 18. The election of both senators and deputies shall be by direct vote. Article 19, The office of senator and of deputy is incompatible with any other public office or position. Article 20. In case of the temporary absence of a senator or deputy, his alternate will be called upon to perform his functions during the absence. If the absence is permanent, the alternate shall continue his functions until the end of the term. Article 21. If both a senator or deputy and his alternate are absent, a byelection shall be called in the jurisdiction concerned to fill the vacancy, in accordance with the Electoral Law. The election must take place within a maximum of sixty days after the date the vacancy occurred.

Section II TheSnat Article 22, The Senate shall be composed of members elected in the proportion of one for each province and one for the National District, and their term of office shall be four years. Each senator shall have an alternate, elected in the same manner and jointly with him. Article 23. To be a senator or alternate of a senator a person must be a Dominican in full enjoyment of civil and political rights and have attained twentyfive years of age. Paragraph. Naturalized persons may not be elected as senator until five years after they acquired nationality and providing they have resided in the country during the two years preceding the election. Article 24. The following are exclusive powers of the Senate: 1) To elect the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the courts of appeal, the land court, the courts of first instance, the judges of instruction, the justices of the peace and their alternates, and the judges of any other courts of a judicial nature created by law. 2) To elect the members of the Accounting Commission, 3) To approve or to reject diplomatic appointments submitted by the executive branch. 4) To try impeachments preferred by the Chamber of Deputies against public officials elected for a specific term on grounds of bad conduct or offenses in the exercise of their functions. In impeachment cases the Senate may not impose other penalties than those of removal from office or of disqualification from all remunerated offices of honor or trust in the Republic. The convicted person, however, shall remain subject to indictment and trial according to law, when appropriate. The Senate cannot pronounce condemnatory sentence unless it is approved by a vote of at least three fourths of its full membership. The provisions contained in this article do not exclude, with regard to members of the judicial branch, the disciplinary authority of the Supreme Court of Justice.

Section III The Chamber of Deputies Article 25. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of members elected every four years by the people of the provinces and the National District in the proportion of one for every fifty thousand inhabitants or fraction thereof greater than twenty-five thousand, but in no case shall a province have less than two deputies.

Each deputy shall have an alternate, elected in the same manner. Article 26. To be a deputy or alternate of a deputy a person must be a Dominican in full enjoyment of civil and political rights and have attained twenty-five years of age. Naturalized persons may only be elected deputies five years after acquiring nationality and provided that they have resided in the country for the two years preceding their election. Article 27. It is an exclusive right of the Chamber of Deputies to prefer impeachments of public officials before the Senate in the cases specified in Article 24 (4). The impeachment may not be ordered except by a vote of three fourths of the total membership of the Chamber.

Section IV Provisions Common to Both Chambers Article 28. The chambers shall meet together as a National Assembly in the cases indicated in this Constitution, and there must be present for this purpose more than one half of the members of each chamber. Decisions shall be taken by absolute majority vote. Article 29. Each chamber shall regulate its internal proceedings and the conduct of its own business, being authorized under the rules of discipline to impose penalties on its members in proportion to the offense committed. Article 30. The Senate and Chamber of Deputies shall hold their sessions separately, except when they meet in National Assembly. Paragraph. They may also meet jointly to receive the message of the President of the Republic and the reports of the secretaries of state referred to in Article 55 (21), to celebrate commemorative acts, and to perform other acts not related to the legislative powers of each chamber nor those indicated in this Constitution as exclusive to either one of them. Article 31. In each chamber the presence of more than half of its members shall be necessary for the validity of its deliberations. Decisions shall be taken by absolute majority vote, except in matters previously declared urgent, which shall be decided by a two-thirds vote. Article 32. The members of both chambers shall enjoy the fullest penal immunity for the opinions they express in sessions. Article 33. No senator or deputy may be deprived of his liberty during the legislative session without the authorization of the chamber to which he belongs, except in the case of his being apprehended in the moment of corm-rifting a crime. In all cases the Senate or Chamber of Deputies, or, if they are not in session or there is no quorum, any member thereof, may demand that a member who has been detained, arrested, imprisoned, or in any other way deprived of his liberty, be set free for the duration of the legislative session or any portion thereof. To this end, the president of the Senate or of the Chamber of

Deputies, or the senator or deputy, as the case may be, shall make such requisition to the Attorney General of the Republic; and if necessary, shall give the order for liberation directly, for which he may request the assistance of the public force, which must be given to him by every depositary thereof. Article 34. The chambers shall meet regularly on February 27 and August 16 of each year, and each legislative session shall last ninety days, which may be extended for sixty days more. Paragraph. Extraordinary sessions shall be at the call of the executive power. Article 35. On February 27 each chamber shall elect from its membership a president, a vice-president, and two secretaries for the term of one year. Paragraph I. Each chamber shall choose its auxiliary employees, who shall remain in their positions as long as they are not expressly removed. Paragraph II. The president of the Senate and the president of the Chamber of Deputies shall have disciplinary powers during the sessions; and they shall represent their respective chamber in all legal acts. Article 36. Whenever the chambers meet in National Assembly or in joint session, the presidency shall be assumed by the president of the Senate; the vice-presidency shall be held by the person who at the time presides over the Chamber of Deputies, and the secretariat by the persons who at the time are the secretaries of the two chambers. Paragraph I. In the event of the temporary or permanent default of the president of the Senate, and in the latter case until a new president of that chamber is elected, the National Assembly or joint session shall be presided over by the president of the Chamber of Deputies. Paragraph II. In the event of the temporary or permanent default of the president of the Senate and of the president of the Chamber of Deputies, an assembly or joint session shall be presided over by the vice-president of the Senate or in his default, by the vice-president of the Chamber of Deputies. Article 37. It is the duty of the National Assembly to examine the certificate of election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, to proclaim them elected, and when called upon, to administer their oaths of office, to accept or reject their resignation, and to exercise the powers conferred by this Constitution.

TITLE VII
The Congress Article 38. The following are powers of Congress: 1) To levy taxes or general contributions and to determine the legal method of their collection and expenditure.

2) To approve or reject, on the basis of the report of the Accounting Commission, the statement of collections and expenditures of revenues that the executive branch must submit to it. 3) To take cognizance of observations that the executive branch may make concerning the laws, 4) To determine suitable measures for the conservation and increase of national property, and for the alienation of property in the private domain of the nation, except as provided in Article 55 (9) and 95 of this Constitution. 5) To determine all matters relating to the preservation of ancient monuments and to the acquisition of all kinds of prehistoric and historic objects that constitute the national archeology. 6) To create or abolish provinces, municipalities, or other political divisions of the territory, and to determine all matters relating to their boundaries and organization. 7) To declare a state of siege, in the event of disturbance of the public peace or public disaster, and to suspend, wherever the foregoing exist, and for their duration, the human rights proclaimed in Article 8, paragraphs 2 (b), (c), (d), and (e), 7, 8, 9, and 12. 8) In the event that national sovereignty is exposed to serious and imminent danger, Congress may declare a state of national emergency, suspending human rights, with the exception of the inviolability of life as affirmed in Article 8 (1) of this Constitution. If Congress is not in session, the President of the Republic may take the same measure, and shall convoke Congress to inform it of the state of emergency and the measures he has taken. 9) To adopt all measures pertaining to immigration. 10) To increase or reduce the number of courts of appeal, and to create or abolish regular or special courts. 11) To create or abolish courts for hearing and deciding contentious administrative matters and to provide for their organization and jurisdiction, 12) To approve or reject extraordinary public expenditures for which the executive branch asks an appropriation. 13) To grant loans on the credit of the Republic through the executive power, 14) To approve or reject international treaties and conventions concluded by the executive power. 15) To legislate on all matters concerning the public debt. 16) To declare by law the necessity of amending the Constitution. 17) To grant authorization to the President of the Republic to leave the country, if the absence is to be for more than thirty days.

18)

To interpellate the secretaries of state on matters within their competence, on authorization of the executive power. To examine annually all acts of the executive power, and to approve them if they conform to the Constitution and the laws. To approve or reject contracts submitted by the President of the Republic in conformity , with Articles 55 (9) and 95. To decree the transfer of the legislative chambers from the capital of the Republic, if justified by reasons of force majeure, or by a call by the President of the Republic.

19)

20)

21)

22) To , legislate on all matters that are not within the competence of another branch of the state or contrary to the Constitution.

TITLE VIII
Enactment of the Laws Article 39. The following have the right of initiative in the enactment of laws. a) Senators and deputies; b) The President of the Republic; and c) The Supreme Court of Justice in judicial matters.

Article 40. Every bill introduced in one of the chambers shall be submitted to two separate discussions, with an interval of at least one day between them; if a bill has previously been declared urgent, it may be discussed in two consecutive sessions. Article 41. If a bill has been approved by either chamber, it shall be sent to the other for discussion in due course, observing the same procedure. If the latter chamber makes amendments, it shall return the bill, with objections, to the chamber in which it was introduced, and if these amendments are accepted, it shall send the bill to the executive power; but if they are rejected, the bill shall be sent back to the other chamber with objections, and if this body approves them, it shall in turn send the bill to the executive power; if the objections are rejected, the bill shall be considered rejected. Article 42. Every bill approved by both chambers shall be forwarded to the executive power. If the President has no objections, he shall promulgate it within eight days after receipt and cause it to be published within fifteen days after promulgation; if he has objections, he shall return it to the chamber from which it came within eight days from the date on which it was sent to him, unless the matter has been declared urgent, in which case he shall return it within three days. The chamber that has received his objections shall place them on the agenda of its next session and again discuss the bill. If, after this discussion, two thirds of the total membership of this chamber again approve it, it shall be forwarded to the other chamber, and if this chamber approves it by a like majority, it shall definitively be considered a law.

Paragraph I. The President of the Republic shall be required to promulgate and publish the law within the periods indicated. Paragraph II. Bills that remain pending in either of the two chambers at the close of a legislative session must follow constitutional procedure until converted into law or definitively rejected in the following legislative session. If this is not done, the bill shall be considered as not introduced. Paragraph III. Every bill received in one chamber, after being approved in the other, shall be placed on the agenda. Article 43. Whenever a bill is sent to the President of the Republic for promulgation and the time remaining before termination of the legislative session is less than that specified in the preceding article for objection, the legislature shall remain in session to take cognizance of the objections until the expiration of the period and procedure established in Article 42. Article 44. After their publication laws are binding on all the inhabitants of the Republic, if the legal time for them to become known has elapsed. Article 45. Any law, decree, regulation, or act contrary to this Constitution shall be null and void ipso jure. Article 46. Bills rejected in one chamber cannot be introduced in the other, or reintroduced in either chamber, until the following legislative term. Article 47. Laws have no retroactive effect, except when they are favorable to whoever are subject to them or serving a sentence. Article 48. All laws shall begin thus: "The National Congress, in the name of the Republic."

TITLE IX
Section I The Executive Branch Article 49. The executive power is exercised by the President of the Republic, who shall be elected every four years by direct vote and may not be reelected for the following term. Article 50. To be President of the Republic a person is required: 1) To be Dominican by birth or origin; 2) To have attained thirty years of age; and 3) To be in full enjoyment of civil and political rights. Article 51. There shall be a Vice-President of the Republic, who shall be elected in the same manner and for the same term as the President and jointly with him. To be Vice-President the same qualifications are required as to be President.

Article 52, The President and Vice-President of the Republic elected in the general elections shall take their oath of office on the February 27 following their election, the date on which the term of those leaving office shall end. Whenever the President-elect of the Republic cannot do so because of being outside the country or of illness or for any other reason of force majeure, the Vice-President-elect shall perform the functions of President temporarily, and in default of the Vice-President the person elected by the Senate, at its first meeting, which must take place on February 27, to be the president of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall do so. Article 53. If the President-elect of the Republic shall definitively default without taking the oath of office, the Vice-President elect shall replace him. Article 54. The President and Vice-President of the Republic, before taking office, shall take the following oath before the National Assembly or before any public official or employee: I swear by God, by my country, and by my honor, to comply with and enforce the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, to uphold and defend its independence, to respect its rights, and to faithfully fulfill the duties of my office. Article 55. The President of the Republic is the head of the public administration and the supreme commander of all the armed forces of the Republic. The powers and the duties of the President are: 1) To appoint the secretaries and subsecretaries of state and other public officials and employees whose appointment is not vested in any other power or autonomous agency, to accept their resignations, and to remove them, 2) To promulgate and order publication of the laws and regulations and see to their faithful execution. To issue regulations, decrees, and instructions whenever necessary. 3) To see to the proper collection and faithful expenditure of the national revenues. 4) To appoint, with the approval of the Senate, the members of the diplomatic corps, to accept their resignations, and to remove them, 5) To receive foreign heads of state and their representatives. 6) To preside over all official acts of the nation, to direct diplomatic negotiations, and to make treaties with foreign nations, which must be submitted to the approval of Congress, without which they shall have no validity and shall not bind the Republic. 7) In the event of a disturbance of the public peace or of a public disaster, if Congress is not in session, to declare a state of siege wherever the foregoing exist, and suspend the human rights which pursuant to Article 38 (7) of this Constitution Congress is permitted to suspend; in the event of serious or imminent danger to declare a state of national emergency, with the effects and requirements indicated in item 8 of that article.

8) To fill temporarily vacancies that occur among judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the courts of appeal, the land courts, the courts of first instance, and among the judges of instruction, justices of the peace, and those of any other courts created by law, as well as among members of the Accounting Commission, when the Congress is in recess, with the obligation of informing the Senate of such appointments at the next legislative session so that it may make permanent appointments, 9) To make contracts, submitting them to the approval of the National Congress whenever they contain provisions relating to the disposal of the national revenues, to the alienation of real property valued at more than ten thousand pesos gold, or to borrowing money, or when they stipulate exemptions from taxes in general, in accordance with Article 95; and without such approval in other cases. 10) To fill vacancies that occur among municipal councilmen, municipal mayors, and mayor of the national district, if the number of elected alternates has been exhausted, where there were any, and the municipalities are not in a position to fill those vacancies. 11) To issue or refuse navigation licenses. 12) To regulate all matters relating to the customs service. 13) To provide for, at all times, whatever concerns the armed forces of the Republic, to order them when necessary, with the assistance of the appropriate military agencies, to fix the number of these forces and dispose of them for purposes of the public service. 14) To take the measures necessary to provide for the legitimate defense of the nation in case of actual or imminent armed attack by a foreign nation, informing Congress of the measures adopted. 15) In the event of the circumstances mentioned in the foregoing item, to cause the arrest or expel aliens whose activities, in his judgment, are or could be harmful to the national interest. 16) To approve or reject the appointments and the removal of the members of the councils of war, which are made according to law by the secretary of state of the Armed Forces. 17) To take all measures relating to maritime, river, and military zones. 18) To regulate all matters relating to the opening of ports and the seacoasts. 19) To prohibit, when he deems it advisable, the entry of aliens into the national territory and to expel them when he deems this advisable in the public interest. 20) To change the place of his official residence whenever he deems it necessary.

21) To submit to the National Congress, at the opening of the regular legislative session on February 27 of each year, a message accompanied by the reports of the secretaries of state, giving an account of his administration for the previous year. 22) To submit to Congress during the second regular legislative session the draft budget of revenues and law of public expenditures for the following year. 23) To grant or refuse authorization to Dominican citizens to hold foreign public offices and accept and use decorations and titles granted by foreign governments. 24) To reject by a decree, with reasons, the excise taxes (arbitrios) established by the municipal governments.

25) To grant or refuse authorization to municipal governments to alienate real property, and to approve or reject contracts made by them when guaranteed by municipal real property or revenues. 26) To grant full or partial pardons, pure and simple or conditional, on February 27, August 16, and December 23 each year. In special cases he may exercise this right on dates other than those indicated in this section. Article 56. The President of the Republic may not leave the country for more than thirty days without the authorization of Congress. Article 57. The President and the Vice-President of the Republic may not resign except before the National Assembly. Article 58. In the event of a temporary absence of the President of the Republic, after taking the oath of office, the executive power shall be exercised by the Vice-President during the absence, and in default of the latter, by the president of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 59. In the event of a permanent absence of the President of the Republic, after taking the oath of office, the presidency shall be held by the VicePresident of the Republic for the time remaining until the end of the term. Article 60. In the event that the Vice-President of the Republic, after assuming the presidency of the Republic by virtue of the provisions of the preceding article, shall be definitively in default, the executive power shall be assumed temporarily by the president of the Supreme Court of Justice who, within 30 days after assuming office, shall convoke the National Assembly to meet within the 15 days following to elect a permanent replacement at a meeting which may not adjourn or declare a recess until it has accomplished the election. In the event that such .a call is not made within the 30 days indicated, the National Assembly shall meet in its own right to conduct the election in the manner prescribed above.

Section II The Secretaries of State Article 61. To conduct the business of the public administration there are the secretaries of state created by law. The law may also create such subsecretaries of state as are deemed necessary and who shall act subordinate to and under the direction of the corresponding secretary of state. To be a secretary or a subsecretary of state it is required that a person be a Dominican in the full enjoyment of his civil and political rights and have attained 25 years of age. Paragraph. Naturalized persons cannot be secretaries of state or subsecretaries of state until five years after acquiring nationality. Article 62. The law shall determine the powers of the secretaries of state.

TITLE X
Section I The Judicial Branch Article 63. The judicial power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice and by all other courts of a judicial nature created by this Constitution and the laws. Paragraph. Judicial officials may not hold any other public office or employment, except as provided in Article 104.

Section II The Supreme Court of Justice Article 64. The Supreme Court of Justice shall consist of at least seven justices; but it may sit, deliberate, and render judgments validly with a quorum determined by the law that regulates its organization. Paragraph I. In electing the justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Senate shall determine which of them is to occupy the presidency and shall designate a first and second substitute to replace the president in the event of his absence or disability. Paragraph II. In the event of the termination of service of a justice who has been designated for one of the above-mentioned positions, the Senate shall choose a replacement or will assign the rank to another justice. Article 65. To be a justice of the Supreme Court a person is required: 1) To be Dominican by birth or origin and to have attained more than thirty years of age. 2) To be in full enjoyment of civil and political rights.

3) To be a member of the bar or a doctor of laws. 4) To have practiced the legal profession for eight years; or for the same period, to have held a position as judge of a court of appeal, judge of first instance, or judge of a land court, or as representative of the public ministry before such courts. The periods of law practice and of holding judicial offices may be added together. Article 66. The public ministry shall be represented before the Supreme Court by the Attorney General (Procurador General) of the Republic, personally or through such substitutes as may be created by law, and he shall have the same rank as the president of the Court, with the powers conferred on him by law. To be Attorney General of the Republic a person must be Dominican and must have the same qualifications as are required to be a justice of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 67. The Supreme Court of Justice, without prejudice to other powers conferred on it by law, has exclusive power: 1) To take cognizance in sole instance of actions against the President and Vice-President of the Republic, senators, deputies, secretaries of state, subsecretaries, justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General of the Republic, judges and attorneys general of the courts of appeal, state attorney before the land courts, judges of the superior land court, and members of the diplomatic corps. 2) To hear appeals of cassation in conformity with law. 3) To hear in last instance cases in which the jurisdiction in first instance pertains to the courts of appeal. 4) To exercise the highest disciplinary authority over all members of the judicial branch, even to the extent of imposing suspension or dismissal, in the manner prescribed by law. 5) To transfer provisionally or permanently from one jurisdiction to another, whenever it deems it advisable, judges of first instance, judges of instruction, judges of original jurisdiction of the land courts, and justices of the peace.

Section III Courts of Appeal Article 68. There shall be at least three courts of appeal throughout the Republic; the number of judges to compose the courts, as well as the judicial districts corresponding to each court, shall be determined by law. Article 69. To be a judge of a court of appeal a person is required: 1) To be Dominican; 2) To be in full enjoyment of civil and political rights;

3) To be a member of the bar or a doctor of laws. 4) To have practiced the legal profession for four years; or for the same period, to have held a position as judge of first instance or representative of the public ministry before courts of first instance. The periods of law practice and of holding judicial office may be added together. Article 70. In each court of appeal the public ministry is represented by an attorney general, or by such substitutes as the law may create, all of whom must meet the same requirements as judges of these courts. Article 71, The courts of appeal have the following powers: 1) To hear appeals from decisions handed down by courts of first instance. 2) To hear in first instance cases instituted against judges of first instance, judges of original jurisdiction of the land courts, judges of instruction, fiscal attorneys, and governors of provinces. 3) To hear any other matters determined by law,

Section IV Land Courts Article 72, The powers of the land courts shall be determined by law. Paragraph. To be a president or judge of the Superior Land Court, the same qualifications are required as to be judge of a court of appeal, and to be a judge of original jurisdiction, the same qualifications as to be a judge of first instance.

Section V Courts of First Instance Article 73, In each judicial district there shall be a court of first instance, with such powers as may be conferred on it by law, Paragraph: The law shall determine the number of judicial districts, the number of judges to compose the courts of first instance, and the number of sections (cmaras) into which they may be divided. Article 74. To be a judge of first instance a person must be Dominican, be in full enjoyment of civil and political rights, and be a member of the bar or doctor of laws. Article 75. To be a public attorney or judge of instruction the same qualifications are required as to be a judge of first instance.

Section VI Justices of the Peace Article 76. In the National District and in each municipality there shall be such justices of the peace as are necessary, according to law. Article 77. To be a justice of the peace or alternate, a person must be Dominican and in full enjoyment of his civil and political rights. They shall have such powers as are determined by law and shall be subject to the qualifications contained therein.

TITLE XI
Accounting Commission Article 78, There shall be a permanent Accounting Commission, composed of at least five members, elected by the Senate from lists of three candidates submitted by the executive power. Article 79. Its powers shall be, in addition to those conferred by law: 1) To examine the general and special accounts of the Republic. 2) To submit to Congress in the first regular session a report on the accounts of the previous year. Article 80. The members of the Accounting Commission shall hold office for four years. Article 81. To be a member of the Accounting Commission a person must be a Dominican in full enjoyment of his civil and political rights and have attained twenty-five years of age.

TITLE XII
National District and Municipalities Article 82. The government of the National District and that of the municipalities shall each be entrusted to a municipal council, whose members (regidores) and alternates, the number of which shall be determined by law in proportion to the population and in no case less than five shall, like the mayor of the National District and the municipal mayors and their alternates, be elected by the people of the National District and the municipalities, respectively, every two years in the form established by the Constitution and the laws, from among candidates who may be proposed by the political parties or by regional, provincial, or municipal political groups. Article 83. The municipal councils, as well as the mayors, are independent in the exercise of their powers, except for those restrictions and limitations established in the Constitution and the laws, which shall determine their functions, powers, and duties. The municipal councils may impose local taxes (arbitrios) with the approval required by law.

Article 84. The law shall determine the qualifications necessary for holding the offices indicated in Articles 82 and 83. Alien adults may hold these offices, under the conditions prescribed by law, provided they have resided more than five years in the corresponding jurisdiction.

TITLE XIII
Administration of the Provinces Article 85. There shall be in each province a civil governor appointed by the executive power. Paragraph. To be a governor a person must be Dominican, have attained twenty-five years of age, and be in full enjoyment of civil and political rights. Article 86. The organization and administration of the provinces, as well as the powers and duties of the civil governors, shall be determined by law,

TITLE XIV
Electoral Assemblies Article 87. Voting is a civic duty for all citizens, with the following exceptions: 1) Those who have lost their rights of citizenship, in accordance with Article 15 of this Constitution. 2) Members of the armed forces and the police. Article 88, The Electoral Assemblies shall meet in their own right three months before the expiration of the constitutional term and shall proceed to exercise the functions prescribed by the Constitution and by law. In cases of extraordinary convocation they shall meet not more than ninety days after the date of the law of convocation. Article 89, The Electoral Assemblies shall elect the President and VicePresident of the Republic, the senators and deputies and their alternates, the members of the municipal councils, the mayor of the National District and the other mayors and their alternates, and any other official specified by law. Article 90. Elections shall be held by direct, secret, and popular vote and with representation of minorities when more than one candidate is to be elected, in accordance with rules fixed by law. Article 91. The elections shall be conducted by a Central Electoral Board and boards subordinate to it, which shall have the power to judge and regulate according to law. Paragraph. The Central Electoral Board shall assume control of and command the public forces in localities where voting takes place.

TITLE XV
The Armed Forces Article 92. The armed forces as a specialized and technical institution are essentially obedient and nonpolitical, and in no case have the right to deliberate. The purpose of their creation is to defend the independence and the integrity of the Republic, to maintain public order, the Constitution, and the laws. Article 93. The armed forces are governed by their organic law and their members cannot be separated from their posts nor deprived of their ranks without justifiable cause. They shall enjoy, likewise, the right of retirement with its corresponding pension and any other compensation granted by the aforementioned law. This law shall establish a Military Administration Board to be presided over by the Secretary of State for the Armed Forces.

TITLE XVI
General Provisions Article 94. All usurped authority is without effect and its acts are void. Any decision reached through the intervention of the armed forces is null and void. Article 95. No exemption shall be recognized and no exoneration, reduction, or limitation of taxes, charges, or fiscal or municipal fees for the benefit of private persons shall be granted, except by virtue of law. Nevertheless, private persons may acquire, through concessions authorized by law or contracts approved by the national Congress, the irrevocable right to benefit, for the full time stipulated in the concession contract, and by fulfilling the obligations that the law or contract imposes on them, from exemptions, exonerations, reductions, or limitations of taxes, charges, or fiscal or municipal fees pertaining to specified works or undertakings for the public benefit, or to specified works or enterprises which have attracted the investment of new capital for the development of the national economy or for any other purpose of social interest. Article 96. No expenditure of public funds shall be valid unless it is authorized by law and ordered by a competent official. Article 97. Annually in the month of April the general accounts of the revenues and expenditures of the Republic for the preceding year shall be published. Article 98. The national unit of currency is the gold peso. Paragraph I. Only banknotes issued by a sole, autonomous issuing entity, whose capital is the property of the state, shall be legal tender and have lawful circulation, provided they are fully backed by gold reserves and by other real and effective securities, in the proportions and under the conditions specified by law and with the unlimited guarantee of the state. Nevertheless, the law may maintain in effect the provisions which now govern the circulation of foreign banknotes and it may restrict, suspend, or reestablish these provisions.

Paragraph II. Metallic coins shall be issued in the name of the state by the same issuing entity and they shall be placed in circulation solely to replace an equivalent amount in banknotes. The legal tender force of metallic coins now in use and those issued in the future shall be determined by law, Paragraph III. The regulation of the currency and banking system of the nation is entrusted to the issuing entity, the superior organ of which shall be a Monetary Board, composed of members who shall be appointed and removed only according to law and they shall be responsible for the faithful fulfilment of their duties in accordance with the rules established in that law. Paragraph IV. The issuance or circulation of paper money, or of any other currency device not authorized by this Constitution is prohibited, whether by the state or by any other public or private entity. Article 99. Any modification in the system of the currency or in the banking system shall require the approval of two thirds of the full membership of both chambers, unless it has been initiated by the executive power at the proposal of the Monetary Board or by its favorable vote. Article 100. Mining deposits belong to the state and only may be exploited by private persons by virtue of a concession or a contract granted in accordance with conditions established by law. The state may transfer or assign the ownership of specific deposits. Article 101. February 27, the anniversary of Independence, and August 16, anniversary of the Restoration, are national holidays. Article 102. The national flag consists of the colors ultramarine blue and vermillion red in alternate quarters, placed in such a way that the blue is toward the upper part of the staff, separated by a white cross half as wide as the height of one quarter, and bearing in the center the coat of arms of the Republic. The merchant flag is the same as the national flag without the coat of arms. Article 103, The coat of arms of the Republic shall have the same colors as the national flag, placed in the same manner; in the center it shall bear the book of the Gospels, open, with a cross above it, both issuing out of a trophy consisting of two lances and four national flags without coat of arms, two on either side; it shall bear a laurel branch on the left side and a palm branch on the right; it shall be crowned with an ultramarine blue ribbon bearing the legend: "Dios, Patria, Libertad", and at the base another ribbon, vermillion red in color, with these words: "Republica Dominicana". The national coat of arms shall be oblong in shape, with the upper angles salient and the lower angles rounded, the center of the base of which terminates in a point, and so placed that if a horizontal line is drawn uniting the two verticals of the oblongs from where the lower angles begin, a perfect square results. Paragraph. The law shall regulate the use and dimensions of the national flag and coat of arms. Article 104. Any person appointed to hold public office must take an oath to respect the Constitution and the laws, and to perform his duties faithfully. This oath may be taken before any public official or employee.

Article 105. No public office or position shall be incompatible with honorary or teaching positions. Article 106. The term of office of all elected officials, regardless of the date of their election, shall terminate uniformly on February 27 every four years, the date on which the constitutional term begins. However, the members of municipal councils and their alternates, the mayor of the National District and the municipal mayors and their alternates, shall be elected for terms of two years, Paragraph. Whenever any elected official ceases to hold office due to death, resignation, removal, disqualification, or other cause, the person who replaces him shall remain in office until the completion of the term. Article 107. The organization of political parties and associations is unrestricted, according to law, provided that their tenets conform to the principles set forth in Article 2 of this Constitution. Article 108. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 24 (4) of this Constitution, the President of the Republic, elect or in office, may not be deprived of his freedom before or during his term of office. Article 109. The law of public expenditures shall be divided into chapters corresponding to the different branches of the administration and funds may not be transferred from one chapter to another, nor from one budget item to another, except by virtue of a law. This law, if it is not initiated by the executive power, must have the vote of two thirds of the full membership of each chamber. Paragraph I. No law that orders or authorizes payment or that creates a pecuniary obligation on the part of the state shall have effect or validity unless the law itself creates special funds for its execution or provides for payment to be made from estimated receipts for the year and there remains available at the time the law is published a sufficient proportion of these receipts to do so. Paragraph II. Congress cannot legally vote any expenditure unless it is included in the bill on public expenditures submitted by the executive power under Article 55 of this Constitution, or unless it is requested by the executive power after submitting that bill, except in the event that the law ordering such expenditure is approved by two thirds of the full membership of each chamber; and in all this the general rule set forth in the first paragraph of this article shall still govern. Paragraph III. Congress may not alter the items included in bills for expenditures of funds or in the law of public expenditures submitted by the executive power except by a vote of two thirds of the full membership of each chamber; and in accordance with the provisions contained in the first paragraph of this article. Paragraph IV. When for any reason Congress closes its term without having voted the budget of revenues and the law of public expenditures, the law of public expenditures of the preceding year shall continue in effect. Paragraph V. When Congress is adjourned, the executive power may issue a decree-law providing for transfers or readjustments of amounts in the law of public expenditures that are required by urgent needs of the administrative

service, as well as the creation or elimination of administrative posts or public services that are subject to that law, with the obligation of submitting these changes to Congress at the next legislative session, for its approval. He may also, in the case provided for in this paragraph and in the same manner, expend funds necessary to meet expenses of the public administration, reporting thereon to Congress when it meets. Paragraph VI. The state guarantees, without any limitation, all pecuniary obligations legally contracted by the public administration or by its autonomous agencies. Consequently, the shares, cedulas, bonds, and other securities issued or contracted by state banks shall at all times enjoy the state's unlimited guarantee and they may not be cancelled without previous payment of their full amount. Article 110. Justice is administered without charge throughout the territory of the Republic. Article 111. The development and embellishment of the cities of the country is declared to be a task of high national interest. Consequently, the state shall appropriate cash funds and provide for works that are necessary and useful to the community.

TITLE XVII
Constitutional Amendments Article 112. This Constitution may be amended if the proposal of amendment is presented in the national Congress with the support of one third of the members of either chamber, or if it is submitted by the executive power. Article 113. The need for amendment shall be declared through a law, which may be passed only by a vote of two thirds of the members of each chamber. This law, which may not be vetoed by the executive power, shall order a meeting of the National Assembly, shall specify the purpose of the amendment, and shall indicate the articles of the Constitution that it will affect. Article 114. To act on the proposed amendment, the National Assembly shall meet within fifteen days following publication of the law declaring the need for amendments, with the presence of more than half of the members of each of the two chambers. In this case, as an exception to the provisions of Article 28, decisions shall be taken by a two-thirds vote. Once the National Assembly has voted and proclaimed the amendments, the Constitution shall be published in its entirety, incorporating the amended texts. Article 115. No amendment may be made of the form of government, which shall always be civil, republican, democratic, and representative. Article 116. The Constitution may be amended only in the manner indicated therein, and it may never be suspended or annulled by any power or authority or by popular acclamation.

Transitory Provisions Article 117. Once the present constitutional amendments are proclaimed, the powers that this Constitution confers on the legislative branch, and hence on the Senate, on the Chamber of Deputies, on both chambers, and on the National Assembly, as well as those conferred on the executive branch shall be exercised by a Council of State which shall hold office until February 27, 1963. Article 118. The Council of State shall be composed of the President of the Republic and six other members, among whom a first and a second vicepresident of the Council shall be appointed. The first and second vice presidents and the other members of the Council shall be appointed by the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council of State. In case of resignation, death, or incapacity of the President of the Republic, he shall be replaced ipso jure by the first vice-president of the Council of State, the second vice-president shall become the first vice-president of the Council, and the Council shall choose a new second vice-president. Other replacements by the President of the Republic shall be made in the same manner as for other members of the Council of State. Article 119. The President of the Republic shall have the following exclusive powers: a) He shall promulgate and order publication of the laws, resolutions, regulations, decrees, and instructions issued by the Council of State, without the power to veto them; b) As Supreme Chief of the Armed Forces of the Republic, he shall have the powers conferred on him by items 13, 14, 16, and 17 of Article 55 of the Constitution. He shall also appoint the Secretary and Subsecretary of State of the armed forces. Article 120. The Council of State shall meet legally with the presence of at least five members, and its decisions shall be taken by a majority of four votes. In case of resignation, death, or incapacity, members of the Council of State shall be replaced by agreement reached by the same majority. However, if the number of vacancies does not permit a legal meeting, with the presence of the members required herein, the President of the Republic shall make new appointments. Article 121. No member of the Council of State may absent himself from the country without the authorization of the Council. Article 122. The Council of State has the power to replace present members of the judiciary, with the exception of justices of the Supreme Court of Justice and judges of the courts of appeal, and it may also replace present governors, mayors, and members of municipal councils, and their alternates, as well as members of the Accounting Commission.

Article 123. The Council of State may change the present number of provinces or their areas or that of the National District. Article 124. The Council of State, after making the pertinent changes in the electoral process, shall call for the election of representatives to a Constitutional Amendment Assembly and a general election for the elective offices established by this Constitution. These elections shall take place not later than December 20, 1962. The officials elected shall take office on February 27, 1963, the date on which the functions of the Council of State shall cease. Candidates for deputy to the national Congress who are elected shall also serve as members of the Constitutional Amendment Assembly. In the event that the Constitution has not been proclaimed before February 27, 1963, the Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of the alternates of the aforementioned deputies elected jointly with their principals. The alternates shall hold office .until their principals finish their mission in the Constitutional Assembly, upon which the principals shall take their seats. Article 125. The Constitutional Amendment Assembly shall meet in the city of Santo Domingo, in the Hall of Sessions of the Chamber of Deputies at ten o'clock in the morning of the third day following the date on which the Central Electoral Board issues its general report on the deputies to Congress, The Constitutional Assembly may not legally meet without the presence of one more than half of its members. The terms of mayors and municipal councilmen holding office at present shall end on February 27, 1963, Article 126. The incompatibility referred to in Article 19 of this Constitution shall not be applicable to deputies, with respect to their functions as members of the Constitutional Assembly. Done and proclaimed in Santo Domingo, National District, capital of the Dominican Republic, this sixteenth day of September in the year nineteen hundred sixty-two, the 119th year of Independence, and the 100th year of the Restoration.

