+(,121/,1(
Citation: 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1229 1868-1869 Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline (http://heinonline.org) Sun Jun 13 22:02:54 2010 -- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license agreement available at http://heinonline.org/HOL/License -- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

EQUATOR.

1229

hereby strictly command that no person or persons whatsoever do commit any act, matter, or thing whatsoever contrary to the provisions of the said statute, upon pain of the several penalties by the said statute imposed, and of our high displeasure: And we do hereby further warn and admonish all our loving subjects, and all persons whatsoever entitled to our protection, to observe towards each and all of the aforesaid Sovereigns and States, their subjects and territories, and towards all belligerents whatsoever, with whom we are at peace, the duties of neutrality; and to respect in all and each of them, the exercise of those belligerent rights which we and our Royal Predecessors have always claimed to exercise : And we do hereby further warn all our loving subjects, and all persons whatsoever entitled to our protection, that if any of them shall presume, in contempt of this our Royal Proclamation and of our high displeasure, to do any acts in derogation of their duty as subjects of a neutral Sovereign in a war between other Sovereigns and States, or in violation or contravention of the law of nations in that behalf, as more especially by breaking or endeavouring to break any blockade lawfully and actually established by or on behalf of any or either of the said Sovereigns and States by carrying officers, soldiers, despatches, arms, ammunition, militaty stores or materials, or any article or articles considered and deemed to be contraband of war, according to the law of modern usages of nations, for the use or service of any or either of the said Sovereigns and States, that all persons so offending, together with their ships and goods, will rightfully incur and be justly liable to hostile capture, and to the penalties denounced by the law of nations in that behalf: And we do hereby give notice, that all our subjects and persons entitled to our protection who may misconduct themselves in the premises will do so at their peril and of their own wrong; and that they will in nowise obtain any protection from us against such capture or such penalties as aforesaid, but will, on the contrary, incur our high displeasure by such misconduct. Given at our Court at Windsor, this 27th day of June, in the year of our Lord 1866, and in the 30th year of our reign. God save the Queen.

CONSTITUTION of the Republic of the Equator.-Quilo, June 9, 1869. (Translation.) IN the name of God, Unity and Trinity, Creator, Legislator, and Preserver, of the Universe. The National Convention of Equator has decreed and submitted to the approbation of the nation the followiW.9

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1229 1868-1869

1230

EQUATOR.

CONSTITUTION
TITLE I.-Of the Republic of Equator and the Equatorian8. SECTION

1.-Of the Republic.

ART. I. The Republic of Equator is composed of all Equatorians united and under the dominion of the same laws. II. The territory of Equator comprises the provinces which formed the ancient Presidency of Quito, and the archipelago of Galapagos. The boundaries will be definitively fixed by Treaties with the neighbouring States. III. The sovereignty or the right to govern, conformably to justice, resides essentially in the nation, which delegates the exercise thereof to the authorities established by the Constitution. The Republic is one, indivisible, free, and independent of all foreign power, and cannot be inherited by any family or person. SECTION 2.-Of the Equatorians.

IV. The Equatorians are such by birth or by naturalisation. V. Equatorians by birth are: 1. Those born within the territory of Equator. 2. Those born in another country whose father or mothbr are Equatorians by birth, provided they come to reside in the Republic. VI. Equatorians by naturalisation are: 1. Those born in other States who are at present in the enjoyinent of this right. 2. Foreigners who profess any useful science, art or industry, or who are the owners of landed property or business capital, and after one year's residence declare, before the authority appointed by law, their wish to become naturalised in Equator, and obtain letters of naturalisation. 3. Such as may obtain them from Congress for services which they have rendered or may render to the country. VII. The duties of Equatorians are : to respect the religion of the State and the authorities, to support the Constitution, to obey the laws, to serve and defend the country, to contribute towards the national expenditure, and to be vigilant for the preservation of the public liberties. VIII. The rights of Equatorians are: equality before the law, and option of election, and of being elected to discharge public appointments, provided they are legally qualified. TITLE II.-Of the Religion of the Republic. IX. The religion of the Republic is the Catholic Apostolic Roman, to the exclusion of any other, and to be always preserved wi91ge

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1230 1868-1869

EQUATOR.

1231

rights and prerogatives which it ought to enjoy in accordance with the law of God and the canonical provisions. The political authorities are bound to protect it and to make it respected. TITLE III.-Of the Citizens. X. To be a citizen it is requisite: 1st. To be a Catholic. 2nd. To know how to read and write. 3rd. To be married or above 21 years of age. XI. The rights of citizenship are lost: 1. By entering the service of a hostile nation. 2. By becoming naturalised in a foreign country. 3. By fraudulent bankruptcy. 4. By any one who sells his vote or buys that of another. 5. By any one condemned to suffer corporal or opprobrious punishment. XII. Equatorians who, for any of the causes mentioned in the preceding Article, may have lost their rights of citizenship, can be reinstated by the Senate; excepting individuals who may have been sentenced to corporal or opprobrious punishment; who cannot be reinstated until they have undergone the sentence. XIII. The rights of citizenship are suspended: 1. By belonging to societies prohibited by the Church; 2. By judicial interdiction; 3. For being an habitual drunkard, professional gamester, confirmed vagabond, or proprietor of a gambling establishment prohibited by law. 4. For mental incapacity impeding free and reflective action. 5. For being indicted as a criminal deserving of corporal or opprobrious punishment, from the time of the declaration that there is ground for the proceedings, till the day of acquittal or condemnation to other punishment. 6. For not having duly presented an account of the public funds under his control, or for not having paid the balance due from him, 3 days after the requisition. TiTLE IV.-Of the Equatorian Government. XIV. The Government of Equator is republican, elective, representative, alternate and responsible. XV. The Supreme Power is divided into legislative, executive, and judicial. Each is to exercise the functions which the present Constitution assigns to it, without overstepping the bounds prescribed ihereby.
TITLE V.-OfEletiotn. XVI. There shall be popular elections by direct and secret 1231 voting in the manner determined by law.

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1231 1868-1869

1232

EQOUATR.

XVII. To be an elector, it is requisite to be an actually qualified citizen and a resident in the parish where the election takes place.
TITLE VI.-Of the Legislative Power. SECTION 1.-Of the Congres,. XVIII. The Legislative Power resides in the National Congress composed of two Chambers, one of Senators and the other of Deputies. X1X. The Congress shall meet every two years on the 10th of August, even although it may not have been convoked, and its ordinary sessions shall last 60 days, which may be extended to 15 days more. An extraordinary Congress shall also meet when convoked by the Executive, and for the time prescribed; but it cannot attend to any other business than that for which it was convoked.
SECTION

2.-Of the Chamber of the Senate.

XX. The Chamber of the Senate will be composed of the Senators appointed by law, and elected for 9 years by the electors of the Republic. XXI. To be a Senator it is requisite to be an Equatorian by birth and an actual citizen, to be 35 years of age and to possess landed property, free of incumbrance worth 4,000 dollars, or a yearly income of 500 dollars proceeding from some profession or useful occupation.

XXII. The exclusive functions of the Senate are: to qualify its
members, to take cognizance of accusations which the Chamber of Deputies may direct to it, and to exercise such others as the Constitution and the laws may assign to it. XXIII. When the Senate takes'cognizance of an accusation, it will confine itself to authorising the trial or not; in case of an affirmative, it will suspend and deliver the accused to the competent Tribunal. SECTION 3.-Of the Chamber of Deputies. XXIV. The Chamber of Deputies will be composed of the Deputies determined by law, elected for 6 years by the electors of the Republic. XXV. To be a Deputy it is requisite to be a citizen in exercise and 25 years of age. citizenship of XXVI. The special functions of the Chamber of Deputies are: to qualify its members, to accuse the President of the Republic, or his substitute, the Ministers Secretaries of State, the magistrates of the Supreme Court and the Councillors of State, before the Senate

and to propose laws relative to taxes and contributions.

1232

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1232 1868-1869

1234

EQUATOR.

XXXIII. The President of the Republic, the Magistrates of the Courts of Justice, and the members of the Council of State are excluded from being Senators and Deputies. XXXIV. The sessions shall be public, unless one of the Chambers should decide that any matter ought to be discussed in secret sitting; or the Executive Power should require it in matters that he presents.
SECTION

5.-Of the .Functions of the Conqress acting separately as Legislative Chambers.

XXXV. The functions of the Congress are: 1. To decree the public expenditure on the estimates presented by the Executive Power; agreeing or not agreeing with them, and watching over the just and legal application of the revenue. 2. To establish taxes and contract debts on public credit. 3. To decree the alienation of national property and its application to the public service, and to regulate its administration. 4. To authorise loans or other contracts to meet the deficit of the National Treasury, to allow the hypothecation of the property and revenues of the Republic, to secure the payment of the said loans or contracts on the proper basis. 5. To examine in each ordinary session the accounts for the previous two years, which the Executive Power must present, including the produce of the revenue and the proceeds of the national property, as well as the expenses of the Treasury. 6. To create or abolish offices, determine or modify their functions, augment or diminish the salaries, and fix the time of their continuance, provided that the Constitution or the law does not assign this function to another authority or corporation. 7. To grant rewards, personal only, to such as have rendered great services to the nation, and to decree public honours to their memory. 8. To determine and make uniform the alloy, weight, value, form, type, and denomination of the coin, and to regulate the system of weights and measures. 9. To fix the maximum of the armed naval and military force which is to be maintained in active service in time of peace. 10. To decree war, on the reports of the Executive Power; to require him to negotiate peace; to give or refuse its assent to public Treaties and agreements concluded by the Executive Power, without which requisite they can neither be ratified nor exchanged. 11. To pass general laws for the regulation of educational establishments and public instruction. 12. To promote and encourage public education, and thel#ogress of sciences and arts, granting for this purpose, and for a limited

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1233 1868-1869

EQUATOR.

1233

The absence or vacancy of Senators and Deputies will be supplied in the manner and form prescribed by the law of elections. SECTION 4.-Proviio* common o 6oth Chambers. XXVII. Neither of the Chambers can commence its sessions without two-thirds of the whole number of its members, nor continue them without an absolnte majority, excepting in the case provided for in the following Article. XXVIII. No Senator or Deputy can withdraw from the Chamber he belongs without the permission thereof; and should he which to do so, he shall lose the rights of citizenship for 4 years; and the Chamber may continue its sessions with the members assembled. XXIX. The Chambers will unite to declare or complete, in the cases and in the form prescribed by law, the election of President of the Republic; to receive his oath; to admit or refuse his resignation ; to approve or not the nominations by the Executive of generals and colonels, with the concurrence of the Council of State; for the other elections assigned to it by the present Constitution and the laws, and in case either of the Chambers desires it; but never to exercise the functions which belong to them separately, in accordance with Article XXXV. XXX. Each of the Chambers will instal itself; they will open and close their sessions on the 'same day; remain in the same town, and neither can remove to another place, nor suspend its sessions for more than 3 days, without the knowledge of the other. In case of disagreement, they will unite and decide by a majority. XXXI. The Deputies and Senators shall never be responsible for opinions they manifest in Congress, and shall enjoy immunity during the sessions, for 30 days before, and for 30 days after; they cannot be accused, prosecuted or arrested, except in the case offlagrante delito,, if the Chamber to which they belong does not previously authorise the prosecution by the vote of the absolute majority of the Deputies present. Should a Senator or Deputy be arrestedflagrante delicto,he shall be immediately placed at the disposal of the respective Chamber, with the case against him, in order that it may authoriso the prosecution. But should the crime be committed in the 30 days subsequent to the sessions of the Congress,. the competent judge can proceed to the arrest and trial of the delinquent Senator or Deputy. XXXII. Every 3 years, at the period designated by law, one half of the Deputies shall be elected, and the third par6 of the Senators. In the first epoch the totality of the members pf both Chambers shall be elected, who shall decide by lot those who are to retire in the following elections, including in that number those %Nhohave ceased to be Senatori or Deputies by death or any othrlv 1234 cause. 4K [1868-69. LIX.]

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1234 1868-1869

EQUATOR.

1235

time, exclusive privileges, or suitable advantages and indemnifications; to promote enterprises, to encourage discoveries and such useful improvements as may be introduced into the Republic. 18. To grant amnesties or general pardons when seriously required on public grounds. 14. To appoint the place where the supreme political powers are to reside. 15. To permit or refuse the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic, or the stay of foreign vessels of war in the ports, if it should exceed two months. 16. To create new provinces and cantons, fix their limits, open or close ports, and establish custom-houses. 17. To form national codes and pass the necessary laws and decrees for the different branches of public administration ; to interpret, reform, and repeal, all laws or legislative acts whatever.
SECTION

6.-Of t1he formation of Laws and other Legislative Acts.

XXXVI. The laws may have their origin in either of the Chambers on the proposal of any of its members, or of the Executive Power, or of the Supreme Court of Justice. XXXVII. A project of law or any other Legislative Act which is not accepted must be postponed till the next session of the Legislative body; if it be accepted it must be discussed at 8 distinct sittings held on different days. XXXVIII. When a project of law, decree or resolution has been approved in the Chamber where it originated, it shall be immediately passed to the other Chamber, with a statement of the days on which it has been under discussion, and this Chamber can give or withhold its approval, or make such amendments, additions, or modifications as it may deem expedient. XXXIX. If the Chamber in which the project originated should not agree to the amendments, additions, or modifications, it may urge the project once more with fresh reasons; and if in spite of this persistence the revising Chamber should not approve the project, it cannot be taken into consideration again till the following Legislative Session, that is, if the amendments, additions, or modifications relate to the whole of the project; but if they only relate to one or more of its Articles, the latter may be suppressed, and the project will follow its course. XL. The project of law, decree or resolution, which has been approved by both Chambers will not have force of law without the constitutional sanction. Should it be approved by the Executive, he will order its execution and publication; but if he should object to sanction it, he shall return it within 15 days, with his observa1235 tions, to the Chamber in which it originated. 4K2

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1235 1868-1869

1236

EQUATOR.

XLI. If the observations of the Executive Power are to the
effect of totally rejecting the project, it will be reserved till the following Legislative Session. XLII. If the observations of the Executive are intended to correct or modify the project, it will be reconsidered in both Chambers, and should it be approved by them with the corrections and modifications of the Executive Power, it shall be returned for its promulgation. In case it is disapproved by both Chambers with those corrections or modifications, it shall be kept till the following Legislative Session. XLIII. Should the project be reserved on account of the objection, it will be again discussed in the following Legislative Session, and should the majority of both Chambers again approve it as it was, the Executive Power must necessarily sanction it; but should they approve it with variations or modifications, it will then be considered as a new project, and the preceding Articles are to be observed. If in spite of the persistence of both Chambers, the Executive Power should maintain that the project is contrary to the Constitution, he shall pass it to the Supreme Court whose opinion shall be limited to a declaration whether it is or is not contrary to the Constitution. In the latter case it shall be promulgated, and shall have force of law. XLIV. If the Executive Power should not return the sanctioned project with his observations, within the term of 15 days, the project shall have force of law, and, as such, its promulgation shall be ordered; unless during that term Congress should have suspended its sessions, or gone into recess, in which case it must be presented within the first 3 days of the next meeting. XLV. The projects of law or other legislative acts which are sent to the Executive for his sanction, shall be in duplicate, and both copies signed by the Presidents and Secretaries of the Chambers, and with them must be forwarded a statement of the days on which they were discussed. XLVI. A subsequent law repeals a previous one in everything contrary to the later law. XLVII. Should the Executive observe that the provisions of Articles XXXVII, XXXVIII, and XXXIX, have not been complied with in regard to some project, he shall return both copies, within 6 days, to the Chamber where the fault was committed, so that, when rectified, the project may follow its constitutional course. With those wherein no fault is found, he must sanction or object to them; returning to the Chamber of its origin one of the copies of each project with the corresponding decree. XLVIII. If within the term specified in the preceding Are,e the Chamber to which the project had to be returned shoulm12ave

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1236 1868-1869

EQUATOR.

1237

suspended its sittings, the days of the suspension shall not be reckoned in the said term. XLIX. The intervention of the Executive Power is not necessary in the resolutions of the Congress respecting removal to another place; conceding or withdrawing the right to declare, wholly or in part, the Republic in a state of siege; making elections; accepting resignations and excuses; providing for its internal police ; and in any other act in which the concurrence of both Chambers is unnecessary. L. In the laws, decrees, and resolutions, passed by Congress, the following formula shall be used: "The Senate and Chamber of Deputies of the Republic of Equator, assembled in Congress, decree." The Executive Power shall use the following: "Let it be executed, or, It is objected to." LI. In the interpretation, modification, or repeal of existing laws, the. same requirements are to be observed as in their formation.

Of the Executive Power. SECTION 1.-Of the Chief of the State.
TITLE VII.-

LII. The Executive Power is exercised by a magistrate denominated President of the Republic. When he may personally take command of the army, or when from sickness, absence, or other temporary reason, lie may not be able to exercise his charge, the Minister of the Interior will act as his substitute, with the title of Vice-President of the Republic. In default of the Minister of the Interior, the other Ministers, according to the priority of their appointments; and, in default of the latter, the Councillors of State, not clergymen, according to the priority of their appointments. LIII. To be President of the Republic it is requisite to have the same qualifications as those for Senator. LIV. The President of the Republic will be elected by vote, secret and direct, of the citizens in exercise of their rights, the Congress making the scrutiny, and declaring the election in favour of him who may have obtained the absolute majority of votes, or in default of that, the relative majority. In the case of an equality of votes, the absolute majority of the Congress will decide, by secret voting, confined to those who have obtained the greater and equal number of votes in the popular election. If the equality be repeated in the Congress, the President of the Senate shall have the decisive vote. LV. The Vice-President will finish the constitutional period of the President whose place he will take, if the Presidency should become vacant by death, dismissal, or resignation, or if physical or mental incapacity, previously proven by the Supreme Court and the Council of State, should incapacitate the President from exercising 12 3 7 his functions, and always provided that less than two years are want-

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1237 1868-1869

1238

EQUATOR.

ing to conclude the period ; but if two or more years are wanting he must convoke the elections within 30 days, and they must take place in the following 90. He who is elected in this manner will conclude the period, and his absence will be supplied as provided in Article LII. LVI. The President of the Republic will continue in his functions for 6 years, and terminate on the day specified by the Constitution. He can be elected for a second period; but to be elected for a third time, there must be an interval of a period between that and the second election. LVII. The President of the Republic cannot leave the.country during the time he is in power, nor for two years after, without leave of the Congress. LVIII. The President elect on entering upon his office will take oath before the Congress, or, in its recess, before the Supreme Court, in the following terms: "I, N. N. swear by our Lord and these Holy Evangelists to discharge faithfully the functions of President of the Republic, to profess and protect the Catholic, Apostolic Roman Religion, to preserve the integrity and independence of the State, to observe and cause to be observed the Constitution and the laws. If I do so, may God help and defend me; and if not, may He and the nation call me to account." LIX. The administration and government of the State are confided to the President of the Republic. His authority extends to whatsoever relates to the preservation of internal order and the external security of the nation, observing and causing to be observed the Constitution and the laws. LX. The special functions of the Executive Power are: 1. To convoke the Congress at the ordinary period, and extraordinarily when public convenience requires it, removing the obstacles that might prevent its meeting. 2. To assist in framing the laws, according to the rules of the Constitution; to sanction and promulgate them, and to issue the decrees, regulations, and instructions necessary for their execution. 3. To propose to Congress a list of 3 magistrates for the Supreme Court, and for the tribunal of the Exchequer, and to appoint them provisionally during the recess of the Congress; to nominate, on the proposal of 3 by the Supreme Court, the magistrates of the other courts of justice, and, at the proposal of the latter, the professional judges of finance and fiscal agents. 4. To grant special pardons, abating or commuting the punishment in concurrence with the Council of State; but not that of functionaries delinquent against the national exchequer, or il foue of an order of the Government.

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1238 1868-1869

EQUATOR .

1239

5. To appoint and remove freely the Ministers Councillors of State, Diplomatic and Consular officers, Governors, political chiefs, and parochial deputies, and generally all the functionaries of the executive branch, civil, military, and of finance, and to accept their resignations. 6. To direct diplomatic negotiations, conclude and ratify Treaties with the approval of the Congress. 7. To declare war on a previous decree of the Congress, and make peace with the approval of the Senate. 8. To look after the collection of the public revenues, to decree their expenditure, according to law, and in case of necessity, with the opinion of the Council of State, to collect the yearly taxes in advance, with the respective discount. 9. To have the supreme inspection in all matters of police and public establishments of instruction and beneficence, in accordance with the regulations, statutes, and laws which govern them. 10. To grant, in accordance with the laws, licences or exemption from active military service, for invalids and charitable pensions, letters of naturalization, and patents of navigation. 11. To dispose the armed force by sea and land, organize it and distribute it in the most advantageous manner, and to command it personally in case of a campaign, with the assent of the Congress, or, during its recess, of the Council of State. 12. With the assent of the Congress, or, if it be in recess, of the Council of State, to declare a part or the whole territory of the Republic in a state of siege for a definite time, in case of actual or threatened external attack or internal commotion, and to decree its cessation. If the state of siege should still continue when the Congress is assembled, it is the business of the Legislative Power to decree its cessation or continuation. LXI. The state of siege being declared, it belongs to the Government, 1st. To command the forcible entrance and search of the domicile of suspected persons; 2nd. To seize and have them conveyed to another inhabited part of the Republic, or banish them fbr a stated period; 3rd. To order the delivery of arms and munitions, and proceed to their discovery and seizure; 4th. To prohibit publications and meetings which, in its opinion, may promote or excite disorder; 5th. To augment the armed force, and call the National Guard into active service, and to remove the capital elsewhere, when there is a weighty necessity for doing so; 6th. To exact warlike contributions from such persons as instigate or encourage foreign or civil war; 7th. To direct that the perpetrators, aiders, and abettors of the crimes of foreign invasion or home insurrection, be tried by military law and with the penalties of the military ordinances, ev?3 when the state of siege has ceased. Should the sentence be con-

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1239 1868-1869

1240

EQUATOR.

demnatory, it is not to be put in execution without the cognizance
of the Executive Power, so that he may exercise or not the power granted to him in paragraph 4, Article LX, of the Constitution. LXII. The President of the Republic can be accused during his term of office, and two years subsequently, for all the acts of his administration, which may have seriously compromised "the honour, security, or independence of the State, or have openly infringed the Constitution.
SrcTiox

2.-Of the .Ministers Secretaries of Department.

LXII. Three Secretaries will be freely nominated by the Executive: for Homo and Foreign Affairs, Finance, War and Marine. Their number can be reduced or increased by law. Sole ยง. The requisites for a Minister are the same as those for a Senator. LXIV. No decree, order, or resolution of the Executive Power, of any kind soever, shall be valid unless signed and communicated by a Secretary of State, nor shall it be obeyed by his agents, or by any authority whatsoever; excepting the appointment or removal of the Secretaries themselves, which may be done by the Executive Power alone. LXV. The Secretaries of State are responsible for infraction of the Constitution or law, for bribery, exaction, or malversation of the public funds; for authorising projects of law, decrees, or resolutions of the Executive Power, without demanding the opinion of the Council of State in the cases provided by the Constitution and the laws, and for having retarded their execution, or for negligence in their fulfilment. Neither a verbal nor a written order of the Executive will save the Ministers from this responsibility. LXVI. The Secretaries of State, with the cognizance of the Executive Power, will give to the Legislative Chambers all reports and information required of them relative to the business connected with their respective departments, excepting those which in the opinion of the Executive should be reserved. LXVII. The Secretaries shall present to the Legislative Chainbers, within the first 6 days of their ordinary sessions, a written report of the state of affairs belonging to their respective departments, proposing what they may deem expedient to improve them. They have a right to take part in the debates of the Chambers, but not to vote. LXVIII. The Secretary of Finance will moreover present, within the first 20 days of the sessions, an estimate of the expenses for the succeeding two years, as also the state of the n~tipal revenue.

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1240 1868-1869

EQUATOR.1 SECTION 3.-Of the Council of State.

1241

LXIX. There shall be a Council of State, presided over by the President of the Republic, and composed of the Ministers Secretaries of State, a Minister of the Supreme Court, a Minister of the Exchequer, with an ecclesiastic and a proprietor, having the qualifications requisite for a Senator, and appointed by the President. LXX. The President, or other person in charge of the Executive Power, will hear the opinion of the Council of State in the following cases: for giving or refusing his sanction to projects of law and other legislative acts, sent to him by the Congress; for convoking the latter on extraordinary.occasions; soliciting from the Congress a decree authorising him to declare war; appointing diplomatic agents,judicial functionaries, and governors of provinces; exercising the right of pardoning, and for the other cases prescribed by the Constitution and the laws, or in those wherein the Executive may think fit to require its opinion. LXXI. The Council of State has the right: 1st. Of authorising, on its responsibility, the Executive Power to declare the state of siege; 2nd. Of preparing projects of law, which, in its opinion, the Executive Power ought to present to the Congress; 3rd. To receive and prepare for the Congress appeals of complaint made against the Supreme Court or its Ministers; 4th. To exercise the other rights prescribed by the Constitution and the laws. LXXII. The Councillors of State are responsible for their opinions, to which the Executive Power may or may not conform.
TITLE

YIII.-Of the Judicial Power.

LXXIlI. Justice shall be administered by a Supreme Court and by the other tribunals and courts which the law may establish. Neither the Congress nor the President of the Republic can in any case exercise judicial functions, transfer pending suits, or cause the revival of proceedings already terminated. LXXLV. To be Minister of the Supreme Court the same qualifications are required as for a Senator, he must also have been for 6 years Minister in one of the tribunals of the Republic, or have creditably practised the profession of advocate for 10 years. LXXV. To be Minister of the superior tribunals, it is required to be an Equatorian in exercise of citizenship, to have practised creditably the profession of lawyer for 5 years, and to be full 30
years of age.

LXXVI. A special law will designate the number of Ministe1 4 1 who are to constitute the Supreme Court and the superior tri-

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1241 1868-1869

1242

EQUATOR.

bunals, the province or provinces where they are to exercise their jurisdiction, and the functions of the said tribunals and courts of first instance. LXXVII. In the debates on projects of law presented by the Supreme Court, one of its Ministers may be present. "LXXVIII. In no trial shall there be more than 3 instances. The tribunals and courts which are not final shall give reasons for their sentences. LXXIX. The magistrates and judges are responsible for their conduct in the exercise of their functions, in the way determined by the law; but they cannot be suspended from their offices without a previous act, giving the reasons, and declaring that there is cause to take proceedings; nor can they be dismissed except by judicial sentence. LXXX. The magistrates of the Supreme Court and those of the superior courts will remain in their offices for 6 years, and they may be re-elected; but they are prohibited from accepting any post freely conferred by the Executive Power.
TITLE IX.-Of the InternalRegimen and Administration.

LXXXI. The territory of the Republic is divided into provinces, cantons, and parishes. LXXXII. In each province there shall be a Governor who shall be the immediate agent of the Executive Power; in each canton a Political Chief, and in each province a Deputy. The law will determine their functions. Sole ยง. The Province of Esmeraldas, as' well as the Equatorian villages of the Banda Oriental, and generally those places which, from their isolated position and distance, cannot form part of any canton or province, or which, from scanty population, cannot constitute a parish, canton, or province, shall be governed by special arrangements, until the increase of their population or the progress of their civilization allow of their being governed as the other provinces or cantons. LXXXIII. Municipalities shall be established in all the principal cantonal towns, and they shall be presided over by the Political Chiefs. The law will determine their functions in all matters connected with police, education and instruction of the inhabitants of the locality; their material well-being, the collecting, management, and application of the municipal revenues, the encouragement of public establishments, and the other objects and duties to which they are to attend.
TITLE X.-Of the Armed Force. LXXXIV. For the defence of the Republic and the preservation 1242

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1242 1868-1869

EQUATOR,

1243

of internal order, there shall be a permanent military force, and national guards. LXXXV. The armed force is essentially obedient, not deliberative. LXXXVI. The command and military jurisdiction can only be exercised over persons purely military, and who are in active service. TITLE XI.-Of Guarantees. LXXXVII. Only Equatorians in exercise of the rights of citizenship can be public functionaries in Equator. "LXXXVIII. No person born in the Republic is a slave, nor can any one enter the country in that condition without becoming free. LXXXIX. Every Equatorian can change his place of abode, reside in or depart from the territory of the Republic, or return to it as may suit his convenience, and dispose of his property, excepting where a third person is interested, observing the legal formalities. XC. No Equatorian can be placed beyond the protection of the laws, nor withdrawn from his natural judges, nor tried by a law promulgated posterior to the committal of a crime, nor deprived of the right of defence in any stage of the prosecution. XCI. No person can be seized or arrested except by competent authority, unless he shall be actually surprised in committing a crime, in which case any one can take him before the judge. Within 24 hours at most after the arrest of any person, the judge will issue a signed order expressing the cause of imprisonment, and whether or not he is to be deprived of communication. Of this order he shall give a copy to the prisoner or person under arrest. The judge who shall fail to comply with this provision, and the jailor who shall not demand it, shall be punished as guilty of arbitrary detention. XCII. With the exception of cases of imprisonment by way of judicial compulsion or correctional punishment, nobody can be imprisoned but for a crime deserving corporal punishment; and in whatever stage of the prosecution it may appear that the said punishment ought not to be inflicted on him, the prisoner shall be set at liberty, on giving sufficient security. XCIII. No one shall be compelled to give testimony in a criminal case against his consort, his ancestors, his offspring, and relations, within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity and second of affinity, nor to give it on oath or other compulsion against himself. XC1V. The confiscation of property is abolished, and no punishment affects any one excepting the criminal. XCV. Every person is presumed to be innocent, and has the right to preserve his good reputation till he is declared delinquent according to the laws. 1243 XCVI. The public credit is guaranteed.

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1243 1868-1869

1244

EQUATOIR.

XCVII. The author or inventor of a discovery or production
shall have the exclusive property thereof for the time conceded to " him by law. XCVIII. Nobody shall be deprived of his property, or of hia right to it, excepting in virtue of a judicial sentence. In case public utility, declared by a law, may require the use or alienation of private property, its value, adjusted with him, shall be immediately given to the owner thereof, or the sum it may be worth in the opinion of honorable men. XCIX. Any public functionary who may try to commit an offence against private property, shall be subjected in person and property to an indemnification of the losses and injuries he may have occasioned. C. Entails are prohibited, and all property is alienable in the manner determined by law. CI. No tax, duty, or contribution, can be exacted unless by competent authority, and in virtue of a decree which, according to law, authorises that exaction. In all taxes, their proportion to the possessions and business of every one will be duly considered. CII. The expression of ideas, whether verbal, written, or printed, is free, without previous censure, provided religion, morality, and decency are respected; but any one who. may abuse this right shall be punished according to the law, and by the ordinary judges, the jury of the press being abolished. CIII. The right of petition shall be exercised personally by one or more individuals in their name; but never in the name of the nation. CIV. Any Equatorian can complain before the Congress, the Executive Power, or the Judicial Power, against infractions of the Constitution and the laws, and present to the Chamber of Representatives an accusation against any high functionary. CV. The abode of every one inhabiting the Equatorian territory is an inviolable asylum, and can only be broken into for a special reason determined by law, and by order of the competent authority. CVI. No person shall be obliged to give lodging in his house to any soldier, nor shall the colleges and houses of education be occupied as military barracks. When buildings not belonging to the State are taken for the lodgment of troops, the proper rent shall be paid. CVII. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable. Papers or goods belonging to private persons cannot be opened, intercepted, or examined, excepting in the cases specified by the law. CVIII. Foreigners will be admitted into Equator, and will enjoy security aud liberty while they respect the Constitution and laws of the Republic. CIX. Equatorians have the right to assemble without arms, p . vided they respect religon, morality, and public order. These

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1244 1868-1869

EQUATOR,

1245

associations will be under the vigilance of the Government. The Catholic institutions established in the Republic shall not be suppressed or dissolved without the concurrence of the Holy See. CX. The Republic of Equator has the right to banish from its territory, foreigners who may compromise the interior or exterior security of the State; without prejudice to the penalties which they thereby incur. TITLE XII.-General Provisions. CXI. No payments shall be made from the national treasury for which the Congress has not provided the corresponding sum, nor to a greater amount than the sum specified. CXII. Every functionary on taking possession of his post shall swear to support and defend the Constitution, and fulfil the duties imposed on him by his office. CXIII. No Equatorian can resign his rights, nor decline the performance of his duties, nor, whilst living in the Republic, accept any appointment from another nation without permission from the Legislative Chambers, or, during their recess, from the Council of State. CXIV. The Congress alone can solve or interpret doubts that may arise as to the sense of any one or more Articles of this Constitution; and the decision shall appear in an express law.
TITLE XIII.-Of the Beform of the Constitution. CXV. At whatever time Congress may judge it convenient to

reform some Articles of this Constitution, that reform may be pro-

posed in order that it may be again taken into consideration in another ordinary Legislative Session, and should it then also be ratified by the majority of each Chamber, proceeding with the formalities prescribed in Section 6, Title VI, the reform shall be valid if the majority of voters approve it, voting by "Yes" or "No." But the bases contained in Articles IX, XIV, and XV, can never be altered.
Transitory Provisions.

CXVI. The present Convention will elect for this time, by secret scrutiny, and by absolute majority of votes, the President of the Republic, the magistrates of the Supreme Court, and those of the Tribunal of the Exchequer. Those who are elected in this manner will hold their appointments till the 30th of August, 1875. CXVII. It will also pass, even after the promulgation of this Constitution, such laws, decrees, and resolutions as it may consider necessary. Given at Quito, in the Hall of Sessions, on the 9th of June, 1869.
RAFAEL CAR VAJAL, President, of the -National Convention, 1Deputyfor the Province of Imbabura. ELIAS LASO, Vice-President, Deputy for the Pro1245 vince of Pichincha.

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1245 1868-1869

1246

GREAT BINTAIN.

Deputy for Imbabura, Manuel Tobar; Deputy for Imbabura, Francisco A. Arboleda; Deputy for Pichineha, Julio Saenz; Deputy for Pichincha, Roberto de Ascsubi; Deputy for Leon, Felipe Sarrade; Deputy for Leon, Pablo Herrera; Deputy for Leon, Ignacio del AlcAzar; Deputy for Tunguragua, Nicolas Martinez; Deputy for Tunguragua, Pablo Bustamante; Deputy for Chim"borazo, Jos6 Ignacio Ordofiez; Deputy for Chimb.orazo, Carlos Zambrano; Deputy for Chimborazo, Pedro Lizarzaburu; Deputy for Azuay, Vicente Cuesta; Deputy for Azuay, Vicente Salazar; Deputy for Azuay, Rafael Borja; Deputy for Loja, Manuel Eguiguren; Deputy for Loja, Juan Torres; Deputy for Loja, Pedro Jos6 Bustamante; Deputy for Guayaquil, Jose Domingo Santistevan; Deputy for Guayaquil, Jacinto Ignacio Camafio; Deputy for Los Rios, Tomas Hermenejildo Noboa; Deputy for Los Rios, Jacinto Ramon Mufios; Deputy for Los Rios, Miguel Uquillas; Deputy for Manabi, Francisco Javier Salazar; Deputy for Manabi, Jos6 Maria Aragundi; Deputy for Manabi, Francisco J. Menendez. VICTOR LAZO, Secretary. Government Palace, Quito, August 11, 1869. Let this be printed and circulated. Given, signed with my hand, sealed with the great seal of the Republic, and countersigned by the Minister of State for the Interior. G. GARCIA MORENO. FRANCISCO J. SALAZAR, Minister of the Interior.

BRITISH ORDER IN COUNCIL, for the Regulation of British Consular Jurisdictidn within the Dominions of the Queen of Madagascar.*-Osborne,February 4, 1869.
At the Court at Osborne House, Isle of Wight, the 4th day of February, 1869.
PRESENT, THE QUEEN'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY IN COUNCIL.

WHEREAS,

by an Act of Parliament made and passed in the

session of Parliament holden in the 6th and 7th years (if Her Majesty's reign (cap. 94)t, intituled, "An Act to remove doubts as to the exercise of Power and Jurisdiction by Her Majesty within divers Countries and places out of Her Majesty's Dominions, and to render the same more effectual," it is, among other things, enacted that it is and shall be lawful for Her Majesty to hold, exercise, and enjoy, any power or jurisdiction which Her Majesty now hath, or may at any time hereafter have, within any country or place out of Her

0

London Gazette of February 5, 1869. t Vol. XXX. Page 984.

1246

HeinOnline -- 59 British & Foreign State Papers 1246 1868-1869

