CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

ECUADOR
1975-1981
by GISBERT H. FLANZ

Issued May 1981

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION BIBLIOGRAPHY

We wish to express our thanks and appreciation to the organization of American States for allowing us to reproduce their excellent translation of this Constitution. The author is indebted to Dr. Fernando Cordova for his assistance in obtaining primary materials and to Maria Benitez and Sarah Hospodar for research assistance.

© Copyright 1981 by Oceana Publication, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR APPROVED IN THE REFERENDUM ON JANUARY 15, 1978 (Translated from the official text published in Registro Oficial No. 800 of March 27, 1979, Quito)

GENERAL SECRETARIAT ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES WASHINGTON, D.C. 1981

CONTENTS

Preamble PRELIMINARY TITLE FIRST PART Title I Ecuadorans and Foreigners Nationality Citizenship Legal Status of Foreigners

1 1

2 2 3 4 4 9 10 12 13 15 16 17 17 17 19 20 20

Section I Section II Section III Title II Section Section Section Section

Rights, Duties and Guarantees I II III IV Individual Rights The Family Education and Culture Social Security and Community Development Labor Political Rights General Rule

Section V Section VI Section VII Title III Section Section Section Section Section SECOND PART Title I Section I Section II Section III

The Economy I II III IV V General Provisions Sectors of the Economy Property Tax System Monetary System

The Legislative Function The National House of Representatives The Enactment and Sanction of Legislation The National Budget

21

21 24 25

iii

Title II

The Executive Function The President of the Republic The Vice President of the Republic The Ministers of State The National Development Council

26 26 31 31 32 33 33 34 34 36 36 37 37 38 38 38 38 40 41

Section I Section II Section III Section IV Title III

The Judicial Function

Section I Basic Principles Organs of the Judicial Function Section II Section III Organization and Functioning Title IV State Organisms The Supreme Electoral Tribunal Office of the Attorney General Supervisory Agencies

Section I Section II Section III Title V Section Section Section Section Title VI THIRD PART Title I

Civil Administration I General Rules II Subordinate Administrative Regime III Autonomous Administrative Regime IV Entities of the Public Sector The Public Forces

Ranking and Control of the Legal Order The Supremacy of the Constitution The Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees

42 42 43 45 45 46

Section I Section II Title II

Amendment of the Constitution

General Provisions Transitory Provisions
iv

PREAMBLE THE PEOPLE OF ECUADOR, IN EXERCISE OF THEIR SOVEREIGNTY, DO ORDAIN AND SANCTION BY REFERENDUM THEIR CONSTITUTION PRELIMINARY TITLE independent, Article 1. Ecuador a sovereign, is government is and unitary state. democratic Its republican, elective, responsible and alternating. Sovereignty resides in the people, who exercise it through the organs of the public power. The official language is Spanish. Quechua and other indigenous languages are recognized as elements of the national culture. The coat of arms, the flag and the anthem established by law are symbols of the Fatherland. The territory is inalienable and irreducible. The capital is Quito. Article 2. The primary function of the State is to strengthen national unity, ensure the effectiveness of the tundamental rights of man, and promote the economic, social and cultural progress of its inhabitants. Article 3. The Ecuadoran State respects the principles of international law; proclaims the legal equality of the states; advocates the peaceful solution of disputes between nations and the association of states with a view to the economic and social cooperation and integration of their peoples, especially with the Ibero-American states, with which it is united by bonds of solidarity and interdependence as a result of the identity of their origin and culture. Article 4. The Ecuadoran State condemns all forms of colonialism, neocolonialism and racial discrimination or segregation. It recognizes the right of peoples to liberate themselves from these oppressive systems.

FIRST PART

Title I Ecuadorans and Foreigners

Section I

Nationality Article 5. Ecuadorans are such by birth or by naturalization. Article 6. The following are Ecuadorans by birth: 1. 2. Those born on national soil; Those born on foreign soil. a. Whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth, either of whom is employed in the service of Ecuador or of an international organization, unless they express a desire to the contrary; Whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth and who come to reside in Ecuador or express a desire to be Ecuadoran while within 18 to 21 years of age. following are Ecuadorans by

b.

Article 7. The naturalization: 1. 2. 3.

Those who obtain Ecuadoran nationality for having rendered services to the country. Those who obtain a certificate of naturalization; and Those who have been adopted as children by Ecuadorans while minors. They retain their Ecuadoran nationality if within the ages of 18 to 21 they express a desire to retain it.

Article 8. Neither marriage nor its dissolution affects the nationality of the spouses.

- 2

Article 9. Spaniards and Ibero-Americans by birth who reside in Ecuador are considered Ecuadorans by naturalization without losing their nationality of origin, if they indicate a desire to be so considered and the corresponding states practice reciprocity. Article 10. Whoever had Ecuadoran nationality at the time this Constitution is issued continues to enjoy it. Article 11. Ecuadoran nationality is lost: 1. 2. 3. 4. By treason to the country, legally declared; By voluntary acquisition of another nationality except as provided in Article 9; When the canceled; certificate of naturalization is

In all other cases as determined by law. Nationality is recovered in accordance with the law. Section II Citizenship

Article 12. Ecuadorans over eighteen years of age are citizens. Article 13. The rights of citizenship are suspended: 1. 2. By judicial interdiction, except in the case of fortuitous insolvency or bankruptcy; confinement During misdemeanor cases; in prison, except in

3.

In all other cases as determined by law. Section III Legal Status of Foreigners

Article 14. Foreigners generally enjoy the same rights as Ecuadorans, with the limitations established in the Constitution and in the law.

- 3 -

Foreigners are excluded from the exercise of political rights. facilitates and Article 15. The State promotes selective immigration. It requires that foreigners dedicate themselves to activities for which they are authorized. Article 16. The waiving of all rights to diplomatic recourse is implicit in contracts concluded by the Government or by public entities with foreign natural or juridical persons. If such contracts are made in Ecuadoran territory, they cannot be subjected to a foreign jurisdiction. Article 17. In accordance with the law and with international agreements, the state guarantees foreigners the right of asylum. Article 18. Foreign natural or juridical persons may not acquire or retain, either directly or indirectly, ownership of or other rights to lands, nor lease them, obtain the use of waters, established industries, agricultural holdings, civil domicile or residence, nor enter into contracts on nonrenewable natural resources or, in general, on products of the subsoil and any minerals or other substances whose nature is distinct from those of the soil, within a belt of fifty kilometers measured toward the interior from the borders and coasts, nor on island territory, except in those cases of special authorization provided by the law. In areas classified by the competent agency as reserved areas or zones, no authorization may be granted in connection therewith. The acquisition of lands or occupation in lucrative activities in another part of the national territory is permissible when authorized pursuant to the law TITLE II Rights, Duties and Guarantees

Section I Individual Rights Article 19. guarantees: Every person enjoys the following

-4 -

1.

The inviolability of life, personal integrity and the right to full material and moral development. Torture and all inhuman or degrading procedures are prohibited. There is no death penalty. The penal system has the purpose of effecting the reeducation, rehabilitation and social restoration of the prisoner.

2.

The right to freedom of opinion and to expression of thought by whatever means of social communication, without prejudice to civil and criminal liability for any abuse incurred in exercising them, in accordance with the provisions of the law, in which case the representatives of communication media are not protected by immunity or special privilege. The right to honor and a good name. Any person affected by inaccurate statements or who has had his honor offended by the press or other communications media, has the right to free redress by the medium involved. Equality before the law. All forms of discrimination for reasons of race, filiation, language, sex, religion, color, social origin, political or other opinions, economic position or birth are forbidden. Women, regardless of their marital status, have rights and opportunities equal to those of men on all levels of public life, private and domestic, especially in civil, political, economic, social and cultural matters.

3.

4.

5.

Freedom of conscience and of religion, individually and collectively, in public and in private. Persons can freely practice the faith that they prefer, except for the limitations prescribed by law to protect the security, public morality and fundamental rights of other persons. The inviolabililty of the home. No one may enter a home or conduct a search or examination therein

6.

5

without the authorization of the person who lives in it or without a court order, in the cases and manner prescribed by the law. 7. The inviolability and secrecy of correspondence, which may be taken possession of, opened and examined only in the cases prescribed by the law. Privacy shall be respected in matters outside the subject of the examination. This same principle is observed with respect to telegraphic, cable and telephonic communications. Documents obtained in violation of this guarantee are not admissible in court. The right to travel freely throughout the national territory and to choose a place of residence. The law provides for necessary restrictions to protect the national security. Ecuadorans enjoy the freedom to enter and leave Ecuador. Foreigners are subject to the provisions of the law. 9. The right to address complaints and petitions to the authorities, but in no case in the name of the people, and to receive due attention or replies in accordance with the law. Freedom of work, business and industry, in accordance with the law. No person may be bound to perform free or forced labor, except when permitted by the law. 11. Freedom of contract. The law regulates the limitations of this principle and the one relating to the review of contracts to avoid unjust enrichment and maintain equity in contractural relations The right of association and of free assembly for peaceful purposes. The right to a standard of living that ensures the necessary health, food, clothing, housing, medical care and social services.

8.

10.

12. 13.

- 6-

14.

The right to privacy concerning political and religious convictions. No one may be required to declare his convictions except in the cases prescribed by law. The right to participate in the cultural life of the community. Personal freedom and security. Accordingly: a. Slavery and all forms of servitude are prohibited. No one may be imprisoned for debts, costs, fees, taxes, fines or other obligations, except in case of compulsory support. No one may be punished for an act or omission which, at the time of commission, was not classified nor punishable as a crime, nor can punishment not provided for in the law be applied to it. Should two penal laws be applicable, the less severe shall be applied even if it takes effect after the violation. In case of doubt, the penal law which is more favorable to the offender shall be applied. No person may be taken from his competent judge, nor judged by special tribunals or commissions set up for the purpose, regardless of their denomination. No one may be punished without due process nor deprived of the right of defense in any state or stage of the process. No one may be compelled in a criminal action to declare against a spouse or relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity, nor compelled to give testimony against himself in matters that may involve criminal guilt. Every person is presumed innocent so long as there is no legal declaration of guilt.

15.

16.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

7

h.

No one may be deprived of his freedom without a written order from the competent authority in the manner and for the length of time prescribed by law, except in the case of flagrans crimen. Every person must be immediately informed of the cause or reasons for his detention. Any person who believes he is being illegally deprived of his freedom may resort to the right of habeaus corpus, either personally or through another person, without need for a written order before the mayor or president of the council in the jurisdiction in which he is located or before whoever replaces him. The municipal authority immediately orders the petitioner to be brought before him and shows him the order of detention. His order must be obeyed without observation or excuse by those in charge of the jail or place of detention. Once informed of the backfround of the case, the mayor or the president of the council shall, within forty-eight hours, order the immediate release of the petitioner if he was not brought before him or if he was not shown the order of detention, or if such order did not comply with the legal requirements, or if legal defects needed correction, or finally, was recourse for the if the basis justifiable. The employee who does not comply with the order shall be immediately discharged from his position or employment without further procedure by the mayor or the president of the council, who will report the dismissal to the comptroller and to the authority who must appoint a replacement. After having released the petitioner, the employee may appeal his dismissal before the contentious-administrative court within eight days of notification of his dismissal.

i. j.

Article 20. The state and other entities of the public sector are obligated to indemnify individuals for

- 8-

any damages caused to them as a consequence of their public services or of the acts of their employees in the performance of their duties. Those entities in such cases have right to redress and to make effective the responsibility of their employees who, either through deception or gross negligence under oath, have caused damages. Article 21. When a verdict of guilty has been changed or reversed on appeal or review, an individual who has suffered punishment as a result of that verdict must be indemnified by the state in accordance with the law. Section II The Family Article 22. The state protects the family as the fundamental core of society by ensuring it the moral, cultural and economic conditions that favor the attainment of its ends. The state also protects marriage, maternity and family property. Marriage is based on the free consent of the contracting parties and on the principle of equality of rights, obligations and legal capacity of both spouses. The state protects progenitors in the exercise of paternal authority and oversees the fulfillment of the reciprocal obligations of parents and children. The latter have the same rights, without considering their filiation background. In registering births, no statement shall be required regarding filiation, and in issuing documents of identity, no reference shall be made to filiation. Inalienable and unattachable family property rights are recognized in the amount and under the conditions regulated by law. Article 23. The state protects the child from its conception and supports the minor as well as his home life, so that his moral, mental and physical development will be normal and assured.

- 9

Article 24. The state defends responsible paternity and the education suitable for the betterment of the family. It guarantees the parents' right to have the number of children that they can support and educate. Article 25. A stable monogamous union of a man and a woman, free of matrimonial ties with another person, who form a de facto household for a period of time and under the conditions and circumstances prescribed by law, results in community property which is subject to the regulations for joint ownership by husband and wife, insofar as they are applicable, unless some other economic arrangement has been stipulated or family property has been established for the benefit of their common children. Section III Education and Culture Article 26. The state develops and promotes culture, artistic creation and scientific research and oversees the preservation of the cultural heritage and artistic and historical wealth of the nation. Article 27. Education is the primary obligation of the state. Official education is secular and gratuitous in all its levels. Private education is guaranteed. The right of parents to give their children the education that they consider proper is recognized. Education is inspired by principles of nationality, democracy, social justice, peace, and defense of human rights, and it is open to all trends of universal thought. Education has a moral, historic and social sense and it stimulates development of the critical capacity of the student for fully understanding the reality of things Ecuadoran, for promoting an authentic national culture, for human solidarity and social and community action. The state guarantees access to education for all inhabitants without any discrimination. Freedom of teaching and professorship is guaranteed.

-

10-

Education at the elementary level and in the basic period of the intermediate level is compulsory. When imparted in official institutions, the social services are provided without cost. In schools established in areas of predominantly Indian population, Quechua or the pertinent indigenous language shall be used in addition to Spanish. The state shall formulate and carry out plans to eliminate illiteracy. The stability and fair remuneration of educators in all levels is guaranteed. The law shall regulate their appointment, promotion, transfer, separation and remuneration. The state shall provide assistance to free private allowances the without prejudice to education, education and for private such established for and the councils The provincial universities. municipalities may collaborate toward the same ends. Article 28. The universities and polytechnic schools, both official and private, are autonomous and are governed by the law and their own statutes. To ensure the fulfillment of the goals, functions and autonomy of the universities and polytechnic schools, the state shall create and support university and polytechnic endowments. Their premises are inviolable. They may not be broken into except in the cases and under the terms in which the dwelling of a person may be broken into. Their surveillance and maintenance of internal order are the competence and responsibility of their authorities. Neither the Chief Executive nor any of his agencies, authorities or officials may close them or reorganize them, totally or partially, or deprive them of their income or budgetary allowances. The principal functions of the universities and polytechnic schools are the study and proposal of solutions to national problems, the creation and development of the national culture and its diffusion among population sectors, scientific research, professional and technical training, and contributing to the establishment of a new and more just Ecuadoran society by indicating methods and guidelines therefore.

Section IV Social Security and Community Development Article 29. All Ecuadorans have the right to social security which includes: 1. Social insurance, the purpose of which is to protect the insured and his family in cases of sickness, motherhood, disability, old age, death and umemployment. It shall be extended to the entire population, and shall be financed with equal contributions from the state, employers, and insured persons. Social insurance is the unrenounceable right of workers. Social insurance shall be applied through an autonomous institution, in the administrative entities of which the state, the employers and the insured workers shall be represented. The funds and reserves of social insurance, which are its own and distinct from those of the national treasury, cannot be allocated for purposes other than those for which it was established. Social insurance cash benefits are not subject to assignment, attachment or withholding, except in the cases of support allowances owed by law or obligations contracted in favor of the insuring institution, and they are exempt from national and municipal taxes. The state and social insurance shall adopt measures to facilitate voluntary affiliation and to put into effect the affiliation of the agricultural worker. 2. Health care of the population and environmental sanitation of urban and rural areas through socialized medicine, through different agencies charged with putting it into effect, and through establishment of the pertinent infrastructure in accordance with the law; the application of programs designed to eliminate alcoholism and drug addiction and to reduce infant mortality. Social welfare, established and regulated by the state, in accordance with the law. - 12 -

3.

Article 30. The state shall contribute to the organization and promotion of the diverse population sectors, especially rural workers in moral, cultural, economic and social matters, so as to enable them to participate effectively in the development of the community. The state shall promote hygienic and low-cost housing. It shall provide the means of subsistence to whomever lacks resources and is not in a position to acquire them and can find no one or no agency obligated by law to provide them. The state shall promote social and civil service for women and encourage the formation of women's groups to become active in society and in the development of the country. It shall provide training to rural women and to marginal sectors. Section V Labor Work is a social right and a social Article 31. duty. It enjoys the protection of the state. The law ensures to the worker respect for his dignity, a decent existence, and a remuneration that covers his essential needs and those of his family. Work is regulated by the following basic standards; a. b. Labor legislation and its application are subject to the principles of social law. The state shall promote the elimination of unemployment and underemployment. The state guarantees the intangibility of the recognized rights of workers and shall adopt measures to extend and improve them. The rights of workers are unrenounceable. Any stipulation implying their renunciation, diminution or alteration is null and void. Action taken to reclaim them prescribes in the time specified by the law, counted from the termination of the work relationship.

c.

d.

- 13 -

e.

In case of doubt about the scope of legal, regulatory or contractual provisions of labor matters, they will be applied by viewing workers in the most favorable light. Pay for work is unattachable, except for payment of alimony. Amounts owed by the employer for work constitute privileged first-class credits, having preference even over mortgage payments. Workers shall share in the net profits of the enterprise in accordance with the law. The right of workers to join a union and of employers to form an association and its free development, without prior authorization, in accordance with the law, is guaranteed. The right of workers to strike and the right of employers to lockout, in accordance with the law, is recognized and guaranteed. Without prejudice to the principal responsibility of the direct obligor and taking exception to the right of repetition, the person in whose benefit work is performed or services are provided is jointly and severally liable for compliance with the social laws, even if the labor contract has been made by an intermediary. Collective labor disputes shall be submitted to conciliation and arbitration tribunals, composed of workers and employers and presided over by a labor official. The tribunals are the only ones competent to determine the nature of labor disputes and to process and settle them.

f.

g. h.

i.

j.

k.

1. For payment of the indemnity to which the worker is entitled, remuneration is understood to mean the amount that the worker receives in cash, in services, or in kind, including what he receives for special and supplementary work, piece work, commissions, profit sharing, and any other normal payment in industry or service. Excepted are the legal percentage of profits, travel allowances or occasional subsidies, the

- 14 -

thirteenth and fourteenth pay, wage compensation, supplementary bonuses, and benefits representing social services. Section VI Political Rights Article 32. Ecuadoran citizens shall enjoy the right to elect and to be elected, to present bills to the National House of Representatives, to be consulted in the cases provided by the Constitution, to supervise the acts of the organs of the public power, and to work and to perform public duties, under the conditions determined by law. Article 33. Voting is universal, equal, direct and secret; it is compulsory for those who can read and write, and optional for illiterates. Ecuadoran citizens who have reached their eighteenth birthday and are in possession of their political rights are entitled to vote. Members of the public forces in active service may not make use of this right. Article 34. Proportional representation of minorities in plural elections is guaranteed, in accordance with the law. Article 35. Popular referendum shall be established in the cases provided by this Constitution. Decisions adopted by this means cannot be opposed. Article 36. All Ecuadorans have the right to found political parties and participate in them, under the conditions established in the law. Political parties shall enjoy the protection of the state in their organization and operation. Article 37. Only political parties recognized by the law may present candidates for a popular election. To participate as a candidate in any popular election, in addition to the other requirements exacted by the Constitution, it is necessary to be affiliated with a political party.

- 15-

Article 38. In order that a political party can be legally recognized and participate in the public life of the state, the following requirements must be met: it must sustain the doctrinary principles that characterize it and a program of political action that is consonant with the democratic system; it must have the minimum number of members, be organized on a national scale, and obtain in elections the electoral quotient required by law. A political party that does not obtain at least the quotient indicated by law is dissolved as a matter of law. Article 39. The exercise of public office is a service to the community as a whole. No authority is exempt from responsibility in the performance of his duties. Unlawful enrichment of public officials and employees is sanctioned in a special way, in accordance with the law. Article 40. An administrative career guarantees the rights and establishes the obligations of public servants. Article 41. No person may hold two or more public offices, except for university professors, who, in addition to a public office, may teach, and telegraph and wireless operators, who may exercise another public post. Nepotism in the form indicated by law is forbidden. Article 42. In no case may extradition of an Ecuadoran be granted. Judgment is subject to the laws of Ecuador. Article 43. Ecuadorans persecuted for political crimes have the right of asylum, which they may exercise in accordance with the law and international agreements. Section VII General Rule Article 44. The state guarantees to all individuals, male and female, who are subject to its jurisdiction, free and etfective exercise and enjoyment of the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights enunciated in declarations, pacts, agreements and other international instruments in torce.

- 16 -

Title III The Economy Section I General Provisions Article 45. The organization and functioning of the economy must correspond to principles of efficiency and social justice in order to ensure for all inhabitants a worthy existence that will enable them, at the same time, to have equal rights and opportunities to benefit from the means of production and consumption. Economic development, within the marketing system, should be geared to increasing production that will basically lead to the betterment and progress of all Ecuadorans. The national goal should be just distribution of the income and wealth of the community. All forms of abuse of the economic power, including those of business groups seeking to control domestic markets, eliminate competition or arbitrarily increase profits, are forbidden, and the law shall take repressive action against them. Section II Sectors of the Economy Article 46. The economy of Ecuador functions through four basic sectors: 1. The public sector, composed of enterprises owned exclusively by the state. The areas of economic exploitation reserved to the state are: a. The nonrenewable natural resources and, in general, the products of the subsoil and the minerals and substances whose nature is different from that of the soil. Potable water, electric telecommunications services; power and

b. c.

The strategic enterprises defined by law.

-17 -

The state exercises its activities in the branches of industry or economic activities that, because of their importance or size, can have decisive economic or political influence, which makes it necessary to direct them toward the social interest. The state may, by way of exception, delegate to private enterprise the exercise of any of the above-mentioned economic activities in those cases provided by law. 2. The mixed economy sector, composed of private enterprises in association with institutions of the public sector. The state shall participate in mixed economy enterprises to promote investment in areas in which the private sector cannot do so without the assistance of the public sector. 3. The communitarian or self-management sector, composed of cooperative, communal or other similar enterprises which are owned and managed by the community of persons who work permanently in them. The state shall decree laws for the regulation and development of this sector. 4. The private sector, composed of enterprises owned by one or more natural or juridical persons of private law and, in general, by enterprises which are not included in the other sectors of the economy.

Article 47. For reasons of social interest, the public sector may, by the procedure and form of payment indicated by law, nationalize or expropriate, as the case may require, with just indemnification, the property, rights and activities belonging to other sectors, for itself or for any of the other sectors mentioned. All forms of confiscation are prohibited.

-18 -

Section III Property Article 48. Ownership in any form, including private ownership, is a right that is recognized and guaranteed by the state for the organization of its economy when it fulfills its social function. This must be translated into an increase and redistribution of income that will permit the entire population to share the benefits of wealth and development. Article 49. The state promotes property ownership and management by workers in enterprises by means of transferring shares or participations in their favor. The percentage of profits of enterprises belonging to workers is paid in cash or in shares or participations, in accordance with the law. The shares and participations thus acquired by workers constitute privileged family assets. Article 50. To make the right to housing effective, municipalities may expropriate, reserve and control areas for future development of urban centers, in accordance with the law. Article 51. The state guarantees ownership of land that is directly and efficiently worked by its owner. Sufficient infrastructure must be established in order to develop the promote agricultural and production agricultural enterprise. The objectives of state policy, as to agrarian reform and the structure of property in the rural sector, are economic development, raising the standard of living and a redistribution of wealth and income. The hoarding of land and the latifundio are proscribed. The integration of production units and their centralization by eliminating the minifundio shall be Communitarian and cooperative production shall favored. be encouraged. Settlement shall be organized and promoted so that the farming frontier may be extended and a well balanced reestablishment of the population in the national territory may be obtained.

- 19 -

Section IV Tax System Article 52. The tax system is governed by the basic principles of equality and generalization. In addition to serving as the means of obtaining budgetary funds, taxes are instruments of general economic policy. Tax legislation stimulates investment, reinvestment, savings and their use in national development. It aims tor a just distribution of income and wealth among all inhabitants of the country. Taxes may be established, changed or Article 53. eliminated only by legislative act of the competent agency. Tax legislation may not be decreed to take retroactive effect to the detriment of taxpayers. Tax rates are established and regulated in accordance with the law. Section V Monetary System Article 54. The Monetary Board, which exercises its functions within the norms established by law, is responsible for conducting the policy relating to the national currency. The Central Bank of Ecuador is the executor of the monetary policy. Article 55. The monetary unit is the sucre. The form of establishing its international exchange relationship is fixed and modified by the President of the Republic in accordance with the law. The issuance of coins and bills, which have unlimited free power, is the exclusive authority of the Central Bank of Ecuador.

- 20 -

SECOND PART Title I The Legislative Function Section I The National House of Representatives Article 56. The legislative function is exercised by the National House of Representatives, located in Quito and composed of twelve representatives elected by national vote; two representatives elected by each province, except those with less than one hundred thousand inhabitants, which elect one; and, in addition, one representative elected for each three hundred thousand inhabitants or fraction thereof over two hundred thousand. The representatives are elected from among the candidates nominated by the legally recognized political parties from slates approved by the electoral function, in accordance with the law. The election base of three hundred thousand or fraction thereof over two hundred thousand increases in the same proportion in which the national population increases, according to the census. Occasionally, the National House of Representatives may meet in any other city. Article 57. Members of the National House of Representatives shall exercise their functions for five years and they may be reelected following a complete term. They must be Ecuadoran by birth, be in full enjoyment of their rights of citizenship, be affiliated with one of the legally recognized political parties, and be at least twenty-five years of age at the time of election. To be elected provincial representatives one must also be a native of the respective province or must have resided uninterruptedly therein for at least three years immediately prior to the election. Article 58. The following may not be members of the National House of Representatives:

- 21 -

a.

The President and the Vice President of the Republic, the Ministers of State, the Comptroller General, the Attorney General, the Superintendent of Banks, the Superintendent of Companies, the President of the Superior Council and the Director General of the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security; Public employees and, in general, those who receive a salary from the public treasury at the time of the election or who have received it within six months prior to the election; Those who exercise control or jurisdiction or who have exercised it within six months prior to the election; Presidents, managers and legal representatives of banks and other credit institutions established in Ecuador, and those of branches or agencies; Those who personally or as representatives of juridical persons have contracts with the state; Military personnel in active service; Ministers of any religion and members of religious communities; Those who are disqualified by other legal provisions.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f. g.

h.

Article 59. The National House of Representatives shall meet in plenary session, without the need for convocation, in Quito on the tenth of August of each year, and shall remain in session for sixty days that cannot be prorogated to deal exclusively with the following matters: a. To appoint from among its members the Chairman and the Vice Chairman of the House, whose functions shall last for a period of one year; To install the President and the Vice President oftheRpublicwoare imdlctebyh Supreme Electoral Tribunal; To interpret the Constitution;

b.

c.

- 22-

d.

To enact, amend, repeal and interpret laws; to establish or abolish taxes, fees and other public revenues; To oversee the acts of organs of the executive function and to consider the report presented to the house by the President of the Republic; To try the President and the Vice President of the the Republic, the Ministers of State, justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the Contentious-Administrative Tribunal, of the Fiscal Tribunal and of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, and the members of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees for violations committed in the exercise of their official functions and to decide on their removal from office if they are found guilty; To deal with and decide on the excusal or resignation of the President and the Vice President of the Republic and of the justices or members of the courts, tribunals or organs referred to in (f) above; To approve or disapprove public treaties and other international conventions; To grant or deny to the President and the Vice permission the Republic of the President necessary; To appoint the Comptroller General, the Attorney General, the Superintendent of Banks and the Superintendent of Companies, on the basis of the lists of three candidates presented to the House by the President of the Republic;

e.

f.

g.

h. i.

k. To grant general amnesty for political crimes and group pardons for common crimes, when justified by some important reason; and 1. To exercise the other functions indicated in the Constitution and the laws.

Article 60. The National House of Representatives shall establish four legislative committees, each consisting of five representatives. These committees shall deal with the following matters:

-23 -

a. b. c. d.

Civil and penal matters; Labor and social matters; Tax, fiscal, banking and budgetary matters; Economic, agrarian, industrial and commercial matters.

The committees shall consider related matters and shall work full time during the entire year. The codification of laws is a special power of the plenary legislative committees. Article 61. In order to perform its work and in order for the legislative committees to do so, the House shall enact the organic law of the legislative function. Article 62. The members of the House must act in a national sense and they may not hold any public office except a university professorship, nor exercise their profession while the House or the committees are in session. During the performance of their functions they enjoy parliamentary immunity, except in case of flagrante delicto. Article 63. The legislation committees shall be partially renewed in the periods and in the manner indicated by law. Their members may be reelected. Article 64. The House may meet in special session by convocation of its Chairman, the President of the Republic, or two-thirds of its members, to deal solely with the matters for which the session is called. Section II The Enactment and Sanction of Legislation

Article 65. The initiative for the enactment of legislation may come from the legislators, the National House of Representatives, the legislative committees, the President of the Republic, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Fiscal Tribunal or the Contentious-Administrative Tribunal. Popular initiative to amend the Constitution and to amend and enact laws is recognized. The exercise of this right shall be regulated by law.

-24 -

If a bill is presented by the President of the Republic, he may intervene in the discussion without vote either personally or by delegation, for which purpose he will be called upon to appear. Article 66. The House may consider, approve or reject a bill. When in recess, this power belongs to the plenary legislative committees. Article 67. Approval of a bill calls for discussion in two debates on different days. Article 68. After approving a bill, the House, or if not in session the plenary legislative committees, will submit it to the President of the Republic for his approval or objections. If the President approves the bill or does not present any objections within ten days atter receiving it, it becomes law. Article 69. A bill approved by the House or by the plenary legislative committees and then objected to by the President may be considered by the House only after one year trom the date of objection. Nevertheless, the House may ask the President to submit it to the voters by referendum. It the objection relates to one part of the bill, the House may accept it and rectify it or else ratify the bill in two debates and with the favorable vote of at least two thirds of its members, and then proceed to promulgate it as law. Section III The National Budget Article 70. The preparation of the preliminary draft of the budget is the responsibility of the executive function. The pertinent legislative committee, with the advice of the technical organ of the executive, considers and discusses the draft presented by the latter and, in case of any discrepancies, reports to the House, which resolves them in a single debate.

- 25 -

If there are no discrepancies, or if they have been resolved by the House, the national budget is approved definitively and cannot be objected to by the executive. Article 71. The budget is enacted annually and shall contain all revenues and expenditures of the state earmarked to cover public services and the execution of economic and social development programs. At least thirty percent of the revenues shall be earmarked in the budget for public education and the eradication of illiteracy. Article 72. The House may not enact laws that repeal or modify those which establish revenues covered in the budget unless, at the same time, it creates new revenues or increases those in existence to substitute for those that it modifies or repeals. The establishment of new taxes for financing the budget shall be subject to the provisions of this Constitution and the law.

Title II The Executive Function Section I The President of the Republic Article 73. The executive function is exercised by the President of the Republic, who represents the state. He serves five years in performing his functions and cannot be reelected. Article 74. To be President of the Republic one must be Ecuadoran by birth, be in full enjoyment of his rights of citizenship, be at least thirty-five years of age at the time of the election, be atfiliated with one of the legally recognized political parties, and he must be elected an absolute majority of the votes cast by direct, universal and secret ballot, in accordance with the law. Article 75. The functions of the President of the Republic terminate and his post is left vacant:

- 26 -

a.

By completion of the term for which he was elected; By death; By acceptance of his resignation; By physical or mental incapacity; and By dismissal or abandonment of his post.

b. c. d. e.

Article 76. Should the President of the Republic be temporarily or definitively absent, he shall be replaced by: a. b. The Vice President of the Republic; Chairman of The Representatives; and the National House of

c.

The President of the Supreme Court of Justice.

Article 77. During the performance of his functions the President of the Republic may not be absent from the country without authorization of the National House of Representatives or, it not in session, the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees. He may not be absent from Quito tor more than thirty consecutive days. Any attitude which is contrary to these precepts shall be considered as abandonment of his post. Nor may he be absent from the country during the year immediately following the termination of his functions without prior authorization of the National House of Representatives or the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, as the case may be. Article 78. The following are powers and duties of the President of the Republic: a. To comply with and enforce the Constitution, laws, decrees, and international conventions;

- 27 -

b.

To object to, approve, promulgate and carry out the laws enacted by the National House of Representatives or the plenary legislative committees; To issue regulations for the application of the laws, which may not interpret or alter them; To maintain the domestic order, guard the external security of the state, and determine the national security policy; To freely appoint and remove ministers, chiefs of diplomatic missions, governors and other public officials if he has the authority to do so, in accordance with the law; To determine foreign policy and direct international relations; to enter into treaties and other international agreements, in accordance with the Constitution and the laws; to ratify them after their approval by the National House of Representatives; to exchange or deposit ratifications; To contract and authorize the contracting of loans, in accordance with the law; To exercise the maximum authority of the Public Forces; To confer military and police ranks and promotions on officials of the Public Forces, in accordance with the law; To mobilization, order whatever requisitioning accordance with the law; demobilization necessary, is and in

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

h.

i.

j.

k.

To avail himself of the Public Forces, through their individual organs, whenever security and the public services so require; To appoint and remove personnel of the Public Forces in accordance with the law;

1.

11. To assume political command in wartime;

- 28 -

m.

To approve in accordance with the law and in a secret manner, the organization of the Public Forces in peacetime, and in case of emergency, to call all or part of the reserves to active service. To declare a state of national emergency and assume the following powers, or some of them, in case of imminent external aggression, international warfare or a serious internal disturbance or catastrophe, notifying the National House of Representatives, if in session, or the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees: (1) To decree the advance collection of taxes and other charges; (2) In case of international conflict or imminent invasion, to invest for the national defense government funds earmarked for other purposes, excepting those intended for health and welfare; (3) To transfer the seat of government to any place within the national territory; (4) To open or close ports temporarily; (5) To impose censorship in social communications media; (6) To suspend the enforcement of constitutional guarantees, but in no case may the President decree the suspension of the right of inviolability of life and personal integrity or the expatriation of an Ecuadoran, nor arrange for his confinement outside of a provincial capital or to a different area from the one in which he resides; (7) To declare the national territory a security zone, in accordance with the law. The national House of Representatives or, if it is in recess, the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, may revoke the declaration if the circumstances warrant;

n.

-29-

fl. To put an end to the declaration of emergency when the reasons for it have disappeared, and to notify the National House of Representatives or the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, as the case may be, of this action, apart from the report that he must render to that body; o. To present to the National House of Representatives an annual report on his work and on the general state of the nation; To call a popular referendum by which to submit questions which, in his judgment, are of great importance to the nation and, especially, proposals to amend the constitution in the cases provided in Article 143, and the approval and ratitication of international treaties or agreements that have been rejected by the House, by the plenary legislative committees, or by the President himself; and To exercise all other powers inherent in his high office that the Constitution and the laws confer upon him.

p.

q.

Article 79. The following persons may not be elected President of the Republic: 1. 2. Those who have already held the office of President of the Republic; Relatives of the incumbent President of the of degree fourth the Republic within consanguinity or the second degree of affinity; Those who have held the office of Vice President of the Republic in the term immediately prior to the election; Those who are Ministers of State at the time of the election or were such six months prior thereto; Those who are active members of the Public Forces or who were such six months prior to the election; Ministers of any religion;

3.

4.

5. 6.

- 30 -

7.

Those who personally or as representatives of juridical persons had a contract with the state; and Legal representatives of foreign companies.

8.

Section II
The Vice President of the Republic Article 80. The Vice President of the Republic is elected simultaneously with the President on the same ballot by an absolute majority of votes, by direct vote, universal and secret, in accordance with the law. Article 81. To be elected Vice President the same qualifications are required as for President of the Republic. The term of Vice President is five years and he may not be reelected. Article 82. The Vice President acts as President of the National Development Council whenever he does not exercise the Presidency of the Republic. Article 83. In the absence of the Vice President, the functionaries indicated in Article 76 (b) and (c) will replace him in the order determined therein. Should the absence be definitive, the National House of Representatives will proceed to appoint a vice president for the period necessary to complete the constitutional term. Article 84. The incompatibilities established tor the President of the Republic are the same for the Vice President, insofar as they are applicable.

Section III
The Ministers of State Article 85. The discharge of the affairs of state is the responsibility of the ministers, who are freely appointed and removed by the President. They represent him in matters relating to their Ministry and are responsible for the acts and contracts that they carry out in the exercise of that representation, in accordance with the law.

- 31 -

Article 86. THe number and denomination of the Ministries are determined by the President in accordance with the needs of the state. Article 87. To be a minister one must be Ecuadoran by birth, be in full enjoyment of his rights of citizenship, and be at least thirty years of age. A minister censured by the National House of Representatives ceases in his functions and may not serve as minister again during the same presidential term. Article 88. The ministers shall present annually to the President, for the information of the nation, a report on the work accomplished and the plans or programs to be carried out in their respective departments. These reports shall be sent to the National House of Representatives. Section IV The National Development Council Article 89. There shall be established in Quito a National Development Council, which will set the general economic and social policies of the state and prepare development plans therefore for the approval of the President of the Republic and execution. The Council shall also set the demographic policy of the country, pursuant to social and economic directives, for the solution of national problems in accordance with the principles of respect for national sovereignty and self-determination of parents. Article 90. The National Development Council shall consist of the following members: The Vice President of the Republic, who will preside over it; The ministers who preside over the economic, domestic, foreign and military areas; One delegate Representatives; from the National House of

- 32 -

The President of the Monetary Board; One representative of organized labor; One representative of the chambers of production; and One representative of the polytechnic universities and schools. The last three representatives are elected in accordance with the law. In case of a tie, the voting is resolved by the vote of whoever presides over the meeting. Article 91. The policies determined by the National Development Council and the economic and social plans that are prepared, once approved by the President of the Republic, must be carried out and implemented by the respective ministers and by the entities of the public sector. They are responsible for the application of his directives. Whenever these policies and plans require modification, amendment or enactment, the President of the Republic shall present the pertinent bills to the National House of Representatives or to the plenary legislative committees.

Title III The Judicial Function Section I Basic Principles Article 92. The judicial process is a means of serving justice. Justice shall not be miscarried because of the mere omission of formalities. Procedural law must strive toward Article 93. simplification, uniformity and efficacy of the proceedings, adopting, insofar as possible, the oral system. Unjustifiable delay in the administration of justice is prevented by law and, in case of repetition, gives

- 33 -

reason for the removal of the magistrate or judge, who, moreover, is liable for damages and injuries sustained by the affected parties. Article 94. The administration of justice is free. The Supreme Court shall issue the pertinent regulations. Article 95. Trials are public, except in the cases indicated by law, but the courts may deliberate in secret. In no case shall there be more than three instances. Article 96. The organs of the judicial function are independent in the exercise of their functions. No authority may interfere in matters proper to that function. Article 97. A career in the judiciary is recognized, and the law shall determine its regulation. Section II Organs of the Judicial Function

Article 98. The organs of the Judicial Function are: a. The Supreme Court of Justice, the superior courts, and the courts and tribunals subordinate to the Supreme Court, in accordance with the law; The Fiscal Tribunal; The Contentious-Administrative Tribunal; and The other tribunals and courts that the laws may establish. Section III Organization and Functioning

b. c. d.

Article 99. The Supreme Court of Justice, the Fiscal Tribunal and the Contentious-Administrative Tribunal have jurisdiction throughout the entire country and at their seat in Quito. The law determines the number of justices that compromise them, as well as the organization and operation of their divisions.

- 34 -

Article 100. To be a justice of the Supreme Court, the Fiscal Tribunal or the Contentious-Administrative Tribunal, the following are required: a. b. c. d. e. To be Ecuadoran by birth; To be in full enjoyment of one's civil rights; To be over forty years of age; To have a degree of doctor in jurisprudence; and To have practiced as an attorney with utmost integrity or as a judge, or occupied a university chair in juridical science for at least fifteen years, or to meet the requirements for a judicial career exacted by the law for this designation.

Article 101. The justices of the Supreme Court, the Fiscal Tribunal and the Contentious-Administrative Tribunal are appointed by the National House of Representatives for a term of six years, with eligibility for reelection. Their powers and the causes for their removal are provided for in the law. Vacancies in the Supreme Court, the Fiscal Tribunal and the Contentious-Admininistrative Tribunal are filled on a provisional basis by the respective courts, and the justices thus elected exercise their functions until the National House of Representatives makes the regular appointments to fill these posts. Article 102. In case of contradictory findings on a single point of law, the Supreme Court, in plenum, shall issue the reconciling norm, and this rule of law shall be compulsory until the law determines otherwise. For this purpose, the justices and the Attorney General shall be summoned immediately after the discrepancy has occurred, to issue the resolution within fifteen days of their meeting. The Fiscal Tribunal and the Contentious-Administrative Tribunal, in their respective plenums, shall have similar powers within like periods to resolve matters within their jurisdiction. Article 103. The law shall determine the organization of the superior courts and the other tribunals and courts.

- 35-

government and judges Justices, 104. Article attorneys may not practice law nor fill other public or private posts except a university chair. Nor may they perform directive functions in political parties or intervene in election contests. Within their respective territorial Article 105. districts, the jurisdiction of civil, penal, labor, tenancy and other special judges in all judicial disputes stems from the castings of lots on at least a daily basis, pursuant to the regulations issued by the Supreme The jurisdiction of judges of criminal is Court. proceedings excepted from this provision. Through their justices, the Supreme Article 106. Court, the Fiscal Tribunal and the Contentious Administrative Tribunal may meet with the National House of Representatives or the legislative committees to intervene, without the right to vote, in the discussion of bills. Article 107. The state shall install public defenders for the protection of indigenous communities, workers' communities, and all persons who lack economic means. Article 108. The Chief Justices of the Supreme Court, the Fiscal Tribunal and the Contentious-Administrative Tribunal shall report annually in writing to the National House of Representatives on their work and programs. Title IV State Organisms Section I The Supreme Electoral Tribunal Article 109. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal, with its seat in Quito and jurisdiction throughout the entire country, is responsible for directing, overseeing and guaranteeing the electoral process. Its organization, duties and powers are determined by law. It shall arrange for the cooperation of the Public Forces to guarantee free and honest voting.

- 36 -

Section II Office of the Attorney General Article 110. The Public Ministry is exercised by the Attorney General, the Ministers and prosecuting attorneys and all other officials specified by the law, which establishes their powers, duties, causes for their removal and the form of subrogation. Article 111. The Attorney General is the sole judicial representative of the state, and he may delegate his representation in accordance with the law. He must meet the requirements exacted to be justice of the Supreme Court. His term is five years. Article 112. The Office of the Attorney General is an autonomous organism with juridical personality. Legal representation is exercised by the Attorney General. Section III Supervisory Agencies Article 113. The Office of the Comptroller General of the State is the autonomous technical agency that controls the management of public funds and ensures that the consolidation of accounts is correct. It also exercises control over the assets of entities of the public sector and the advisory services rendered and regulation for the purposes indicated in this article. Its supervision also extends to entities of private law receiving state subsidies, insofar as their proper use is concerned. Article 114. The Office of the Superintendent of Banks is the autonomous technical agency that supervises the organization, operation, dissolution and liquidation of banking, insurance, financing, investment and reciprocal credit institutions, as well as those of the Securities Board (Comisión de Valores) - National Finance Corporation, and of other natural and juridical persons specified in the law. Article 115. The Office of the Superintendent of Companies is the autonomous technical agency that exercises control over the organization, operation, dissolution and liquidation of companies, pursuant to the circumstances and conditions established by law.

-37-

Article 116. The Comptroller General of the State, the Superintendent of Banks and the Superintendent of Companies serve for a term of five years. The law shall determine the cases in which their removal or subrogation shall be effected. Title V Civil Administration Section I General Rules Article 117. The territory indivisible. Nevertheless, for
administration, provinces,

of

the

state

is

purposes of civil cantons and parishes are

The law shall determine the requirements established. that must be met to be classified as such. The demarcation of provinces, cantons and parishes may neither cede nor take away territory. Article 118. The state shall promote the harmonious development of its entire territory by encouraging the support of depressed areas, the distribution of resources and services, administrative decentralization and national deconcentration, in accordance with the territorial delimitations. Section II Subordinate Administrative Regime

Article 119. Within the executive function there shall be in each province a governor, in each canton a jefe politico, and in each parish a teniente politico, in accordance with the law.
Section III

Autonomous

Administrative Regime

Article 120. In each province there shall be a Provincial Council with a seat in its capital. Its members shall be elected by direct and secret popular vote. The provincial prefect, elected in the same manner,

-38 -

shall be the executive authority who, with only a deciding voste in case of a tie, presides over the Council. This body shall promote the progress of the province and its ties with the central bodies. Article 121. Each canton constitutes a municipality. Its government is the responsibility of a Municipal Board, whose members shall be elected by direct and secret popular vote, in accordance with the law. In the boards of the provincial capitals and in the other boards that meet the population and budgetary requirements prescribed by the law, there is a mayor elected by direct and secret popular vote, who presides over the board with only a deciding vote in case of a tie. Article 122. The provincial councils and the municipalities shall enjoy functional, economic and administrative autonomy. The law shall determine their structure, composition and operation and shall effectively apply the principle of autonomy; it shall support the improvement of provincial and municipal living conditions; and it shall determine the powers and duties of the provincial councils and the municipalities. Different regimes may be established according to the population, economic resources and the importance of civil subdivision. Their incomes may not be less than those at present and they shall be increased in accordance with the law. Solely by virtue of law may duties and regulations be imposed on provincial councils or municipalities. No external official or authority shall intervene in their administration. Article 123. Provincial councils and municipalities may join together, temporarily or permanently, to realize common objectives. Article 124. The legislative power of provincial councils and municipalities is expressed in ordinances.

-39 -

Section IV Entities of the Public Sector For the preparation and execution of Article 125. the following shall be national development plans, considered as entities of the public sector: a. b. national different The administrative dependencies; agencies and

The entities comprising provincial or cantonal administration, within the civil administrative regime; The juridical persons established by law for the exercise of national power or for providing public services or for economc activities assumed by the state and those established by provincial or cantonal legislative act for providing public services.

c.

The norms for establishing penal, civil and financial responsibility for handling and administering public funds, shares or resources apply to all employees of the entities referred to in (a), (b) and (c) above. The entities indicated in (b) and (c) above shall enjoy the autonomy established in the laws of their locality insofar as their organization and functioning are concerned. Particularly, autonomy is guaranteed for the provincial councils, municipal boards, the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security, the Central Bank of Ecuador, the National Development Bank, public welfare boards, the Securities Board-National Finance Corporation, Ecuadoran Housing Bank and the regional and provincial economic development corporations. Relations between the agencies included in (a) and (b) above, or institutions created by law for the exercise of the authority of the state and its employees, are subject to the laws regulating public administration, except those referring to the labor sector determined in the Labor Code. The juridical persons created by law or by local legislative act for providing public services or those created for economic activities assumed by the state govern the relations with their employees in accordance

- 40 -

with the Labor Code, except for persons who exercise functions of direction, management, representation, advisory services, departmental direction or the like, which are subject to the laws regulating public administration. Title VI The Public Forces Article 126. The Armed Forces and the National Police shall constitute the Public Forces. Their training, organization, mission and employment are regulated by law. Article 127. The Armed Forces have a duty to the Nation. The President of the Republic is their commander in chief. In case of national emergency, he may delegate his authority, in accordance with the law. Article 128. The Public Forces are appointed to preserve the national sovereignty, to defend the integrity and independence of the republic, and to guarantee its legal order. Without lessening its fundamental mission, the law shall determine to what extent the Public Forces must lend their cooperation in the economic and social development of the country and in other matters concerning national security. Article 129. The Public forces are not deliberative. Only the authorities who issue orders which are contrary to the Constitution and the laws are responsible for them. Article 130. The stability of members of the Public Forces is guaranteed. Only the President of the Republic may grant or recognize military or police ranks. Article 131. The members of the Armed Forces enjoy a forum of their own. They may not be indicted nor stripped of their ranks, honors and pensions, except for the reasons and in the manner determined by law. command police Article 132. Military and jurisdiction are exercised in accordance with the law. and

Article 133. In addition to the permanent Armed Forces, reserve forces shall be organized according to national security requirements.

-41 -

Article 134. Military service is compulsory for Ecuadorans in the manner determined by law. Article 135. Ecuadorans and foreigners are obligated to cooperate in national security in accordance with the law. Article 136. The fundamental mission of the National Police is to guarantee internal order and individual and collective security. It constitutes an auxiliary force of the Armed Forces. THIRD PART Title I Ranking and Control of the Legal Section I The Supremacy of the Constitution Article 137. The Constitution is the supreme law of the land. Secondary norms and others of lesser importance must maintain conformity with constitutional precepts. Laws, decrees, ordinances, provisions and international treaties or agreements that oppose the Constitution or modify its precepts in any way shall be void. Article 138. The Supreme Court of Justice has the authority to suspend--either totally or partially, at any time, on its own initiative or on petition of a party--the effects of laws, ordinances or decrees that may be unconstitutional either in form or in substance. The Court shall submit its decision for resolution of the National House of Representatives or, in the event of its recess, to the plenary legislative committees. However, neither a resolution of the Supreme Court nor of the National House of Representatives or the plenary legislative committees shall be retroactive in effect. Without prejudice to this authority, the Supreme Court--in special cases which it agrees to hear--shall declare inapplicable any legal precept that is contrary to Order

-42-

the Constitution. This declaration is binding only in the cases in which it pronounces judgment. The divisions of the Court shall inform the plenary Court for the purposes determined in the previous paragraph. Article 139. In case of doubt about the scope of the norms contained in this Constitution, only the National Rouse of Representatives in plenum may interpret them in generally binding terms. Section II The Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees Constitutional Tribunal of Article 140. The Guarantees is established, with jurisdiction throughout It compromises the the Republic and its seat in Quito. following members: 1. Three members elected by the National House of Representatives; The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court; The Attorney General; The President of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal; One representative of the President of the Republic; A representative of the workers; A representative of the chambers of production; and Two representatives of the citizenry, elected by their electoral colleges--one by the mayors of the cantons and the other by the prefects of the provinces.

2. 3. 4. 5.

6. 7.

8.

The members indicated in 5, 6, 7 and 8 above must be Ecuadoran by birth, be in full enjoyment of their citizenship rights, and be at least twenty-five years of age. All of these and the ones indicated in 1 above are appointed for a term of one year and may be reelected. The others are ex officio members of the Tribunal. The Tribunal shall elect from among its members a president and a vice president for a term of one year.

- 43 -

The Ministers and the Comptroller General may attend the sessions of the Tribunal and participate without vote in its deliberations. The law shall determine the norms for its organization and functioning and the procedures for its actions. Article 141. Constitutional of The Tribunal Guarantees is responsible for the following: 1. To ensure the observance of the Constitution, calling the attention of the authorities and other officials of public administration; To make observations regarding decrees, agreements, regulations and resolutions which have been enacted in violation of the Constitution or of the laws, after hearing the report of the authority or agency responsible for issuing them. If the observations are not accepted, the Tribunal shall publish them in the press and present them for consideration to the National House of Representatives, or if not in session to the plenary legislative committees, so that the necessary action may be taken. 3. To take cognizance of the complaints made by any natural or juridical person regarding violation of the Constitution, to prepare the accusation against the officials responsible and, except as provided by the Penal Code, to present these accusations before the National House of Representatives or, if not in session, to the plenary legislative committees so that it may prosecute or order prosecution, as the case may be, of those responsible; To exercise the other powers Constitution and laws confer upon it. that the

2.

4.

Article 142. Constitutional of The Tribunal Guarantees shall report to the National House of Representatives the regarding annually in writing performance of its functions.

-44 -

Title II Amendment of the Constitution

Article 143. Amendments to the Constitution may be proposed by legislators, the President of the Republic, the Supreme Court of Justice, or by referendum. The National House of Representatives in plenum may hear and discuss proposals for constitutional amendment. Their approval requires the vote of at least two thirds of the total votes of the members of the House. Once an amendment proposal has been approved in two debates, the House shall remit it to the President of the Republic for action. If the President approves, the amendment is promulgated in accordance with the law. The President of the Republic may submit amendment proposals to referendum in the following cases: a. When an amendment proposed at the initiative of the President of the Republic has been totally or partially rejected by the House; and When a proposed amendment approved by the House has been totally or partially rejected by the President of the Republic.

b.

A referendum called by the President of the Republic shall be limited solely to that part or parts of the proposed amendment which have been subject to discrepancy. GENERAL PROVISION Article 144. Ecuadoran and foreign juridical persons are subject to the provisions of law.

By the First Committee on the Legal Restructuring of the State

Dr. Carlos Cueva Tamariz, Chairman Dr. Galo Garcia Feraud, Vice Chairman (Here follow the signatures of other members of the Committee).

- 45 -

TRANSITORY PROVISIONS No. 001 THE SUPREME COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENT Resolves: To submit for consideration and resolution of the people of Ecuador the following Transitory Provisions, which replace those prepared by the Committees on Legal Restructuring and which will be voted on while acting on the Referendum, together with the text of the Proposed Constitution: FOR THE PROPOSED NEW CONSTITUTION First. The present Constitution shall enter into force with the inauguration of the President and the Vice President of the Republic, elected by popular vote. Second. Once it has concluded its mission, the present Supreme Referendum Tribunal shall become the Supreme Electoral Tribunal and shall function in accordance with the law. Third. Elections for President and Vice President of the Republic, provincial prefects and councillors, and municipal mayors and councilmen shall take place on Sunday, July 16, 1978. Fourth. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall place for consideration of the Supreme Council of Government the date of inauguration of the President and the Vice President of the Republic, elected by the people in accordance with the circumstances determined by the electoral process. Fifth. Thus elected, the President and the Vice President of the Republic shall take the oath of office before the Supreme Electoral Tribunal. Provincial prefects and councillors and municipal mayors and councilmen shall take office in accordance with the law. Sixth. Once he has taken the oath of office, the President of the Republic shall call for elections to the National House of Representatives.

- 46 -

Seventh. Until the National House of Representatives legally takes office, the President of the Republic may enact whatever emergency decree-laws may be necessary for the normal development of the state, with the obligation to inform the National House of Representatives as to the reasons for issuing them. Eighth. Until the National House of Representatives functions and makes use of its powers, the appointments of Comptroller General, Attorney General, Superintendent of Banks and Superintendent of Companies shall be made by the President of the Republic. Justices of the judicial function shall exercise their posts until they are legally replaced, in accordance with this Constitution. Ninth. Members of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees who are representatives of the National House of Representatives shall be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice until the House makes use of its powers. Tenth. The directors of the National Board on Economic Planning and Coordination shall be replaced by the National Development Council. The present Board and its various departments shall become responsible to the National Development Council thirty days from the opening of the first session of the National House of Representatives. Done in the National Palace at Quito on December 7, 1977. Vice Admiral Alfredo Poveda Urbano General Commandant of the Naval Forces Chairman of the Supreme Council of Government Division General Guillermo Duran Arcentales General Commandant of the Land Forces Member of the Supreme Council of Government Brigadier General Luis Leoro Franco General Commandant of the Air Force Member of the Supreme Council of Government This a copy. I certify it: Victor H. Garcés Pozo Rear Admiral Secretary General for Public Administration

- 47 -

I CERTIFY that the preceding text has been reviewed by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal for publication in the Official Register, in compliance with the instructions contained in Art. 3 of Decree 2400 of 31 March 1978, published in Official Register No. 564 of 12 April of the same year. Quito, January 10, 1979 Dr. Jaime Vallejo Benavides Secretary of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal

- 48 -

