INTERNATIONAL BUREAU OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLICS
WASHINGTON, D. C.

AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONS
A COMPILATION OF THE POLITICAL CONSTITUTIONS OF THE INDEPENDENT NATIONS OF THE NEW WORLD .0 WITH SHORT HISTORICAL NOTES AND VARIOUS APPENDIXES

By JOSE IGNACIO RODRIGUEZ
Chief Translator and Librarian

VOLUME II	

JULY, 1905

WASHINGTON

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1907

The National Assembly, in the name and by authority of the Ecuadorian people, decrees the following political Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador:
TITLE I.
THE ECUADORIAN NATION.

ARTICLE 1. The Ecuadorian Nation consists of all the Ecuadorians united under laws identical for all of them. ART. 2. The territory of the Ecuadorian Nation embraces all the provinces which formerly constituted the Presidency of Quito, and the Archipelago of Colon, formerly called Galapagos.. . The limits shall be finally fixed by treaties with the bordering nations. ART. 3. The Republic is free, indivisible and independent of all foreign power. ART. 4. The Government of Ecuador is popular elective, repve and reresentative, alternati sponsible. It is distributed among three powers, namely, legislative, executive and judicial. Each one is vested with the authority given to it by this Constitution, and shall not exceed the limits established by it. ART. 5. The sovereignty is essentially vested in the Nation, which delegates it to the authori ties established by this Constitu tion.

TITLE II. SECTION I.

Ecuadorians.
ART. 6. The following are Ecuadorians: 1. Those born in the territory of Ecuador of Ecuadorian fathers or mothers. 2. Those born in Ecuadorian territory of foreign fathers, if they reside in it. 3. Those born in a foreign nation of Ecuadorian fathers or mothers, if residing in the Republic and declaring their desire to be Ecuadorians. 4. Those born in foreign nations, who enjoy Ecuadorian nationality.

5. Foreigners professing s c i ences, arts or useful industries, holding real estate or owning capital invested in business, who, after residing one year in tie Republic declare their intention to acquire a domicile in it and obtain naturalization papers. 6. Those who have obtained Ecuadorian nationality through an act of Congress for services rendered to the Republic. ART. 7. No Ecuadorian shall be exempted, even after acquiring some other nationality, from the duties imposed upon him by the Constitution and the laws, as long as he remains domiciled in the Republic.
SECTION II.

Citizens.
ART. 8. To be a citizen of Ecuador it shall be required to be over 18 years of age and to know how to read and write. ART. 9. The rights of citizenship shall be lost: 1. By entering the service of a foreign enemy. 2. By naturalization in another country.

3. In all the other cases determined by law. ART. 10. Ecuadorians who have lost the rights of citizenship may secure rehabilitation from the Senate; but those sentenced to imprisonment for–more than six months shall not obtain said rehabilitation until their term of imprisonment has been served. Ecuadorians naturalized in another country shall recover the rights of citizenship by returning to Ecuador, renouncing their foreign citizenship, and declaring their intention to be again vested with Ecuadorian nationality. ART. 11. The rights of citizenship shall be suspended: 1. By judicial interdiction. 2. By a judicial decree issued in cases of offenses carrying with them, upon conviction, the loss of the rights of citizenship. 3. By a judicial decree issued against a public functionary or employee.
TITLE III.
RELIGION.

ART. 12. The religion of the Republic is the Roman Catholic Apostolic, with exclusion of all other worship contrary to morals. The public powers are bound to protect that religion and cause it to be respected. TITLE IV.
GUARANTIES.

ART. 13. The Government respects the religious beliefs of all the inhabitants of Ecuador, and shall cause the manifestation thereof to be respected. Religious beliefs, shall not interfere with the exercise of political or civil rights. ART. 14. The penalty of death, whether for political or common offenses, is hereby abolished. ART. 15. The penalty of confis cation of property is hereby to r bidden.

ART. 16. No one shall be deprived of his property unless by judicial decision, or through condemnation for public use, which shall be made according to law and upon previous indemnification. ART. 17. No tax or duty shall be levied or collected except according to law, and by the authority which the same may designate. In the apportionment of taxes due attention shall be paid to the individual wealth or industry of the taxpayers. ART. 18. All shall enjoy the liberty of industry, and within the limits provided by law the exclusive ownership of their discoveries, inventions and literary works. ART. 19. Correspondence by letter and telegraph is inviolable, and shall not be admitted in evidence in proceedings instituted for politiical offenses. It is hereby forbidden to intercept, open, or examine private letters, papers or effects, except in the cases established by law. ART. 20. The dwelling house of every inhabitant is inviolable and shall not be entered except for some special reason established by law and by order of the competent authority. ART. 21. There are no slaves, nor shall there be any within the limits of the Republic, and any slave who steps on Ecuadorian territory shall thereby become free. ART. 22. Compulsory conscription is hereby forbidden. ART. 23. No one shall be compelled to render services not established by law; and in no case shall artisans and journeymen be compelled to work, except by virtue of a contract. ART. 24. There shall be freedom of union and association, without arms, for purposes not forbidden by law. ART. 25. The right of petition to any authority is guaranteed to

all, and the authorities shall take action during the time established by law, upon all petitions presented to them. This right can be exercised individually or collectively, but never in the name of the people. ART. 26. No one shall be detained, arrested, or imprisoned except in the cases and for the time established by law. ART. 27. No one shall be placed beyond the protection of the law, or outside the jurisdiction of his natural judges, tried by special commissions, or according to laws subsequent to the offense, or deprived of the right of defense in any stage of the proceedings. ART. 28. No one shall be compelled to give testimony in criminal cases against his consort, ascendants, descendants, and collateral relations within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or second of affinity, nor shall he be compelled in any way whatever to incriminate himself. No one shall be kept in solitary confinement without communication with the outside world for over twenty-four hours, put in irons, or subjected to any kind of torture. ART. 29. Everyone is entitled to be presumed innocent and retain his good reputation, as long as he is not convicted of crime according to law. ART. 30. Equality before the law shall be guaranteed to all; no privileged jurisdiction shall be allowed to take cognizance of common offenses. ART. 31. No privileges shall be granted or obligations imposed, tending to make some citizens of better or worse condition than any others. ART. 32. Everyone shall be at liberty to express his ideas orally or through the public press, suby ject, however, to the responsibilit established by law. A special jury shall take cognizance of the cases

of offenses committed through the public press. ART. 33. Everyone shall be free to travel, change his domicile, absent himself from the Republic, or return to it, and carry away or bring back his property. In case of war, however, a passport shall be required. ART. 34. The public credit is guaranteed, and in consequence thereof the funds set apart by the law for the gradual payment of the public debt shall never be applied to any other purposes, except in the case set forth in clause 9, article 98. ART. 35. The suffrage shall be free. ART. 36. Teaching shall be free, and everyone shall have the right to establish schools, subject, however, to the provisions of law. Primary instruction shall be gratuitous and compulsory; but parents shall have the right to give. their children the instruction which they may deem proper. Primary instruction and the teaching of trades shall be paid out of the public funds. ART. 37. Foreigners shall be admitted in Ecuador and allowed to enjoy all the constitutional guaranties, as long as they respect the Constitution and the laws of the Republic. The immigration of religious communities is, nevertheless, excepted; and no ecclesiastic who is not an Ecuadorian by birth shall be permitted to exercise jurisdiction as a prelate or serve a benefice in the Ecuadorian Church or administer the property of monastical institutions existing in the Republic. (ART. 38. a Every contract entered into between a foreigner and the Government or a private individual of Ecuador shall carry with

it implicitly the condition that all diplomatic claims are thereby waived.) ART. 39. Public officers who should violate any one of the guaranties established in this Constitution shall become responsible with their property for the losses and damages sustained through their action; and in regard to the offenses which they may commit when violating said guaranties, the following rules shall be observed: 1. Charges may be preferred against them before the courts of justice, by any person, without being required to give bonds or employ counsel. 2. The penalties which may be imposed in these cases shall not admit of pardon, reduction, or commutation during the constitutional period in which the offense was committed. 3. The action to prosecute these offenses, as well as the execution of the sentences rendered in the same, shall not be barred by limitation during the period aforesaid. TITLE V.
ELECTIONS.

ART. 40. There shall be, in conformity with the law, popular elections by direct and secret vote. The President and Vice-President of the Republic, the senators, the deputies, and all other functionaries designated by the Constitution and the laws shall be elected in this manner. ART. 41. All Ecuadorians in the exercise of the rights of citizenship are electors. ART. 42. The election shall take place on the day appointed by law. The respective authorities shall, on that day, under their strictest responsibility, carry on the electoral law without waiting for any order from their superiors.

TITLE VI.
THE LEGISLATIVE POWER.

SECTION I.

The Congress.
ART. 43. The legislative power shall be vested in the National Congress, consisting of two chambers, one of senators and another of deputies. (ART. 44. a Congress shall meet every year, on the 10th of August, in the capital of the Republic, even if it has not been called to convene. It shall be in session for sixty days, and no longer. It shall meet also in extra session, when called together by the Executive power, but then it shall sit only for the time and for the purposes expressed in the call.) SECTION II.

The Senate.
ART. 45. The Senate shall consist of two senators for each Province. ART. 46. To be a senator the following qualifications are required: 1. To be an Ecuadorian in the exercise of citizenship. 2. To be thirty-five years of age. Ecuadorians by naturalization, under clauses 3, 4, 5, and 6, article 6, of this Constitution, shall require the additional qualification of residence for four years in the Republic. ART. 47. The exclusive powers of the Senate are: 1. To try, upon articles formulated by the Chamber of Deputies, all the cases of impeachment of public functionaries mentioned in article 52 of the present Constitution. 2. To restore citizenship to any one who lost it for any reason

whatever, except treason in favor of a hostile State or of foreign invaders. 3. To rehabilitate, upon proof of innocence, the memory of those unjustly condemned. ART. 48. When the Senate takes cognizance of charges relating to official acts, its power to punish shall be limited to remove from office the guilty functionary, or, at the most, disqualify him, either temporarily or perpetually, from holding a public position; but if the case involves an offense requiring some other penalty, the case shall be referred for trial to a competent tribunal. ART. 49. When the charges preferred are not of official character, the Senate shall limit its action to decide whether or not there is sufficient ground for prosecution. In the affirmative case, the Senate shall place the accused party at the disposal of the proper tribunal. SECTION III.

The Chamber of Deputies.
ART. 50. The Chamber of Deputies shall consist of representatives elected by the people of the Provinces. Each Province shall have one deputy for every thirty thousand inhabitants; but if there be a fraction of this unit exceeding fifteen thousand, one more deputy shall be elected. EveryProvince, whatever its population may be, shall have at least one deputy. ART. 51. Every Ecuadorian in the exercise of his rights of citizenship, over twenty-five years of age, may be a deputy. ART. 52. The Chamber of Deputies shall have the following special powers: 1. To formulate articles of impeachment before the Senate

against the President of the Republic, the acting Chief Magistrate. of the Nation, the secretaries of state, the justices of the supreme court, and the councilors of state. 2. To investigate all charges against the aforesaid officials, and, if well founded, to submit them to the Senate. 3. To require the proper authorities to enforce the responsibility of public officials who exceeded their powers or failed to comply with their duties. 4. To initiate all legislation relating to taxation.
SECTION Iv.

Provisions applicable to both chambers.
ART. 53. Neither chamber shall begin to do business without the presence of a quorum, consisting of two-thirds of the total number of its members, nor shall it continue in session without an absolute majority being in attendance. ART. 54. No senator or deputy shall, under the penalty of losing his rights of citizenship for two years, withdraw from his seat without permission of the respective chamber. ART. 55. The two chambers shall meet in joint session to declare the result of the election of President and vice-president of the Republic; to perfect their election; to administer the oath of office to the high functionaries; to accept or reject their resignations; to elect the councilors of state, the justices of the supreme court, the members of the tribunal of accounts, or of the superior courts; to accept or reject the resignation of the same officials; to confirm or reject the nominations made by the Executive for the positions of generals and colonels in the army; and to censure the conduct of the ministers of

state. They shall meet also in joint session whenever one of the chambers may request it, if the object of the meeting is not to exercise powers which, under article 65, belong to each one separately. The minister of state whose official conduct has been censured by Congress shall not be put again at the head of any department until after the expiration of the constitutional period. ART. 56. The chambers shall organize, and open or close their sessions on the same day. Both shall hold their meetings in the same city, and neither shall transfer its sittings to another place or adjourn for more than three days without the consent of the other. ART. 57. Neither the senators nor the deputies shall be responsible for their opinions expressed in Congress. They shall enjoy immunity during the time of the sessions and for thirty days before and after the same. They shall not be tried, prosecuted, or arrested until the chamber to which they belong resolves, by a majority of the members present, to authorize their trial, prosecution, or arrest. If a senator or a deputy, is surprised in the act of committing some criminal offense, he shall be put at the disposal of the respective chamber, which shall decide, upon examination of the facts, whether or not the prosecution of the case should continue. If the criminal offense is commited thirty days after the date of adjournment, the court shall proceed freely to prosecute the case of the accused senator or deputy. ART. 58. No senator or deputy shall, during the term of his congressional service, be permitted to accept, even pro tempore, in any way whatever, any position within the free gift of the Executive. Officials whose appointment by the Executive does not require the

action of the Senate shall not be elected senators or deputies, even if they resigned their offices three months before the election. Army officers shall be exempted from the disqualification of the first paragraph of the present article in cases of foreign invasion or internal disturbance, but in no other. ART. 59. The senators shall serve for four years and can be reelected indefinitely. Half of the Senate, however, shall be renewed every two years, and the names of the senators whose seats are to be vacated shall be, the first time, drawn by lot in the manner and form which the Senate itself may provide. ART. 60. Deputies shall serve for two years and can be reelected indefinitely. ART. 61. The president and vicepresident of the Republic, the members of the cabinet, the councilors of state, and the justices of the tribunals and courts are disqualified from being senators or deputies. Nor shall anyone be elected for either position by a Province in which he is exercising, at that time, or has exercised for three months previous to the election, any command, jurisdiction, or authority, whether civil, ecclesiastical, political, or military. ART. 62. If on the day of the first meeting of Congress a sufficient number of senators or deputies is not present, as required by the present Constitution, or if at any other meeting, either of the Senate or of the Chamber of Deputies, no business can be transacted for want of a quorum, the members present, whatever their number may be, shall have the power to compel the absentees, under the penalties of law, to attend the meetings, and shall sit in their respective chambers until said quorum is obtained.

ART. 63. The sessions shall be public; but, if so resolved by one chamber the discussion on any matter shall be secret. ART. 64. Each chamb e r has original and exclusive power to appoint its own officers, and to make rules for the transaction of its business, and for the police service in the palace wherein it holds its sessions. SECTION

v.

Powers of Congress when divided in legislative chambers.
ART. 65. Congress shall have power: 1. To reform the Constitution in the manner and form provided by it, and to decide, when needed, the proper construction to be placed upon the language of that instrument. Such explanations or interpretations shall be made by a special act. 2. To make every year, upon examination of the . estimates submitted by the Executive, all the appropriations necessary to meet the expenses of the Government. 3. To supervise the proper and legal disbursement of the national revenue. 4. To levy taxes and authorize the Executive to contract loans pledging the credit of the nation; but these contracts shall not be carried into effect until after their approval by Congress. During the recess of Congress the Executive power shall contract voluntary loans with the advice of the council of state. 5. To acknowledge the national debt, .and provide means for the payment, both of the interest and the principal. No debt shall be recognized if not contracted under proper authority, or if it arises out of some fact contrary to the laws.

6. To decree the sale of public, property, make rules for the man-

agement of the same, or apply it to public uses. 7. To create or abolish those offices whose creation or abolition does not belong, under the Constitution or the laws, to some other authority; to fix or modify the powers of the different officials; to fix the duration of their respective terms of office, and their compensation. 8. To declare, according to law, and upon examination of the decision rendered by the tribunal of accounts, the responsibility, if any, which the secretary of the treasury may have incurred. 9. To grant rewards, merely of honor and personal, to those who rendered great services to the country, and to decree public honors to the memory of the deceased. 10. To fix the fineness, weight, value, shape, and denominations of the national coin, and make it uniform; decide whether or not foreign coin shall be admitted to circulation; and fix the standard of weights and measures. 11. To fix annually the maximum strength of the army and navy in active service in time of peace, and make rules to maintain the national force at its proper standing. 12. To declare war if asked to do so by the Executive; to instruct the Executive to negotiate peace; and to approve or disapprove all public treaties and conventions. Without such approval no treaty shall be ratified or exchanged. 13. To enact general laws of public instruction for observance in the schools and educational establishments. 14. To promote the	 proges sciences, arts, industrial enterprises, discoveries, and improvements. 15. To grant general or partial amnesties or pardons for political offenses; and general pardons for

progesf

common offenses, if so required by some grave reason of public utility, even in case that the trial is pending. If Congress is not in session, the Executive shall exer cise this power with the advice of the council of state. 16. To designate the place of residence of the supreme powers. 17. To grant or refuse permission to foreign troops to pass through the territory of the Republic, and to allow or disallow foreign men-of-war to remain for more than two months in the ports of the Republic. 18. To create or suppress provinces and cantons, to fix the limits thereof, and to create or suppress ports of entry. 19. To order the opening or improvement of roads and canals, without preventing the local districts from opening or improving their own. 20. To declare, in case of physical or mental inability of the President or Vice-president of the Republic, whether or not a new election shall be held. 21. To enact the national codes and all the laws, decrees, and resolutions necessary for the proper administration of the Government; place the proper construction upon them, and amend, modify, or repeal their provisions. ART. 66. Congress shall have no power to suspend, under cover of a pardon, the course of the judicial proceedings, repeal decrees and orders made by the courts (except in the cases set forth in clause 15 of the preceding article), exercise any of the powers which exclusively belong to the Executive, or abridge the powers which, under the present Constitution, belong to the local authorities. Congress is also forbidden to order the payment of any claim without the proper proof of its validity, grant

any indemnification without previous decision of a court to that effect, or delegate any of the powers which belong to it under the present Constitution to any of its members, or to any other person, authority, or corporation.

SECTION VI.

The making of laws and legislative decrees.
ART. 67. All laws, decrees, and resolutions of Congress may be originated in any chamber upon motion of any of its members, the Executive, or the supreme court, the latter in matters concerning the administration of justice. ART. 68. If a bill or resolution so introduced is rejected, it shall not be reintroduced during the u Congress, same session of	 unless it is amended. In that case it shall be discussed in three different meetings of each chamber on different days. ART. 69. All bills or resolutions approved in the chamber where they were introduced shall pass immediately to the other chamber, with a statement of the number of days employed in their discussion; and the other chamber shall either approve or reject them, or make such amendments, additions, or modifications thereto as it may deem advisable. ART. 70. If the chamber of origin does not concur in the additions or amendments proposed by the other chamber, it shall have the right, to be exercised not more than once, of returning it to the revising chamber, and insisting upon its passage, alleging its reason for such action. If, in spite of this second presenta-

tion, the revising chamber refuses to strike out the amendments or additions, and these amendments or additio ns refer to the whole bill, then the measure shall be postponed until the next session of Congress; but if the amendments or additions refer only to certain articles, these articles shall be set aside and the bill shall follow its course. ART. 71. All bills or resolutions passed by the two chambers shall be sent for approval to the Executive power. If the approval is granted the bill shall become a law, and the Executive shall order it to be promulgated and executed; but if the approval is refused the Executive shall return the bill with his objections to the chamber where it originated within nine days. The bills passed by both chambers as urgent shall be approved or disapproved by the Executive within three days, but the Executive shall have no power to pass opinion on the urgency of the measure. ART. 72. If the chamber should consider that the objections of the Executive are well founded, and if said objections refer to the whole act, the latter shall be sent to the archives, and shall not be reintroduced until the next session of Congress. If the objections of the Executive refer to provisions which in its opinion need correction or amendment, the corrections or amendments suggested shall be discussed and disposed of in one debate. ART. 73. If the majority of the members present refuse their assent to the objections made by the Executive to the whole act, the chamber where the bill originated shall refer it, with the proper explanations, to the other chamber. If the latter finds that the objections of the Executive are well founded, the bill shall be returned in order that it may be kept in the

archives. But if a majority of the members of the revising chamber finds that the objections of the Executive are not well founded, the bill shall then be sent to the Executive for approval, which, in that case, shall not be refused. ART. 74. If the Executive does not return the bill, either approved or disapproved, within the period of nine days, or of three incases of urgency, or if the Executive refuses his approval after all the constitutional requisites have been complied with, the act shall become a law. But if during the periods above stated Congress adjourns, either temporarily or finally, the act shall then be pub ished in the newspapers, together with the objections thereto, and shall be introduced again during the first three days of the next meeting. If not published, together with the objections, within a period of nine days, the bill shall become a law. ART. 75. All bills and resolutions upon which no action has been taken, as well as all those rejected or disapproved, shall be published in the newspapers, together with an explanation of the reasons preventing them from becoming laws. ART. 76. The bills and resolutions sent to the Executive for approval shall be forwarded in duplicate, and signed by the presidents and secretaries of each chamber. They shall be accompanied by a statement of the days on which they were discussed. ART. 77. If the Executive notes that the provisions of articles 68, 69, and 70 have not been complied with in regard to some bill or resolution, sent to it for approval, the two copies aforesaid shall be returned within three days to the chamber where the error was committed, in order that, said error having been corrected, the measure may go on through its

constitutional stages. But if no error is found, the act shall be either approved or disapproved, and one of the copies, properly indorsed by the Executive, shall be returned to the chamber where it originated. ART. 78. If the chamber where the bill originated has adjourned, the days of the adjournment shall not be counted in making up the periods of time set forth in article 74. ART. 79. The resolutions of Congress directing its sittings to be transferred to some other place, granting or refusing extraordinary powers, causing elections to be held, accepting resignations and excuses, or providing rules for its interior government, shall not require the intervention of the Executive. Nor shall said intervention be necessary for any act which can be executed by one chamber alone. ART. 80. Congress shall use for its laws, the following enacting clause : "The	 of the ReCongress public of Ecuador decrees." The form of approval or disapproval to be used by the Executive power shall be: " Let it be executed," or "Let it be objected." ART. 81. The same rules which have been established for the enactment of the laws shall be followed for their interpretation, amendment, or repeal. ART. 82. The laws have no binding force except by virtue of their promulgation. ART. 83. The laws shall be promulgated by the Executive power within six days subsequent to their having become such; and if the said period is allowed to pass without the promulgation being made by the Executive, the council of state shall then make the said promulgation, within the following six days, under its strictest responsibility.

Both periods may, however, be shortened or extended by the law itself, and in this case a special period shall be fixed. TITLE VII.
THE EXECUTIVE POWER.

SECTION I. The Chief Magistrate of the Nation. ART. 84. The Executive power is vested in the President of the Republic of Ecuador. In case of necessity the President shall be superseded: 1. By the vice-president of the Republic. 2. By the last president of the Senate. 3. By the last president of the Chamber of Deputies. ART. 85. After the election of President and vice-president has been held, Congress shall count the votes and declare elected the candidate who obtained an absolute, or, if not, a relative majority. If the vote is equally divided, Congress shall decide by absolute majority and by secret ballot who is to have the office; but the choice has to be made from among the candidates who obtained equal number of votes in the popular election. If the vote of Congress proves to be equally divided the decision shall be by lot. ART. 86. No one shall be President or vice-president of the Republic who is not an Ecuadorian by birth, and has not all the qualifications required to be a senator. ART. 87. The positions of President and vice-president of the Republic become vacant by death, removal, accepted resignation, physical or mental disability declared by Congress, and expiration of the term established by the Constitution. ART. 88. If the position of President or vice-president of the Re-

public becomes vacant before the end of the constitutional period, the official in charge of the Executive power shall order, within the period of eight days, a new election; but this election shall be terminated within two months at the latest. The President or vice-president elected in this way shall serve only during the unexpired term of his predecessor. If the unexpired term of the President does not exceed one year, the acting President shall continue in charge until the period expires. If at the time of the vacancy there is no vice-president, no election shall be held for that reason, but the last president of the Senate, and in his default the last president of the Chamber of Deputies shall be called to discharge the duties of the executive. ART. 89. The President and vicepresident of the Republic shall serve for four years. Neither shall be reelected except after the expiration of two periods. During the same interval the President is disqualified from being elected vice-president, or vice versa. ART. 90. No relative within the second degree of consanguinity or the first degree of affinity, of the Chief Magistrate, shall be elected to succeed him.
ART. 91. The President or acting President of the Republic shall not be allowed, during his term of office or one year thereafter, to leave the Ecuadorian territory without the consent of Congress. ART. 92. The President and vicepresident of the Republic, on entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, shall make before Congress the following promise: "I, N. N., do promise to fulfill the duties imposed upon me by the office of President (or vice-president) of the Republic according to the Constitution and the laws."

ART. 93. If Congress is not in session the President and vicepresident shall make the constitutional promise before the supreme court of justice. SECTION II.

Powers and Duties of the Executive.
ART. 94. The Executive shall have the following powers and duties: 1. To approve the laws and decrees passed by Congress and make the proper rules and regulations for their execution, without undertaking thereby to interpret or alter their provisions. 2. To obey and execute the laws and decrees, and to cause them to be obeyed and executed by all executive agents and other employees. 3. To call Congress to convene at the proper time, in ordinary session, and to meet in extra session whenever it may be required by public utility. 4. To use the armed forces for the defense of the nation and for all other purposes of the public service. 5. To appoint and remove, with the advice and consent of the council of state, all diplomatic agents, and without said advice and consent the members of the cabinet, the governors of the Provinces, the political chiefs, the parochial lieutenants, and all other employees whose appointment or removal does not belong under the Consti-. tution or the laws to some other authority. 6. To conduct the diplomatic negotiations, conclude treaties, ratify the same after their approval by Congress, and exchange their ratifications. 7. To send to Congress all nominations for generals and colonels.

8. To appoint all other military chiefs and officers. 9. To accept or refuse to accept the resignation of generals, chiefs, and officers in the army and to grant, in conformity with the law, certificates of disability and vouchers for pensions. 10. To grant patents of navigation. 11. To declare war upon a previous order of Congress, and to make peace with the approval of the same body. 12. To see that the laws relating to the management and disbursement of the national revenues are strictly complied with and obeyed. 13. To cause an account of the public revenues to be rendered each year by the secretary of the treasury to the respective tribunal, in order that the latter may settle it and transmit it to the legislative body. 14. To supervise public instruction and all that concerns public order and safety. 15. To grant patents of inventions as provided in article 18 of the present Constitution. 16. To grant pardons, and decrease, or commute, in conformity with the law and with the limitations established by it, penalties and sentences imposed for crimes or offenses. To exercise this power it shall be required: (1) That a final sentence has been passed; (2) that the judge or tribunal who pronounced said sentence reports on the subject; and (3) that the council of state be consulted. This benefit shall not be granted to convicts who offended by order of the Government, or against the national treasury. 17. To preserve order in the interior of the Republic and protect it against foreign aggression.

ART. 95. The President, or acting President, shall have no power to violate the guaranties established by the present Constitution; to stop the course of judicial proceedings; to abridge in any way the liberty of the courts; to prevent elections from being held or to interfere with them; to dissolve the legislative chambers or to cause them to adjourn; to exercise the executive authority when absent from the capital of the Republic at a distance of more than forty kilometers; or to admit foreigners to serve in the army as officers or chiefs, without permission of Congress. ART. 96. The President shall be held responsible for treason or conspiracy against the Republic, for violation of the Constitution, interference with the action of the other powers, preventing Congress from meeting or deliberating, refusing to approve laws and decrees constitutionally passed, exercising extraordinary faculties without permission of Congress or of the council of state, provoking an unjust war, or preventing any public officer from being paid his salary. ART. 97. On the opening of an ordinary session of Congress the President of the Republic, or the acting Chief Magistrate, shall report in writing to each chamber on the political and military state of the Nation and on its revenues and resources, and shall also recommend such reforms or improvements as in his judgment are needed in any branch of the government. ART. 98. In case of foreign invasion or domestic disturbance, the Executive shall apply to Congress, if then in session, and if not, to the council of state, in order that, after properly passing upon the urgency of the case, the following powers, or any of them in full or

with restrictions, may be granted to it, namely: 1. To increase the army and navy, and establish military authority where it may be deemed necessary. 2. To order the collection in advance of all the taxes for one year and no more. 3. To contract voluntary or forced loans, provided that they are general, proportional, and bearing interest at the usual commercial rate. These loans shall be resorted to only when the revenues are not sufficient to meet the expenses. Provision shall be made for the time and manner of payment of these loans. 4. To move the national capital when threatened, or when the moving be required by a grave necessity, until the danger or the necessity ceases. 5. To compel, in case of foreign invasion, all those suspected of favoring it, to reside at a certain place, and to take the same action, with the advice of the council of state, in regard to those suspected of taking part in any conspiracy or internal disturbance. The place of compulsory residence shall be the chief town of a canton or the capital of a province. It is forbidden to send any person to the territory of Oriente or to the Colon Archipelago, or compel the suspected persons to travel by unusual or indirect roads. At the termination of the extraordinary powers, all those compelled to reside at a certain place shall recover their liberty, and be permitted to return to their homes without a safe conduct. If the suspected person should ask for a passport to leave the Republic, his petition shall be granted, and the selection of the

route shall be left to him; but as soon as the extraordinary powers cease, he shall have the right to return freely. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs shall not be construed as to prevent suspected persons from being tried before the courts and punished, if convicted, for offenses committed, unless they have been pardoned. If the sentence be condemnatory, the period of imprisonment previous to the conviction shall be deducted from the penalty. 6. To arrest all persons suspected Of favoring a foreign invasion or internal disturbance, or of taking part in the same; but the arrested persons shall be placed at the disposal of the court of competent jurisdiction, together with all the papers relating to the case, within the period of six days at the latest. The Executive may, however, order the suspected persons, during the same six days, to establish their residence at some specified place. 7. To admit into the service of the Republic, in case of foreign war, such foreign auxiliary troops as may be allowed by treaties. 8. To open and close temporarily ports of entry. 9. To dispose of the public moneys even when appropriated for other purposes, except when belonging to the school fund, railroads or charitable institutions. ART. 99. The powers granted the Executive under the preceding articles shall not extend beyond the time, place, and object indispensable for the reestablishment of the peace or safety of the Republic, and it shall be so stated in the decree of concession. The Executive shall report to Congress at its first meeting, within the first eight days, the use which has been made of these powers.

As soon as the danger ceases, the council of state shall declare, upon its own responsibility, that the extraordinary powers have terminated. ART. 100. The Executive shall not delegate these extraordinary powers, except to the provincial governors, and with the advice of the council of state. The provincial governors in this case shall have no power, without special order of the Executive, to compel any one to reside away from his home. The Executive and the authorities entrusted with the enforcement of its orders shall be directly responsible for the abuses which they may commit. The said authorities shall be also responsible for the enforcement of orders issued by the Executive beyond its powers.

SECTION III. The Secretaries of State. ART. 101. There shall be five secretaries of state, freely appointed by the President. The law shall determine the branches of business respectively entrusted to them, and their respective functions. ART. 102. To be a secretary of state the same qualifications shall be required as to be a senator. ART. 103. All decrees, orders, or decisions of the Executive shall be signed by the respective secretary of state; and if not signed, they shall have no value and shall not be obeyed by any agent of the Government or by any private person or authority. The appointment or removal of the secretaries themselves is excepted from this rule.

ART. 104. The secretaries of state shall be held responsible in the cases set forth in articles 95 and 96 and in those of violation of law, bribery, collusion, and embezzlement of public funds, countersigning decrees or orders of the Executive issued without the advice of the council of state, when this advice is required by the Constitution and the laws, delaying the execution of valid decrees or failure to watch over their enforcement. An order, either verbal or in writing, from the Executive shall not exempt the secretaries of state from responsibility. ART. 105. The secretaries of state shall transmit to the legislative chambers, with the knowledge of the Executive, all the information which may be asked from them in regard to any matter belonging to their respective departments, unless, in the judgment of the Executive, such matter should be kept secret. In the latter case the information shall be given in secret session. ART. 106. The secretaries of state shall present to Congress, during the first six days of the ordinary session, a written report on the condition of the business of their respective departments, and recommend whatever they may deem conducive to improve said condition. They may take part, but without vote, in the discussions of the bills introduced in Congress by the Executive, and they shall attend the meetings of either chamber when invited thereto. ART. 107. The secretary of the treasury shall submit, furthermore, to Congress, when assembled in ordinary session and during the first twenty days of the same, a statement of the national revenues and the Budget of expenditures for the following year.

SECTION Iv.

The Council of State.
ART. 108. There shall be in the capital of Ecuador a council of state, consisting of the vice-president of the Republic, the secretaries of state, the attorney-general, the chief justice of the tribunal of accounts, the rector of the Central University, two senators, two deputies, and two private citizens having the qualifications required to be a deputy. The Congress shall elect at each annual meeting the seven members last mentioned, who may be reelected indefinitely. The vice-president of the Republic shall be the president of the council, and in his default the attorney-general, and in default of the latter any one of the counselors appointed by his colleagues. ART. 109. In the recess of Congress it shall belong exclusively to the council of state: 1. To authorize the Executive, according to clause 4 of article 65, to contract voluntary loans in time of peace, provided that said loans are indispensable for the proper administration of the Government.

2. To prepare articles of impeachment against the Executive, and complaints against the justices of the supreme court. 3. To grant or refuse extraordinary powers to the Executive, or to withdraw said powers in pursuance of article 98. 4. To fill the seats of Councilors of State, which may become vacant, except those of the vicepresident of the Republic and the secretaries of state. 5. To exercise all the other powers given it by this Constitution and the laws. In the three cases first mentioned in the present article, and when the question under discussion relates

to compelling some one to reside at a particular place, the secretaries of state shall be heard, but shall have no vote; and when all the secretaries of state are present, no business shall be transacted in the council with less than eleven councilors. ART. 110. The President or Acting President of the Republic shall hear the opinion of the council of state in the following cases: 1. Before approving or refusing to approve the bills or resolutions passed by Congress. 2. Before applying to Congress for authority to declare war. And in all the other cases in which the Constitution or the laws may render said opinion necessary, or in which the Executive may deem it advisable to ask for it without impairing the power of the Executive to accept it or not. TITLE VIII. THE JUDICIAL POWER. ART. 111. The judicial power is vested in one supreme court, the superior courts, the jury, and all other tribunals and courts established by the Constitution and the laws. ART. 112. To be a justice of the supreme court, it shall be required to be an Ecuadorian citizen in the exercise of the rights of citizenship, over thirty-five years of age, and a lawyer of good standing, having practiced law for not less than eight years. ART. 113. To be a justice of a superior court, it shall be required to be an Ecuadorian citizen in the exercise of the rights of citizenship, over thirty years of age, and a lawyer of good standing, having practiced law for not less than five years. ART. 114. Congress shall elect, by absolute majority of votes, the justices of the supreme court, of

the superior courts, and of the tribunal of accounts. If Congress is not in session, the supreme court shall take cognizance of the requests for excuse and of the resignations tendered by its own members or members of the superior courts, and shall elect the officials who pro tempore shall serve in their place. The tribunal of accounts has the same power in regard to its own members. ART. 115. The law shall designate the number of justices of the supreme court, the superior courts and the tribunal of accounts; the Province or Provinces in which they shall exercise jurisdiction; the powers that they and the courts of the first instance shall have; and the manner of appointing the latter, and their time of service.

ART. 116. The justices of the supreme court may be present at the discussion of the bills introduced in Congress by the court.
ART. 117. No case shall be conducted through more than three instances. Tribunals and courts at law shall always state the reasons upon which their decisions are founded. ART. 118. The justices and judges are responsible, in the manner and form provided by law, for their judicial action. They shall not be suspended except by a judicial decree setting forth the reason for the suspension, nor. shall they be removed unless by judicial sentence. ART. 119. The justices of the supreme court, the tribunal of accounts, and the superior courts shall serve for six years, and may be reelected indefinitely. They are forbidden to accept, during their terms of office, any position within the free gift of the Executive.

TITLE IX.
THE HOME GOVERNMENT.

ART. 120. The territory of the Republic shall be divided into provinces, cantons, and parishes. ART. 121. in each province there shall be a governor; in each canton a political chief and in each parish a lieutenant. The law shall fix their respective powers. ART. 122. To attend to the interests of each locality there shall be municipal corporations. The law shall provide for the organization of these bodies, and define their functions and their powers in everything concerning the education and instruction of the inhabitants of the locality, the police, the material improvements, the local taxation, the manner of collecting and disbursing the local revenues, the improvement of the public establishments, and all other matters within their jurisdiction. ART. 123. No resolution passed by these municipal bodies shall be complied with if it is in opposition to the Constitution or the laws, and if any controversy should arise on this matter between a municipal corporation and the political authority the supreme court shall decide it. ART. 124. The province of Oriente, the archipelago of Colon, and, in general, all other places which, owing to their distance, or their isolation, can not be governed by the general laws, shall be governed by special laws. TITLE X.
THE NATIONAL FORCE.

ART. 125. For the defense of the. Republic and the preservation of order, there shall be a military force organized by law. ART. 126. No person unless. purely military and in active mill--

Lary service shall be subject to military jurisdiction or-authority. ART. 127. Neither the President of the Republic nor any other authority shall, without incurring responsibility, appoint or pay a greater number of generals or colonels than that established in an express and individual manner by the National Congress or a constitutional assembly. ART. 128. Neither the President of the Republic nor any other authority shall, without incurring responsibility, recognize and pay military chiefs or officials who are not already recognized and ordered to be paid by a constitutional government.

ART. 129. Congress shall not grant any rank superior to that of general, nor shall it approve the nomination of any general or colonel without first examining the military record of the nominee. ART. 130. The armed force is, by its nature, an obedient and not a deliberative body; but the military authorities are not bound to comply with any order intended to overthrow the high national powers or issued manifestly in violation of the Constitution. ART. 131. No requisition shall be made, nor shall any assistance be asked by any armed body, except to the civil authority, and in the manner provided by law.
TITLE XI.
SUPREMACY OF THE CONSTITUTION.

ART. 132. The Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic, and no secondary law, decree, rule, order, provision, or public treaty whatsoever, which might be found to be in opposition or at variance with its text, shall have any effect whatever.

TITLE XII.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.

ART. 133. No payment shall be made by the treasury if Congress has not authorized it by a proper appropriation, nor shall any amount be disbursed, in excess of the amount appropriated. ART. 134. No person or body of persons shall simultaneously exercise political and military or judicial authority. ART. 135. All employes or public functionaries, on entering upon the discharge of their duties, shall promise to support and defend the Constitution and to comply with their official duties. The one who should not make this promise freely shall not be allowed to enter upon the discharge of his duties.a ART. 136. No person shall receive two salaries out of the national treasury. ART. 137. Entailments of property for whatever purposes are hereby forbidden. No real property in Ecuador shall be allowed to become inalienable. ART. 138. The public powers owe protection to the Indian race, to the end that its social life may be improved. TITLE XIII.
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION.

ART. 139. The Constitution shall not be amended at any time within four years from the present date. At the expiration of this time if two-thirds of the members of both chambers, in an ordinary Congress, deem it advisable to amend any article or articles of the Constitution, the amendments shall be drawn up and submitted to Congress to be discussed in the next ordinary session; and if the amendment is then approved by

absolute majority in each chamber, the discussion and the vote having been in accordance with section 6 of Title VI of the present Constitution, it shall be valid and made a part of the Constitution.
TITLE XIV.
TRANSIENT PROVISIONS.

ART. 140. The national assembly may enact, after the promulgation of this Constitution, any laws or resolutions which it may deem necessary, and use all the other powers specified in article 65. ART. 141. The convention shall elect, by secret vote and absolute majority, the President and vicepresident of the Republic, the councilors of state, chief justice and justices of the supreme court, chief justices and justices of the tribunal of accounts and of the superior courts, rector of the Central University, and rectors of the universities of Guayas and Azuay. Instead of the two senators and deputies mentioned in article 108, it shall appoint from among its own members four councilors of state. ART. 142. Until the law providing for the organization of the Executive departments is promulgated, the Executive power is hereby authorized to determine the business to be transacted by each one of the secretaries of state. ART. 143. The President and vice-president of the Republic elected in conformity with article 141, shall terminate their f unctions, respectively, on the thirty-first of August, nineteen hundred and one, and the thirty-first of August., eighteen hundred and ninety-nine. These functionaries, the same as the members of the tribunals of justice and senators and deputies, shall receive the salaries to be fixed by the appropriation law, which the national assembly shall enact.

ART. 144. The first ordinary Congress shall meet on the tenth of August, eighteen hundred and ninety-eight. Given at Quito, the capital of the Republic of Ecuador, this twelfth of January, eighteen hundred and ninety-seven.

ANNEX NO. 1. Law of June 13, 1897 , explanatory of article 38. SOLE ARTICLE. —Article 38 of the Constitution shall not cover cases in which the enforcement of judicial decisions or of arbitral awards in favor of foreign contractors has been refused. The parties injured thereby shall have the right to resort to diplomatic intervention, according to the principles of public law. ANNEX NO. 2. Law of September 21, 1830, explanatory of article 44. ARTICLE 1. The capital of the Ecuadorian State shall be always and irrevocably the city of Quito. ART. 2. The Constitutional Congress shall hold its meetings at that city. ART. 3. The high Executive and judicial functionaries shall reside in the same city during the whole time established by the Constitution, and shall have no power to act elsewhere without previous permission of Congress. Otherwise their acts shall be void. Sole paragraph. If the said capital should be afflicted by pestilential diseases, invaded by enemies, or placed under difficult unforeseen circumstances, the Chief Magistrate of the State shall have the discretionary power of trans-

ferring temporarily the capital to some other place selected by him, provided that this is done with the advice of the council. When the danger ceases the Government shall return to the capital. ART. 4. No order, decree, or rule issued by the Government outside the said capital and five miles around it shall have binding force. ANNEX NO. 3. Law of October 21, 1831, explanatory of article 135. ARTICLE 1. Those who have been appointed to civil or ecclesiastical positions of whatever nature, and do not enter upon the discharge of their duties within the time established by this law shall thereby forfeit their positions, which the Government shall have the right to consider vacant, and fill them anew, according to law. ART. 2. Those who reside in the place where the office to be served by them is located shall enter upon the discharge of their duties twenty days after receiving their appointments. Those who are absent, but within the limits of the department, shall have forty days; those who are in a bordering department shall have fifty days; and those who are at a greater distance shall have one hundred days. ART. 3. Nothing else than physical inability, legally proved, or actual engagement in the service of the State shall serve as an excuse for the delay; but as soon as the impediment ceases the time established by law shall begin to run. ART. 4. The impediment shall be proved before the local authorities, who shall take care under their responsibility to furnish information thereof to the Government. They shall be bound in the

same way to inform the Government when the official becomes able to fill his position. ART. 5. Taking possession by proxy of the dignities and offices in the cathedral churches is hereby forbidden, and the decree of March twenty-ninth, eighteen hundred and twenty-five, is here by repealed.

