
CONSTITUTION of the Republic of the Equator. Quito, February 13, 1884. In the name of God, Author and Law-Giver of the Universe. THE National Assembly of Equator agrees on the following political Constitution:-

CHAPTER I.-Concerning the Nation and its form of Govermnent. 1. The Equatorian nation is composed of all Equatorians united under the control of the same laws. 2. The territory of the Republic comprises that of the provinces which formed the ancient Presidency of Quito and that of the Archipelago of Galapagos. The boundaries will be fixed definitely by means of Treaties with the neighbouring nations. 3. Sovereignty is vested in the nation, which delegates it to the authorities established by the Constitution. 4. The Government of Equator is popular, elective, representative, alternative, and responsible. It is distributed in three Powers: the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial. Each of these will exercise the functions which are provided by this Constitution, without overstepping the limits prescribed by it. 5. The Republic is indivisible, free and independent of any foreign Power. CHAPTEU II.-Concerning Equatorians and Foreigner. Section 1. 6. The following are Equatorians(1.) All who are born in the territory of the Republic of Equatorian father or mother; (2.) Those born in the said territory of foreign parents, if they reside therein ; (3.) Those who, born in a foreign State, of Equatorian father or mother, come to reside in the Republic and express their wish to be Equatorians; (4.) Natives of another State who may be in enjoyment of Equatorian nationality; (5.) Foreigners who are proficient in science, art, or useful industries, or are owners of real property or funded capital, and who, after having resided for a year in the Republic, declare their intention of becoming domiciled therein, and obtain letters of naturalization; and (6.) All who are awarded rights of nationality by Congress for services rendered to the Republic. 7. No Equatorian, even should he acquire another nationality, and shall be exempt from the duties imposed by the Constitution the laws whilst he is domiciled in the Republic, except in cases provided for in existing Treaties. 8. A special Law will determine what foreigners are 4omiciled, as well as their privileges and duties.

Section 2.-Concerning Citizens. 9. Citizens are Equatorian males, who can read and write, and have completed 21 years, or who are or may have been married. 10. Rights of citizenship are lost(1.) On entering the service of a nation at war with the Republic; (2.) On naturalization in another State; and (3.) In the other cases provided for by the law. 11. Equatorians who have lost the rights of citizenship may obtain rehabilitation from the Senate. But those condemned to confinement or prison for a term of more than six months will not obtain rehabilitation until their sentence has expired. Any Equatorian who becomes naturalized in a foreign country will recover his rights of citizenship if he returns to Equator and, renouncing the foreign nationality, expresses his intention to resume citizenship in Equator. 12. Rights of citizenship are suspended(1.) By judicial interdiction; (2.) By a judicial sentence pronounced in consequence of breaches of the law which entail loss of the rights of citizenship; and (3.) By a judicial sentence against a public official. CHAPTER

III.-Concerning the Religion of the Republic.

13. The religion of the Republic is the Apostolic Roman Catholic, in exclusion of every other. The political powers are under obligation to respect it, to cause it to be respected, and to protect its liberty and other rights. CHAPTER IV.- Concerning Guarantees. 14.* Capital punishment will not be imposed for political or ordinary crimes, except assassination and parricide, in cases where they are according to the law liable to this penalty. 15. Every individual has the right to be considered innocent, and to retain his good reputation, so long as he is not declared guilty in accordance with the laws. 16. There are not, nor shall there be, any slaves in the Republic, and those who set foot on Equatorian territory shall be free. 17. The conscription is forbidden. 18. From no one shall services be required which are not

imposed by law; and in no case shall artisans and day labourers be compelled to work, except in virtue of an agreement. 19. There is freedom of meeting and associating, without arms, for lawful purposes. 20. All possess the right of petition to any authority, and to obtain a decision thereupon; but these will never be exercised in the name of the people. 21.* No one shall be detained, arrested, or imprisoned, except in the cases and in the form provided by the law. 22. No one may be placed beyond the protection of the laws, nor withdrawn from their ordinary Judges, nor judged by special commissions, or by Laws passed subsequent to the commission of the act, nor deprived of the right of defence in any part of his trial. 23. No one will be compelled to give evidence in a criminal trial against his, or her, consort, forefathers, descendants, or collaterals, within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or the second of affinity; nor shall any one be compelled, on oath or by other judicial compulsion, to give evidence against himself in matters which entail penal consequences; nor be placed in solitary confinement for more than 24 hours, nor punished with bars, fetters, or other torture. 24.* Public whipping, banishment, and confiscation are forbidden. 25. No one shall be deprived of his property, except in virtue of a judicial sentence, or of expropriation, which, subject to an indemnity, may be decreed in accordance with the law, on the grounds of public convenience. 26. No contribution or tax will be levied except in accordance with the law, and by the authority provided therein. In all taxation a due proportion will be observed between the amount levied and the possessions or the trade of the individual taxed. 27. All will enjoy freedom to carry on their business, and, within the limits prescribed by law, will enjoy exclusive ownership of their discoveries, inventions, and literary works. 28.* All may freely express their opinions, either by word of mouth or through the press, having due regard for religion, decency, morality, and honour, and being subject in these matters to legal responsibility. 29. The dwelling-place of every individual is inviolable; it shall not be destroyed, except under special circumstances determined by law and by the competent authority. 30. The franchise is free. 31.* Epistolary correspondence is inviolable, and will not be 
It is forbidden

employed as evidence in trials for political offences.

to intercept, open, or schedule papers or effects of private property, except in the cases provided for by law. 32. All may travel about freely, change their place of abode, absent themselves from the Republic, and return to it, accompanied whether in going or coming by their goods. An exception is made in case of war, when a passport will be required. 33. The public credit is guaranteed. Therefore in no case will the funds be withdrawn which are designated by the laws for the amortization of the National Debt. The provisions of Article 94, section 9, are excepted. 34. Scholastic establishments may be opened by any one, subject to the laws on public instruction. Primary instruction is free and compulsory, without prejudice to the right of parents to provide such education as they may think desirable. The said education, and that of arts and crafts, will be at the charge of the public funds. 35. It is unlawful to create entails, or to make other settlements of real property, or that there shall be any real property in Equator held in such a manner as that it is not capable of being freely transferred. 36. Public offices may only be filled by subjects of Equator in full possession of the rights of citizenship. 37. Public officials who violate any of the guarantees mentioned in this Constitution will be responsible with their goods for the damages or injuries they cause, and with regard to the crimes or offences which, in violating them, they commit, the following provisions will be observed:(1.) They may be prosecuted without necessity for the finding of security and without the signature of an advocate; (2.) The penalties incurred will not be liable to remission, diminution, nor commutation during the constitutional period in which the offence is committed, nor during the following constitutional period; and (3.) The criminal and civil trials which arise out of the crimes and offences, and the penalties imposed, will not be commenced till after the expiration of the said constitutional periods. CHAPTER V.-Concerning the Elections. 88. There will elections by direct the President and Deputies, and the the laws, be held, in conformity with the law, popular and secret vote. In this manner will be elected Vice-President of the Republic, the Senators and other officials required by the Constitution and

39. The electors are the subjects of Equator in possession of the rights of citizenship. 40. The elections will be held on the day fixed by law; that day having arrived, the respective authorities, under the most heavy responsibility, must carry out the provisions of the said law, without waiting for orders from their superiors. CHAPTER VI.-Concerning the Legislative Power. Section 1.-Concerning Congress. 41. The Legislative Power is vested in the National Congress, composed of two Chambers, one of Senators and the other of Deputies. 42.* Congress will meet every year on the 10th June, in the capital of the Republic, even though it has not been convoked; and the Sessions will last 60 days, during which time it may not be prorogued. It will also meet in Extraordinary Session when convoked by the Executive Power, and for the time and for the business only which he indicates. Section 2.-Concerning the Chamber of the Senate. 43. The Chamber of the Senate is composed of two Senators for each province. 44. In order to be Senator it is necessary (1.) To be a subject of Equator in exercise of the rights of citizenship; and (2.) To be of the age of 35 years. Subjects of Equator naturalized in accordance with Article 6, sections 3, 4, 5, and 6, of this Constitution, must, in addition, have resided for four years in the Republic. 45. The following are exclusive attributes of the Senate (1.) To try prosecutions instituted by the Chamber of Deputies against officials provided by Article 50; (2.) To reinstate those who have lost their rights of citizenship, except in cases of treason, in favour of a State at war with the Republic, or of a foreign army; (3.) To rehabilitate the memory of persons condemned unjustly, in the event of their innocence being proved. 46. When the Senate tries any accusation, and this must be limited to conduct in official functions, it may not impose any other punishment than the suspension or dismissal of the official, and, at most, declare the accused, temporarily or permanently, incapacitated 
1301

from occupying public positions; but a criminal trial will follow in the competent Tribunal, if the deed constitutes an offence which merits further punishment. 47. When the prosecution does not refer to the official conduct of the accused, the Senate will confine itself to a declaration whether or no there is a case for investigation, and in case there is, will place the accused person at the disposition of the proper Tribunal. Section 3.-Concerning the Chamber of Deputies. 48. The Chamber of Deputies is composed of Deputies elected in the provinces of the Republic, each of which will have one Deputy for each 30,000 inhabitants. But if the remainder amounts to 15,000 there will be one more Deputy. And every province, whatever its population may be, nominates at least one Deputy. 49. Any subject of Equator in the exercise of his rights of citizenship may be Deputy. 50. The following are the special attributes of the Chamber of Deputies:(1.) To indict, before the Senate, the President of the Republic, or the individual intrusted with the Executive Power, Ministers, Secretaries of State, Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and State Councillors; (2.) To take into consideration accusations made against the said authorities, and, if they consider them well-founded, to lay them before the Senate; (3.) To require of the proper authorities that they take steps to make effective the responsibility of public officials who have abused their position or been deficient in the execution of their duties; and (4.) To take the initiative in laws of imposts and taxes. Section 4.-egulations common to the two Chambers. 51. Neither of the Chambers will commence its Sessions unless two-thirds of its total number of members are present, nor will continue them without an absolute majority. 52. No Senator or Deputy may absent himself without the permission of the Chamber to which he belongs, and if he does so he will lose for two years the rights of citizenship. 53. The Chambers will meet jointly to declare the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, or to confirm their election; to receive the oath of the high functionaries; to accept or refuse their resignation; to elect Councillors of State, Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the Court of Exchequer, and of the Superior Courts, and to accept or refuse their

resignation; to approve or reject the recommendations made by the Executive for the appointment of Generals or Colonels ; censure the conduct of the Ministers of State; and when one of the Chambers demands a joint Session. But they shall never meet jointly to exercise the attributes which belong to each separately in conformity with Article 62. Any Minister whose official conduct has been censured by the Congress may not take any fresh portfolio until the meeting of the next Legislature. 54. The Chambers must sit separately, must open and close their Sessions on the same day, sit in the same town, and neither of them must be transferred to another place, nor prorogue their Sessions for more than three days, without the consent of the other. 55. The Senators and Deputies may not be held responsible for the opinions which they enunciate in the Congress, and enjoy privilege for 30 days previous to the Sessions of the Chambers, during such Sessions, and for 30 days after. They will not be sentenced, prosecuted, nor arrested, unless the Chamber to which they belong first authorizes their trial by a vote of the majority of the members present. When any Senator or Deputy has committed any crime or offence he shall be placed at the disposal of the Chamber to which he belongs, in order that the Chamber may declare, after examination of the charge, if the trial should or should not go on. But if the crime or offence is committed within the 30 days after the close of the Session, the Judge will freely proceed with the trial of the Senator or Deputy. 56.* During the period for which they are elected, and for one year after the expiration of such period, Senators and Deputies may not accept, even provisionally or in commission, any employment in the independent gift of the Executive Power. Officials who are appointed by the Executive alone may not be elected Senators or Deputies. although they have resigned their appointments three months previous to the elections. Military Commanders are excepted from the provisions of the first paragraph of this Article solely in cases of foreign invasion or internal revolution. 57. The President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries and Councillors of State, and the Judges of the Courts of Justice, are ineligible for election as Senators or Deputies. Nor is any person eligible to be returned for a province if in any part of it, or in one of its cantons, he holds or has held three months previous to the elections any civil, ecclesiastical, political, or military command or authority. 

58. Senators are elected for four years, and may submit themselves for re-election without restriction. Every two years one-half the Senate will be renewed; on the first occasion the Senators who must retire under this Rule will be chosen by lot in accordance with the Regulations to be drawn up by the Senate. 59. Deputies are elected for two years, and may submit themselves for re-election without restriction. 60. If on the day fixed for the opening of the Sessions there are not the number of Senators or Deputies fixed by this Constitution, or if the Sessions being opened either of the Chambers is unable to continue them for want of a quorum, the members present, whatever be their number, will order the absentees, under the legal penalties, to attend, and will continue to meet until the complement of two thirds or the quorum is present. 61. The Sessions will be held in public; unless either Chamber decides by Resolution to deal with any matter in secret Session. Section 5.-Concerning the Attributes of Congress divided into Legi8lative Chambers. 62.* The following are the attributes of Congress:(1.) To reform the Constitution, observing the procedure prescribed therein; and to settle and interpret any doubts which may arise as to the interpretation of its Articles. Such resolution or interpretation will have the effect of a special law; (2.) To decree annually the public expenditure with reference to the estimates presented by the Executive Power; (3.) To watch over the just and lawful application of the national funds; (4.) To levy taxes and to authorize the Executive to contract loans on the security of the public credit, which loans may not be issued without the consent of Congress; (5.) To take into consideration the National Debt, to determine the manner and means to be employed as well for its redemption as for the payment of the interest thereon. Debts contracted without the proper authorization, and any contracted by reason of illegal acts, will not be recognized by Congress; (6.) To decree the disposal of fiscal property, make regulations for its administration, and employ it for public purposes; (7.) To create or suppress any employments the creation or suppression of which are not vested in any other authority by the Constitution or the law; to fix or modify the functions of the officials; settle their time of service; and increase or diminish their annual cost; 

(8.) To declare according to law, and in view of judgment pronounced by the 'Court of Exchequer, the liability of the Minister of the Treasury; (9.) To confer rewards, solely honourable and personal, on those who may have rendered great services to the country, and to decree
public honours to their memory; (10.) To determine and make uniform the alloy, weight, value, coinage, and denomination of the national money; and make regulations as to the admission and circulation of foreign money; and to establish a system of weights and measures; (11.) To fix each year the maximum of the armed forces, both naval and military, which is to be employed on active service in time of peace, and to make regulations for its recruiting ; (12.) To declare war, on information received from the Executive Power ; to require him to enter into negotiations for peace, and to approve or withhold approval from public Treaties and other Conventions, without which approval they will not be ratified or exchanged; (13.) To promote the progress of science, arts, enterprise, discoveries, and improvements, and to grant, for limited periods, exclusive patent rights, or advantages and indemnities; (11.) To grant, whether during trial or not, general amnesties or pardons when required by serious reasons of public convenience. If Congress is not sitting, the Executive Power will exercise this function, with the consent of the Council of State; (15.) To fix the place in which the Supreme Powers are to be settled ; (16.) To grant or refuse permission for the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic, or the continuance of foreign ships of war in the ports when for more than two months; (17.) To create or abolish provinces and cantons, settle their boundaries, and to legalize or close ports; (18.) To decree the opening or improvement of roads and canals, without interfering with the rights of localities to open and improve their own; (19.) To decide whether or no a new election shall be held in case of physical or mental incapacity of the President or Vice-President of the Republic; (20.) To draw up codes, pass Laws, Decrees, and Resolutions for the regulation of the public administration, and to interpret, reform, or annul them. 63. Congress may not suspend, under the pretext of pardon, the course of judicial proceedings, nor revoke Decrees and Resolutions, pronounced by the Judicial authority (except in cases provided for by paragraph 14 of the preceding Article), nor exercise any of the

functions reserved to the Executive Power, nor depreciate the attributes which, under this Constitution, belong to Provincial Government. Nor may it decree any payment until the amount payable is proved in accordance with the law, nor any indemnity unless it is preceded by a definite sentence. Lastly, it is forbidden to delegate to one or more of its members, or to another person or body, any of the duties which are imposed upon it by this Constitution. Section 6.-Concerning the making of Laws and other Legislative Acts. 64. The Laws, Decrees, and Resolutions of Congress may originate in one of the Chambers, on the initiative of any of its members, or of the Executive Power, or of the Supreme Court, in matters relating to the administration of justice. 65. If a proposal to bring in a Bill or other legislative act is refused, it shall be postponed to the next Legislature; unless it is brought forward again with modifications. In case it is passed, it will be debated by each Chamber in three Sessions and on different days. 66. A Bill, Decree, or Resolution having been approved by the Chamber in which it originated, shall immediately be sent on, the days on which it has been debated being stated, to the other Chamber, which may give or withhold its approval, or pass the amendments, additions, or modifications it considers desirable. 67. If the Chamber in which the Bill was first debated does not approve of the proposed additions or modifications, it may insist a second time with fresh reasons. If, notwithstanding such insistence, the revising Chamber does not pass the Bill, and the additions or modifications affect the Bill as a whole, it will not be debated until the next Legislature; but if they only refer to one or more of its clauses, such clauses will be withdrawn and the Bill will be proceeded with. 68. The Bill, Decree, or Resolution which has received the assent of both Chambers will be sent to the Executive Power for his sanction. If he sanctions it, he will order it to be promulgated and put in force; but if he disapproves of it, he will return it, with his observations thereon, within the space of nine days to the Chamber in which it originated. Bills which both Chambers have passed as " urgent," will be approved or vetoed by the Executive Power within the space of three days, he not having the right to decide on the question of urgency. 69. If the Chamber consider the observations of the Executive Power well founded, and they affect the Bill as a whole, it will be deposited in the archives, and will not be brought in again until the

following Legislature. If they are only limited to corrections or modifications, the Chamber may discuss them and decide upon them in a single debate. 70. In case the majority of the members present do not approve of the observations affecting the measure as a whole, the Chamber in which it originated will send it on with this object to the revising Chamber, which, if it agrees with the said observations, will return the Bill that it may be deposited in the archives; but if this Chamber, by a majority of its members, also disagrees with them, the Bill will be sent to the Executive Power for his sanction, which cannot be refused. 71. In case the Executive Power should not return a measure, sanctioned or with observations, within the space of nine days, or of three in case of urgency, or in case he should refuse to sanction it after the constitutional requirements have been complied with, it will have the force of law. But if, during the said terms, Congress shall have suspended or closed the Sessions, the Bill must be published in the press and presented in the first three days of the next Session with the objections duly made. If within the space of nine days it is not published with the objections thereto, it will have the force of law. 72. Bills which remain in abeyance, or are thrown out or objected to, will be published in the press, and the cause which has impeded their sanction must be stated. 73. Bills which go up to the Executive for sanction will go in duplicate, both copies being signed by the Presidents and Secretaries of the Chambers, and bearing a statement of the days on which they were debated. 74. When the Executive finds that, with respect to any Bill, the provisions of Articles 65, 66, and 67 have not been duly complied with, he will return both copies before the third day to the Chamber in which the omission has occurred, in order that, the omission being repaired, the said Bill may follow the constitutional course; but in case no such omission is found he must sanction or disapprove it, and return to the Chamber from which it originated one of the two copies with the proper Decree. 75. If this Chamber has suspended its Sessions, the days of suspension will not be counted in the manner fixed by Article 74. 76.* The intervention of the Executive Power is not necessary in Resolutions of Congress as to its removal to another place, the granting or withdrawing extraordinary powers, carrying out elections, receiving resignations and excuses, making regulations for its internal order, nor in such acts as may be executed by one of the Chambers alone, 

77. Congress will employ on the Laws which it issues the following formula: " The Congress of the Republic of Equator decrees;" and the Executive Power will employ the following: "Let it be executed," or "Let it be objected to." 78. In the interpretation, modification, or abrogation of Laws the same formalities will be observed as for their formation. 79. Laws only come into force by virtue of their promulgation. 80. They will be promulgated by the Executive Power within the six days following that on which they become law; and if at the end of that period he has not promulgated them, the Council of State will do so under the severest penalties, also within six days. These periods may, however, be diminished or lengthened by the law itself, other special dates being fixed.

CHAPTER VIII.-Concerning the Executive Power.

Section 1.-Concerning the Chief of the State. 81. The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic of Equator. In case the Presidency is vacant, the post will be filled by (1) the Vice-President of the Republic; (2) the last President of the Senate; and (3) the last President of the Chamber of Deputies. 82. The election of President and Vice-President having taken place, the Congress will scrutinize the votes and will declare the candidate elected who has obtained the absolute majority, or failing that, the relative majority. In case of an equality of votes, the absolute majority of Congress will decide by secret voting, limited to those who have obtained the greater and equal number of votes in the popular election. If there is a tie in the Congress, the election will be decided by lot. 83. The President and Vice-President of the Republic must be Equatorians in conformity with paragraphs 1 or 2 of Article 6; must be citizens, and have completed 35 years of age. 84. The posts of President and Vice-President of the Republic are vacated by death, destitution, resignation, physical or mental incapacity declared by Congress, and by the completion of the term fixed by the Constitution. 85. When the offices of President or Vice-President become vacant before the termination of a Constitutional period, the person charged with the Executive Power will make arrangements within the space of eight days for a new election to take place; such election will be concluded in the space of two months at the most,
The individual elected in these cases will cease to hold office at the time when his predecessor would have given up office. If only one year or less is wanting to the end of the Presidential or Vice-Presidential term of office, the individual charged with the Executive Power will continue to exercise it until the conclusion of the said term. 86. The President and Vice-President of the Republic are appointed for four years. They may not be re-elected till the expiration of two periods from their period of office. It is also unlawful that during those two periods the President shall be elected Vice-President, or vice versa. 87. No relation in the second degree of consanguinity or the first degree of affinity of the person exercising the Executive Power shall be elected to replace him. 88. It is not lawful for the President of the Republic or the individual intrusted with the Executive Power to absent themselves from Equatorian territory without the consent of Congress, whilst they are discharging their functions, or for one year afterwards. 89. The President and Vice-President of the Republic on taking possession of their posts will take before Congress, or, if Congress is not sitting, before the Supreme Court, the following oath:"I, N. N., swear by God, our Lord, and the holy Gospels, that I will faithfully perform the duties of President [or Vice-President] of the Republic, protect the Roman Apostolic Catholic religion, preserve the integrity and independence of the State, keep and cause to be kept the Constitution and the laws. If thus I do, may God aid me and be my defence; and if not, may He and my country call me to account therefor." Section 2.-Concerning the Attributes and Duties of the Executive Power. 90.* The following are attributes and duties of the Executive Power -(1.) To sanction the Laws and Decrees of Congress, and to make for their execution such Regulations as shall not interpret nor alter them ; (2.) To comply with and carry out the Laws and Decrees, and cause his agents and the other officials to comply with and give effect to them; (3.) To convoke Congress every year, and in Extraordinary Session when the public convenience requires it;

(4.) To preserve internal order and watch over the external safety of the Republic; (5.) To dispose of the forces armed for the defence of the nation, and for such other objects as the public service renders requisite; (6.) To appoint and remove the Diplomatic Agents in accord with the Council of State, and, independently, the Ministers Secretaries of State, Governors of provinces, political chiefs, parochial lieutenants, and other officials, whose appointment and dismissal are not vested in any other authority by the Constitution or the laws; (7.) To direct diplomatic negotiations, conclude Treaties, ratify them, after Congress has approved them, and exchange the ratifications ; (8.) To submit to Congress names for appointment as General Officers and Colonels; (9.) To appoint the other Chiefs and officers; (10.) To accept or refuse the resignation of their positions of Generals, Chiefs, and officers, either in the army or navy, and to grant, in conformity with the law, certificates of retirement; (11.) To issue ships' commissions; (12.) To declare war, when Congress has decreed it, and make peace, with the approbation of Congress; (13.) To watch over the strict observance of the law, whether in matters of administration or the disposal of the national funds; (14.) To take care that the Minister of the Treasury renders, every year, to the proper Tribunal, an account of the public funds; that this Tribunal may pass it on, with its decision thereon, to the Legislative Body; (15.) To grant patents of property in cases provided for by Article 27 of this Constitution; (16.) To pardon, reduce, or commute, in conformity with the law and with the limitations prescribed therein, the punishments imposed for crimes or offences. For the exercise of this attribute it is requisite (1) that it be preceded by the sentence which has caused the writ of execution; (2) a Report of the Judge or Tribunal which has passed the sentence; and (3) the consent of the Council of State. This attribute shall never be exercised on behalf of an individual who has committed the crime or offence by order of the Government or against the National Exchequer. 91. The President or the individual intrusted with the Executive Power may not violate the guarantees provided by this Constitution; delay the course of judicial proceedings; interfere with the freedom of the Judges; impede or influence the elections;

1309 


1310

EQUATOR.

dissolve the Legislative Chambers, nor suspend their Sessions; exercise the Executive Power when absent more than 5 kilometres from the capital of the Republic; nor admit foreigners into the army as Chiefs or officers without the permission of Congress. 92. He is answerable for treason against the Republic, or conspiracy against it; for infringement of the Constitution; for attempts against the other powers; for interference with the meeting or deliberations of Congress; for refusing to sanction Laws and Decrees constitutionally passed; for exercising extraordinary powers without the permission of the Legislature or of the Council of State; and for the deprivation of any of the public officials of the payment of their salary. 93. The President of the Republic, or the individual intrusted with the Executive Power, will at the opening of the ordinary Sessions of the Congress lay a statement in writing before each Chamber, concerning the political and military condition of the. nation, concerning its income and resources, indicating the reforms and improvements of which each branch is in need. 94.* In case of foreign invasion or internal commotion, the Executive will have recourse to Congress, should it be assembled, and, if not, to the Council of State, in order that, after seeing their report and appreciating the necessity, they concede or refuse, with such restrictions as they judge proper, all or part of the following powers.(1.) Increasing the army and navy, calling under arms the National Guard, and establishing military authorities where they may be deemed necessary; (2.) Ordering the anticipated collection of the taxes for not more than one year, with the discount at the rate of interest which the Government collects; (3.) Negotiating loans, with the consent of the Council of State ; (4.) Changing the capital when it is menaced or grave necessity demand it, until the menace cease ; (5.) In case of international war, the imprisonment of those suspected of favouring it, and, also, after consent of the Council of State, of those suspected of taking part in conspiracy or internal commotion; The imprisonment to be in the chief town of a canton or the capital of the province, and not in the territory of the Oriente or the archipelago of Galipagos, and the prisoner not to be compelled to travel by unusual or indirect roads. On the cessation of the extraordinary powers, the prisoner 

recovers his liberty, and may return without safe-conduct. Should the person suspected demand a passport to leave the country, it will be granted him, and he will be at liberty to choose his route ; and as soon as the extraordinary powers cease he will have the right of returning. The preceding paragraphs do not prevent the person suspected from being tried and punished by the ordinary Tribunals for misdemeanour, provided he has not been amnestied or pardoned. Should he be sentenced, the time of imprisonment will be taken into account. (6.) The arrest of those suspected of favouring external invasion or internal disturbance, and of taking part in it; but within three days, at most, they must be taken before the competent Judge, with the evidence and other documents which have led to the arrest; or the imprisonment will be decreed within the same three days; (7.) In case of external war, the admission, in accordance with Treaties, of foreign auxiliary troops into the service of the Republic; (8.) Temporarily establishing ports; (9.) Disposing of the public funds, although they may be destined to other objects, with the exception of those intended for public instruction, hospitals, lazarettos, and other charitable establishments. 95. The powers which are conceded to the Executive Power by the preceding Article will be limited to the time, place, and objects indispensable in order to re-establish the tranquility or security of the Republic; all which will be indicated in the Decree of Concession. Of the use which he has made of these powers he will render an account to Congress at its first Session and in the first eight days. As soon as the danger has ceased, the Council of State will declare, under its responsibility, that the extraordinary power have ceased. 96.* The Executive Power may not delegate these powers to any one but the Governors of provinces, and with the consent of the Council of State. The Governors, in this case, may not intern without the special order of the Executive Power. The Executive Power and the authorities to whom he commits the execution of his mandates will be directly responsible for any abuses which may be committed. The authorities referred to in the preceding paragraph are also responsible for the compliance with any orders which the Executive Power may give in excess of the powers intrusted to him.


Section 3.-Concerning the Ministers Secretaries of State. 97. For the exercise of his attributes the President of the Republic will have the Secretaries of State which the law provides. 98. For the position of Secretary of State the same requirements are in force as for that of Senator. 99. All the Decrees, Orders, or Resolutions of the Executive Power will be countersigned by the Minister of the branch to which they refer, and in case they are not they will have no value whatever, nor will they be obeyed by their agents, nor by any person or authority. The nominations and dismissals of the Secretaries of State themselves are excepted. 100. The Ministers Secretaries of State are responsible in the cases referred to in Articles 91 and 92, and, in addition, in cases of breach of the law, subornation, disturbance, and malversation of the public funds; for authorizing Decrees or Resolutions of the Executive Power issued without the consent or concurrence of the Council of State, when the Constitution and the laws prescribe it; and for preventing the execution of Decrees, or not having watched over their due fulfilment. The verbal or written order of the Executive Power does not exonerate Ministers Secretaries of State from their responsibility. 101. The Secretaries of State will render to the Legislative Chambers, with the concurrence of the Executive Power, the information and notices which may be demanded of them respecting matters in their respective Departments, with the exception of such as, in the opinion of the Executive, should be kept private; concerning these they will give information in secret session. 102. The Ministers Secretaries of State will present to the ordinary Legislature, in the first six days of the Session, a written statement of the position of affairs in their Departments, proposing the measures they may think desirable for their improvement. They may intervene, without vote, in the discussions on the measures which the Executive presents to Congress, and they will be present whenever their presence is required by either Chamber. 103. The Secretary of the Treasury will also present to the ordinary Congress, in the first 20 days of its Session, a statement of the state of the National Exchequer and the Estimates for the following year. Section 4.-Ooncerniny the Council of State. 104.* There will be in the capital of Equator a Council of State, composed of the Vice-President of the Republic, the Ministers 

Secretaries, the Fiscal Minister of the Supreme Court, two Senators, one Deputy, one ecclesiastic, and three citizens who possess the same qualifications as those required for a Senator. The Congress, in each annual Session, will elect the seven last named, who will be eligible for re-election without restriction. The Vice-President of the Republic will preside over the Council; in his absence the Fiscal Minister of the Supreme Court will take his place, and in his absence a Councillor appointed by the remainder. The Ministers Secretaries of State will have no vote when the question is that of conceding extraordinary powers. 105. The President of the Republic, or the individual intrusted with the Executive Power, must take counsel with the Council of State as to giving his sanction or not to the Bills and other legislative acts; to convoking Congress in Extraordinary Sessions; to soliciting from Congress the authorization necessary to enable him to declare war; and to the appointment of the dovernors of provinces. The Council of State will also give its opinion in the other cases prescribed by law, or when the President of the Republic or the individual intrusted with the Executive Power request it. 106. It is the duty of the Council of State(1.) To grant or deny to the Executive Power when Congress is not sitting extraordinary powers, and to withdraw them as soon as the danger has ceased;, (2.) To prepare statements of complaint made against the Ministers of the Supreme Court, and to present them to Congress; (3.) To elect, in case that Congress omits to do so, the persons who are to fill vacancies in the Council of State, except those of the Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State, and the Fiscal of the Supreme Court; and (4.) To exercise the other attributes conferred upon it by the Constitution and the laws.
CHAPTER VIII.-Concerning the Judicial Power.

107. The Judicial Power is exercised by a Supreme Court, the Superior Courts, the Magistracy, and such other Tribunals and Courts as may be established by the Constitution and the law. 108. To hold the position of Minister of the Supreme Court the following requirements are necessary: to be in possession of full rights of citizenship, to be over 35 years of age, and to have exercised the profession of advocate in the Republic for eight years, and with good credit. 109. To hold the position of Minister of the Superior Courts the following requirements are necessary: to be an Equatorian in exercise of the full rights of citizenship, over 30 years of ago, and to 

have practised the profession of advocate in the Republic for five years with good credit. 110. The Congress will elect, by an absolute majority of votes, the Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the Court of Exchequer, and of the Superior Courts. If Congress is not sitting, the Supreme Court will consider the excuses and resignations which are submitted by its members and those of the Superior Courts, and will elect provisionally members to replace them. The Court of Exchequer will have the same power with respect to its Ministers. 111. The law will determine the number of members of the Supreme Court, the Superior Courts, and the Court of Exchequer; the province or provinces over which their jurisdiction extends; and their functions. It will also determine the functions of Courts of First Instance, the method in which their Judges are to be appointed, and the length of time for which they are appointed. 112. The Ministers of the Supreme Court may assist at the debates on the measures presented by the Court to Congress. 113. In no action will there be more than three trials. The Tribunals and Courts which are not merely Courts of investigation will always deliver their Judgments. 114. The Judges and Magistrates are responsible for their conduct in the exercise of their functions in the manner settled by law. They may not be suspended from their office unless a prosecution be instituted against them, nor may they be deprived of their office except by virtue of a judicial sentence. 115. The Judges of the Supreme Court, of the Court of Exchequer, and of the Superior Courts, will hold office for six years, and will be eligible for re-election without any restriction. Even though they resign their appointments and a year elapse from such resignation, they may not accept any post in the free gift of the Executive Power.
CHAPTER

IX.-Concerning the Administrative Government of the Interior.

116. The territory of the Republic is divided into provinces, cantons, and parishes. 117. In each province there will be a Governor, who will be the direct agent of the Executive Power; in each canton, a Political Chief; and in each parish, a Lieutenant. The law will fix their functions. 118. For the administration of sectional (small districts) interests there will be Municipalities. The law will determine their organization and functions in all concerning the education and instruction
of the inhabitants of the locality; the police; material improvements; the creation, collection, management, and employment of the funds; the support of public establishments; and other objects under their control. 119. No Municipal Decrees shall be put in force in so far as they are opposed to the Constitution and the law; and in case any question arises as to this between the Municipality and the political authority, it will be decided by the Supreme Court. 120. The Province of Oriente, the Archipelago of Galipagos, and, generally, any places which, owing to their isolation and distance, cannot be ruled by the ordinary laws, will be subject to special laws.

CHAPTER X.-Concerning the armed _Forces. 121. For the defence of the Republic and the preservation of internal order, there will be a permanent military force and national guards. 122. The military authority and jurisdiction will only be exercised over persons purely military on active service. 123. Neither the President of the Republic, nor any ether authority, can of his own authority recognize or appoint more Generals or Colonels than those who have been or may be approved in an express and individual manner by Congress or the Constituent Assembly. 124. Neither the President of the Republic, nor any other authority, may, without rendering himself liable, recognize or appoint any but the Chiefs and officers whose ranks have been conferred or approved, or may be conferred or approved, by a Constitutional Government. 125. Neither will Congress confer a rank superior to that of General, nor approve those of General and Colonel, without examination of their respective records of service. 126. Soldiers who are not on active service will not be entitled to pay. Orders for retirement, temporary and final, are therefore forbidden. Those soldiers are excepted who, being actually in possession of orders for retirement, temporary or final, are 70 years of age, or have had 20 years of active service. 127. The armed force is essentially obedient, not deliberative; but the military authorities may not execute orders attempted against the high national authorities, or such as are manifestly contrary to the Constitution. 128. No armed force will levy, requisition, nor demand assistance of any description, except of the civil authorities and as the law provides. 129. The armed force will be formed by voluntary enlistment, or by the proportional contingent which each province will provide, summoning to the service of arms those who, according to the law, are bound to render such service.
CHAPTER XI.-General Provisions.

130. The Treasury shall incur no liability for which Congress has not applied the corresponding sum, nor to a greater amount than that fixed. 131. No one individual or corporation may exercise at the same time political and military or judicial authority. 132. Every official on entering into his employment will take oath to sustain and defend the Constitution, and comply with the duties which that imposes on him. 133. No one will receive two salaries from the National Treasury. 134. The salary which is provided by law for the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and for the Judges of the Courts of Justice, and the travelling expenses and daily allowance of the Deputies, may not be increased or diminished, except with respect to those who may be elected for another Constitutional period. 135. When the Republic is menaced with foreign war no Equatorian can renounce his rights of citizenship, nor accept employment in another nation.
CHAPTER

XII.-Concerning the Reform of the Constitution.

136. At any time if an absolute majority of the Chambers considers the reform of the Constitution necessary, they will propose it to Congress, in order that it may be taken into consideration by the Legislature after the new elections provided by sections 57 and 58 have taken place; and if it is then accepted by an absolute majority of the Chambers, proceeding in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of Chapter VI, the reform will form part of the Constitution.
CHAPTER

XIII.-Temporary Provisions.

137. The Assembly will elect, by secret scrutiny and by an absolute majority of votes, the President and Vice-President of the Republic, Councillors of State, Ministers of the Supreme Court, of the Court of Exchequer, and of the Superior Courts. 138. In place of the two Senators and Deputies provided for in

Article 104, it will appoint three of its members as Councillors of State. 139. The President and Vice-President of the Republic, who are elected by virtue of the preceding Article, will end their term of office respectively on the 30th June, 1888, and the 80th Juno, 1886; and these officials, as well as the Judges of the Courts of Justice, and the Senators and Deputies, will be entitled to the salary fixed by the Law to be passed by the National Assembly. 140.* The first ordinary Congress will meet on the 10th June, 1885. Given at Quito, the capital of the Republic, February 4, 1884. FRANISCO J. SALAZAR, President of the Assembly. RAmoN BoRRERo, -Vice-President. [Here follow the signatures of 60 Deputies.] VICENTE PAz, Secretary. ArAinicio RIBADENEIRA, Secretary. Palace of Government at Quito, February 13, 1884. Let it be promulgated and circulated. Given and signed by my hand, sealed with the seal of the Republic, and countersigned by the Minister of State for the Home Department. (L.S.) JOS2 MARIA PLACIDO CAAMAIO. J. MODESTO ESPINOSA, Minister of the Interior.


