Title: Date Adopted: Date In Force: Date Published: Country: Copyright: Source: Translator:

The Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador: 11 August 1998 06/05/1998 08/10/1998 08/11/1998 Ecuador Oceana Publications, Inc. Embassy of the Republic of Ecuador/National Constituent Assembly Amended articles: Reka Koerner

THE CONSTITUENT NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ISSUES THE PRESENT POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR Table of Contents TITLE I: Of the Fundamental Principles TITLE II: Of Inhabitants Chapter 1: Of Ecuadorans Chapter 2: Of Foreigners TITLE III: Of Rights, Guarantees and Duties Chapter 1: General Principles Chapter 2: Of Civil Rights Chapter 3: Of Political Rights Chapter 4: Of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Chapter 5: Of Collective Rights Chapter 6: Of the Guarantee of Rights Chapter 7: Of Duties and Responsibilities TITLE IV: Of Democratic Participation Chapter 1: Of Elections Chapter 2: Of Other Forms of Democratic Participation

Chapter 3: Of Political Parties and Movements Chapter 4: Of the Statute of the Opposition TITLE V: Of the Institutions of the State and the Public Function Chapter 1: Of the Institutions of the State Chapter 2: Of the Public Function TITLE VI: Of the Legislative Function Chapter 1: Of the National Congress Chapter 2: Of Organization and Functioning Chapter 3: Of Deputies Chapter 4: Of the Legislation and Codification Commission Chapter 5: Of the laws Chapter 6: Of International Treaties and Agreements TITLE VII: Of the Executive Function Chapter 1: Of the President of the Republic Chapter 2: Of the Vice-President of the Republic Chapter 3: Of the Ministers of State Chapter 4: Of the State of Emergency Chapter 5: Of the Public Force TITLE VIII: Of the Judicial Function Chapter 1: Of General Principles Chapter 2: Of the Organization and Functioning Chapter 3: Of the National Counsel of the Judicature Chapter 4: Of the Penitentiary Regime

TITLE IX: Of Electoral Organization TITLE X: Of the Organisms of Control Chapter 1: Of the Office of the State Comptroller General Chapter 2: Of the Office of the State Attorney General Chapter 3: Of the Public Ministry Chapter 4: Of the Commission of Civic Control of Corruption Chapter 5: Of the Superintendencies TITLE XI: Of the Territorial Organization and Decentralization Chapter 1: Of the Administrative and Subordinate [Seccional] Regime Chapter 2: Of the Dependent Subordinate Regime Chapter 3: Of the Subordinate Autonomous Governments Chapter 4: Of the Special Regimes TITLE XII: Of the Economic System Chapter 1: General Principles Chapter 2: Of Economic and Social Planning Chapter 3: Of the Tax Regime Chapter 4: Of the Budget Chapter 5: Of the Central Bank Chapter 6: Of the Agricultural and Livestock Regime Chapter 7: Of Investment TITLE XIII: Of the Supremacy, Control and Reform of the Constitution Chapter 1: Of the Supremacy of the Constitution Chapter 2: Of the Constitutional Tribunal

Chapter 3: Of the Reform and the Interpretation of the Constitution

THE PEOPLE OF ECUADOR [The Republic of Ecuador], through the inspiration of its millennial history, in remembrance of its heroes and the work of its men and women who, through their sacrifices, forged the Native Land; true to the ideals of liberty, equality, justice, progress, solidarity, equality and peace[,] that have guided its steps since the dawn of its republican life, proclaims the will to strengthen the unity of the Ecuadoran nation by recognizing the diversity of its regions, people, ethnicities and cultures, invokes the protection of God, and[,] by exercising its sovereignty[,] establishes through this Constitution the fundamental norms that support the rights and liberties, organize the State and democratic institutions and impel the economic and social development, support rights and liberties, organize the State and democratic institutions and propel the social and economic development. TITLE I Of the Fundamental Principles Article 1. Ecuador is a social state of law, sovereignty, unitary, independent, democratic, multicultural and multiethnic. Its government is republican, presidential, elective, representative, responsible, alternating, participatory and administered through decentralization. Sovereignty resides in the people, whose will is the source of authority, who exercise it through the organs of public power and the democratic means foreseen in this Constitution. The State respects and stimulates the development of all the Ecuadoran languages. Spanish is the official language. Quichua, Shuar and the other ancestral languages are of official use for the indigenous peoples, under the terms fixed by the law. The Flag, the Coat of Arms and the Anthem established by law are symbols of the Native Land. Article 2. The Ecuadoran territory is inalienable and irreducible. It includes the territory of the Real de Audiencia de Quito with modifications introduced by valid treaties, adjacent islands,

the Archipelago of Galapagos, the territorial ocean, the subsoil and the respective airspace [suprayacente]. The capital is Quito. Article 3. The primary duties of the State are: 1. To strengthen national unity in its diversity. 2. To ensure the application of human rights, the fundamental liberties of men and women, and social security. 3. To defend the natural and cultural patrimony of the country and protect the environment. 4. To preserve the sustainable growth of the economy, and equitable and balanced development for the collective benefit. 5. To eradicate poverty and promote the economic, social and cultural progress of its inhabitants. 6. To guarantee the functioning of the democratic system and a public administration free from corruption. Article 4. Ecuador, in its relationship with the international community: 1. Proclaims peace [and] cooperation as the system of coexistence and juridical equality of the States. 2. Condemns the use or threat of force as a means of solving conflicts and repudiates violent overthrow [despojo bélico] as a source of law. 3. Declares international law as the norm for the conduct of States in their reciprocal relationships and promotes the resolution of controversies through juridical and peaceful methods. 4. Propitiates the development of the international community, [and] the establishment and the strengthening of its organisms. 5. Supports especially the integration of the Andian and Latin American [regions].

6. Rejects all forms of colonialism, neocolonialism, discrimination or segregation, [and] recognizes the right of peoples to self determination and to liberate themselves from oppressive systems. Article 5. Ecuador may form with one or more States, associations for the promotion and defense of national and community interests. TITLE II Of Inhabitants Chapter 1 Of Ecuadorans Article 6. Ecuadorans are such by birth or by naturalization. All Ecuadorans are citizens[,] and, as such, enjoy the rights established in this Constitution, that shall be exercised in the cases and with the requirements determined by the law. Article 7. [The following] are Ecuadorans by birth: 1. Those born in Ecuador. 2. Those born outside of Ecuador. 2.1. Those whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth, [and who] are employed in the service of Ecuador or of an international organization, or who are temporarily absent from the country for any reason, unless they express their will to the contrary; 2.2. Those whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth, who reside in Ecuador and express the will to be Ecuadoran; and, 2.3. Those whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth, and who subject to the law, express the will to be Ecuadorans between the ages of 18 and 21, although they live outside of Ecuador. Article 8. The following are Ecuadorans by naturalization:

1. Those who obtain Ecuadoran nationality by rendering relevant services to the country; 2. Those who obtain a certificate of naturalization; 3. Those who, while they are minors, are adopted by an Ecuadoran in the capacity of children. They retain their Ecuadoran nationality if they do not express a contrary desire when they come of age; 4. Those who are born in the exterior to foreign parents who become naturalized in Ecuador when they are minors. Their Ecuadoran nationality will be retained if they do not expressly renounce it on becoming 18 years of age; and, 5. The inhabitants of foreign territories in the border regions, that can prove that they belong to the same Ecuadoran ancestral people, subject to international conventions and treaties, and that manifest their express will to become Ecuadorans. Article 9. Citizenship is not lost through marriage or its dissolution. Article 10. Those that acquire Ecuadoran nationality in conformance with the principle of reciprocity, treaties entered into [celebrado] [by Ecuador] and upon expressing the will to acquire it, may maintain their nationality of origin. Article 11. Those who possessed Ecuadoran nationality when this Constitution was issued shall continue to enjoy it. Those Ecuadorans by birth that are naturalized or have been naturalized in another country may maintain their Ecuadoran nationality. The State shall endeavor to protect Ecuadorans who are outside of Ecuador. Article 12. Ecuadoran nationality is lost through the cancellation of the naturalization letter and may be recuperated in conformity with the law. Chapter 2 Of Foreigners Article 13.

Foreigners have the same rights as Ecuadorans, with the limitations established by this Constitution and the law. Article 14. The waiver of all rights to diplomatic recourse is implicit in contracts made by the institutions of the State with foreign natural or juridical persons. If such contracts are made in Ecuadoran territory, one cannot summon their submission to a foreign jurisdiction, except in the case of international treaties. Article 15. Foreign natural or juridical persons may not acquire title for the economic exploitation of lands or concessions in zones of national security. TITLE III Of Rights, Guarantees and Duties Chapter 1 General Principles Article 16. The highest duty of the State consists of respecting and enforcing respect for the human rights guaranteed by this Constitution Article 17. The State guarantees to all its inhabitants, without any discrimination, the free and efficient exercise and enjoyment of the human rights established by this Constitution and in the declarations, pacts, agreements and other international instruments in force. It shall adopt measures for the effective enjoyment of these rights through permanent and periodic plans and programs. Article 18. The rights and guarantees determined by this Constitution and by the international instruments in force are directly and immediately applicable before any judge, tribunal or authority. The interpretation of constitutional rights and guarantees that most favors their effective enforcement [vigencia] shall be used. No authority may demand conditions or requirements that are not established in the Constitution or in the law for the exercise of these rights. The laws may not restrict the exercise of the constitutional rights and guarantees.

Article 19. The rights and guarantees included in this Constitution and in international instruments do not exclude others derived from the nature of the person and that are necessary for their full moral and material development. Article 20. The institutions of the State [and] the persons or entities to which they delegate and concede powers [delegatarios y concesionarios] are required to indemnify private parties for damages incurred as a consequence of their deficient provision of public services or the acts of their functionaries and employees while carrying out their positions. The aforementioned institutions shall have the right to recovery [repetición] and shall make effective the responsibility of the functionaries or employees who, through judicially declared fraud [dolo] or grave fault [culpa grave] , caused the injury. Competent judges shall establish the penal responsibility of these functionaries and employees. Article 21. When a guilty sentence is reformed or revoked through an appeal [recurso de revisión] , the person who suffered punishment as a result of that sentence, shall be rehabilitated and indemnified by the State in accordance with the law. Article 22. The State shall be civilly responsible for cases of judicial error that, because of the inadequate administration of justice, produce the imprisonment of an innocent [person] or his arbitrary detention, and for presumed violations of the norms established by Art. 24. The State shall have the right of recovery [repetición] against the responsible judge or functionary. Chapter 2 Of Civil Rights Article 23. Without prejudice to other rights established in this Constitution and in international instruments in force, the State recognizes and guarantees the following to persons: 1. Inviolability of life. There is no death penalty. 2. Personal integrity. The [following] are prohibited[:] All cruel penalties [and] tortures; all procedures that are inhuman [or] degrading or that include physical, psychological, [or]

sexual violence or moral coercion[;] and the undue application and use of genetic human material. The State shall adopt the necessary measures to prevent, eliminate and punish, especially, violence against children, adolescents, women and senior citizens [personas de la tercera edad]. Lawsuits and punishments for genocide, torture, forced disappearance of persons, kidnapping and homicide for political reasons or reasons of conscience shall be imprescriptible. These crimes shall not be susceptible to pardon or amnesty. In these cases, obedience to the orders of superiors shall not exempt [the subordinate] from responsibility. 3. Equality before the law. All persons are considered equal and enjoy the same rights, liberties and opportunities, without discrimination for reasons of birth, age, sex, ethnicity, color, social origin, language[,] political affiliation, economic position, sexual orientation[;] state of health, disability, or difference of any other nature. 4. Liberty. All persons are born free. Slavery and all forms of servitude and trafficking in human beings are prohibited. No person may be imprisoned for debts, costs, taxes, fines or other obligations, except in instances of compulsory family support [pensiones alimenticias]. No one can be obligated to do something prohibited or to stop doing something that is not prohibited by the law. 5. The right to the free development of one's personality, without limitations beyond those imposed by the judicial order and the rights of others. 6. The right to live in a healthy environment, ecologically balanced and free from pollution. The law shall establish restrictions to the exercise of certain rights and liberties to protect the environment. 7. The right to possess public and private goods and services of optimal quality; to choose them freely, as well as receive adequate and true information on their contents and characteristics. 8. The right to honor, a good reputation and personal and family privacy. The law shall protect the name, image and voice of the person. 9. The right to freedom of opinion and to expression of thought in all its forms, through whatever means of communication, without prejudice to the responsibilities foreseen in the law. The person affected by inaccurate assertions or [assertions] without proof, or whose honor is injured by unpaid news [informaciones] or publications issued by the press or through other means of social communication, shall have the right to have these

obligatorily make the corresponding rectification, immediately and free of charge, in the same space or hour of the news or publication being rectified. 10. The right to communicate and to develop means of social communication and to access, through equal conditions, to radio and television frequencies. 11. Liberty of conscience; liberty of religion, expressed in an individual or collective manner in public or private. Persons may freely practice the faith that they profess, with the only limitations being those prescribed by the law to protect and [create] respect for diversity, plurality, security and the rights of others. 12. Inviolability of the home. No one may enter into it nor conduct a search or examination therein without the authorization of the person that inhabits it or without a court order, in the instances and the manner prescribed by law. 13. The inviolability and secrecy of correspondence. It may only be retained, opened and examined in the cases prescribed by the law. Secrets not related to the matter motivating the examination shall be respected. This same principle shall be observed with respect to any other type or form of communication. 14. The right to travel freely through the national territory and to choose one's residence. Ecuadorans shall enjoy the liberty to enter and to leave Ecuador. As regards foreigners, the provisions of the law shall be followed. A prohibition on leaving the country can only be ordered by a competent judge, in accordance with the law. 15. The right to address complaints and petitions to the authorities, but in no case in the name of the people; and to receive the pertinent attention or answers within a reasonable period. 16. The liberty of business [empresa], as subject to the law. 17. Liberty of work. No person may be obligated to perform free or forced labor. 18. Liberty of contract, as subject to the law. 19. Liberty of association and of assembly for peaceful purposes. 20. The right to a quality of life that assures health, food and nutrition, potable water, environmental conditions[,] education, work, employment, recreation, housing, clothing and other necessary social services. 21. The right to keep one's political and religious convictions secret. No one may be required to declare them. In no case may personal information about third persons' religious beliefs and political affiliations, or data about their health and sexual life, be used, except to satisfy a need for medical attention.

22. The right to participate in the cultural life of the community. 23. The right to identity, in accordance with the law. 24. The right to make free and responsible decisions regarding one's sexual life. 25. Juridical security. 26. The right to due process and justice without delay. Article 24. The following basic guarantees, without impairing others established in the Constitution, international instruments and laws or jurisprudence, must be observed to ensure due process: 1. No one may be punished for an act or omission that[,] at the time of perpetration[,] was not classified as a penal or administrative infraction or infraction of some other nature, nor can a punishment be applied if it is not foreseen in the Constitution or in the law. Also[,] one may not punish a person in manner that is not in conformance with the preexisting laws, [or that does not] observe the proper transactional steps [trámite] of each procedure. 2. In case of a conflict between two laws that contain punishments, the less rigorous shall be applied, even if its promulgation was after the infraction; and[,] in case of doubt, the norm that contains punishments shall be applied in the manner most favorable to the accused. 3. The laws establish the due proportionality between infractions and punishments. They also determine sanctions alternative to the punishment of deprivation of liberty, in conformity with the nature of each case, the personality of the transgressor[,] and the social reincorporation of the person sentenced. 4. Upon being detained[,] every person has the right to know in a clear manner the reasons for their detention, the identity of the authority that ordered it, the [identity] of the agents that carried it out and those responsible for the respective interrogation. [Every person] shall also be informed of the right to remain silent, to solicit the presence of a lawyer and to communicate with a relative or any person he indicates. The person who detains a person, with or without a written judicial order, and does not immediately deliver the [detainee] to the competent authority shall be punished. 5. No person may be interrogated, not even for purposes of investigation, by the Public Ministry, by a police authority or by any other [authority], without the assistance of a private defense lawyer or a defense lawyer appointed by the State if the interested party

cannot designate his own defender. Any judicial, pretrial or administrative proceeding that does not comply with this principle shall lack probative character. 6. No one may be deprived of his liberty without a written order by a competent judge, in the cases, for the time and with the formalities prescribed by the law, except in instances of flagrante delicto, in which case he may also not be detained without a judicial order [fórmula de juicio] for more than 24 hours. Disciplinary arrests foreseen in the law within the organisms of the public force are excepted. No one may be held without means of communication [incomunicado] . 7. Every person is presumed innocent as long as his culpability is not declared through a judgment that may not be appealed to a higher court [sentencia ejecutoriada]. 8. Preventative imprisonment may not exceed six months in trials of crimes punished through imprisonment [prisión] , or a year in trials of crimes punished through internment [reclusión]. If these time periods are exceeded, the order of preventative imprisonment will become ineffective, under the responsibility of the judge accountable for the trial. Once the order for the stay of proceedings or the absolute sentence has been issued, in any case, and without any exceptions, the detainee shall immediately recover his liberty, without prejudice to any pending opinion or appeal. 9. No one may be compelled to in a criminal action to declare against a spouse or relative within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity, nor compelled to make a declaration against himself, in matters that may occasion criminal responsibility. Voluntary declarations of those who were victims of the crime or those of their relatives, independent of their degree of relationship, shall be admissible. In addition, these persons may establish and pursue the corresponding criminal action. 10. No one may be deprived of the right to a defense in no state or degree of the respective procedure. The State shall establish public defenders for service to the indigenous communities, workers, women and abandoned minors or victims of intrafamily or sexual violence, and every person who does not have [sufficient] economic resources. 11. No person may be taken from his competent judge, nor judged by tribunals of exception or special commissions set up for the purpose. 12. Every person has the right to be timely and duly informed, in his native language, of the actions initiated against him. 13. Decisions of public powers that affect persons must be reasoned. Such reason shall not exist if the decision does not enunciate the legal norms or principles on which it is based, and if it does not explain the pertinence of their application to the factual

antecedents. Upon deciding a challenge to a punishment, one may not make the situation of the appellant worse. 14. Evidence obtained or collected [actuadas] in violation of the Constitution or the law does not have any validity. 15. In any type of proceeding, the witnesses and experts are required to appear before the judge and respond to the respective interrogatories, and the parties have the right to access the documents related to the said proceeding. 16. No one may be tried more than once for the same case. 17. Every person has the right to access to the judicial organs and to obtain the effective, impartial and expedited protection of their rights and interests, without in any case remaining defenseless. Noncompliance with judicial resolutions shall be punished by the law. Article 25. In no case may the extradition of an Ecuadoran be granted. Their judgment is subject to the laws of Ecuador. Chapter 3 Of Political Rights Article 26. Ecuadoran citizens have the right to elect and to be elected, to present bills to the National Congress, to be consulted in the situations provided for by the Constitution, to supervise the acts of the organs of public power, to revoke the mandate they confer to popularly elected dignitaries, and to carry out positions and public duties. These rights shall be exercised in the instances and subject to the requirements determined by the Constitution and the law. Foreigners do not enjoy these rights. Article 27. The popular vote is universal, equal, direct and secret; it is compulsory for those who can read and write, and optional for illiterates and for those who are more than 75 years old. Ecuadorans who have reached their eighteenth birthday and are in possession of their political rights have the right to vote. Members of the Public Force [Fuerza Pública] in active service may not make use of this right.

Ecuadorans domiciled in the exterior may elect the President and Vice-President of the Republic, in the place of their registry or census location [empadronamiento] . The law shall regulate the exercise of this right. Article 28. The enjoyment of political rights shall be suspended for the following reasons: 1. Judicial interdiction, while this status exists, except in the case of insolvency or bankruptcy that has not been declared fraudulent. 2. A sentence that condemns the person to deprivation of their liberty, while this status exists, except in cases of contravention. 3. In the other cases determined by the law. Article 29. Ecuadorans persecuted for political crimes shall have the right to solicit asylum and exercise that right in conformity with the law and international agreements. Ecuador recognizes foreigners' right to asylum. Chapter 4 Of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights First Section Of Property Article 30. Ownership of property, in whatever form, and while it fulfills its social function, constitutes a right recognized and guaranteed by the State for the organization of the economy. This should procure the increase and the redistribution of income, and allow the entire population to have access to the benefits of wealth and development. Intellectual property is recognized and guaranteed, in the terms foreseen by the law and in conformity with the agreements and treaties in force. Article 31. The State shall promote property ownership and management by workers in enterprises by means of transferring shares or equity [participaciones] in their favor. The percentage of profits of enterprises that belong to workers shall be paid in cash or in shares or in

equity, in accordance with the law. This shall establish the necessary protections to ensure that the profits permanently benefit the worker and his family. Article 32. To make the right to housing and to the conservation of the environment effective, municipalities may expropriate, reserve and control areas for future development, in accordance with the law. Article 33. For the purposes of social order determined by the law, State institutions, through the procedure and in the time periods indicated by the procedural norms, may expropriate, with previous just valuation, payment and compensation, the property belonging to the private sector. All confiscation is prohibited. Article 34. The State guarantees equality of rights and opportunities for women and men in access to production resources and in economic decision making in the administration of the conjugal society [sociedad conyugal] and property. Second Section Of Work Article 35. Work is a social right and duty. It enjoys the protection of the State, which assures to the worker respect for his dignity, a decent existence, and fair remuneration that covers his essential needs and those of his family. It is regulated by the following fundamental norms: 1. Labor legislation and its application are subject to the principles of social law; 2. The State shall promote the elimination of unemployment and underemployment; 3. The State guarantees the intangibility of the recognized rights of workers and shall adopt measures to extend and improve them; 4. The rights of workers are unrenounceable. Any stipulation implying their renunciation, diminution or alteration is null and void. Actions taken to reclaim them are acquired by prescription in the time specified by the law, measured from the termination of the work relationship.

5. A transaction in labor matters shall be valid, provided it does not imply the renunciation of rights and it is made before an administrative authority or competent judge; 6. In case of doubt about the scope of legal, regulatory or contractual provisions of labor matters, they will be applied in the manner most favorable to the workers; 7. Payment for work is unattachable, except for the payment of family support allowances [pensiones alimenticias]. All that is owed by the employer for work constitutes privileged first-class credit, with preferences even over mortgage payments. 8. Workers shall share in the net profits [utilidades liquidas] of the enterprise in accordance with the law; 9. The right of organization of workers and employers and their free development without prior authorization, in conformance with the law, is guaranteed. In the entities of the State, the labor sector shall be represented by one sole organization for all purposes of labor relations. The relations of the organisms included in numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4, of Article 118 and the juridical persons created by the law for the exercise of State power with their servants shall be subject to the laws that regulate the public administration, except those of workers which shall be governed by the labor law. When the institutions of the State exercise activities that they cannot delegate to the private sector, [activities] that they may not even assume [ni éstos puedan asumir], the relationship with their servants shall be regulated by the administrative law, with the exception of the relationship with workers that are protected [amparados] by the labor law. For activities exercised by the institutions of the State and that can be assumed by the private sector through total or partial delegation, relations with their workers shall be regulated through the labor law, with exception of positions of leadership [dirección] , management, representation, advisor, head of department or the equivalent, which shall be subject to the administrative law; 10. The right of workers to strike in their respective businesses and the right of employers to shut down is recognized and guaranteed, in accordance with the law. Paralyzation is prohibited, to any title, of the public services, especially health, education, justice and social security; electrical energy, potable water and sewage; indictment, transportation and distribution of combustibles; public transportation, telecommunications. The law shall establish the pertinent punishments. 11. Without prejudice to the principal responsibility of the direct obligor and taking exception to the right to repetition, the person in whose benefit work is performed or

services are provided is solely responsible for compliance with the labor obligations, even if the labor contract has been made through an intermediary; 12. Collective contracts are especially guaranteed; consequently, the collective pact legally formed, cannot be unilaterally modified, repudiated or impaired; 13. Collective labor disputes shall be submitted to reconciliation and arbitration tribunals, composed of employers and workers, presided over by a labor functionary. These tribunals are the only ones competent to determine, process and settle labor disputes; and, 14. For payment of indemnity to which a worker is entitled, remuneration is understood as everything he receives in currency, in services, or in kind, including that received for special and supplementary work, piece work, commissions, profit sharing [participación en beneficios], and any other normal payment in the industry or service. The legal percentage of profits, travel allowances, or occasional subsidies, the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth remunerations, wage compensation, supplementary bonuses, and social service benefits are excepted. Article 36. The State shall propitiate the incorporation of women into the remunerated workforce, with the same rights and opportunities, guaranteeing identical remuneration for work of equal value. It shall particularly seek to ensure respect for their labor and reproductive rights for the improvement of conditions of work and access to the systems of social security, especially in the case of expectant mothers and during the period of lactation, working women, women in the informal sector, women in the handcraft sector, heads of households and widows. Every type of labor discrimination against women is prohibited. The work of the spouse or partner in the household shall be taken into consideration to compensate him or her equally in situations in which he or she finds herself at an economic disadvantage. Unpaid domestic work is recognized as productive labor. Third Section Of the Family Article 37. The State recognizes and protects the family as the fundamental cell of society and guarantees it conditions that favor the integral attainment of its ends. These [conditions] consist of legal or factual bonds and are based on the equality of its members' rights and opportunities.

It protects marriage, maternity and family property. It equally supports women who are heads of households. Marriage is based on the free consent of the contracting parties and on the equality of rights, obligations and legal capacity of the spouses. Article 38. A stable and monogamous union of a man and a woman, free of matrimonial ties with another person, that in fact forms a household for a period of time, and under the conditions and circumstances prescribed by the law, shall create the same rights and obligations as families created through matrimony, including those relating to the legal presumption of paternity, and the conjugal society. Article 39. Responsible maternity and paternity is advocated. The State shall guarantee the right of persons to decide on the number of children they want to conceive, adopt, maintain and educate. It is the obligation of the State to inform, educate and provide means that contribute to the exercise of this right. The patrimony of the family is recognized as unattachable [inembargable] in the quantity and under the conditions established by the law, and with the foregoing limitations. The right to make a will and to inherit is guaranteed. Article 40. The State protects mothers and fathers who are heads of their families, in the exercise of their obligations. It shall promote the corresponding paternal and maternal responsibility and shall oversee the fulfillment of the reciprocal obligations and rights among parents and children. Children have the same rights, without considering their derivation [filiación] or adoption. In registering births no statement shall be required regarding the nature of the parental relationship [filiación] , and the document of identity shall not make reference to it. Article 41. The State shall form and execute policies to achieve equality of opportunity among women and men through a specialized organism that shall function in the manner determined by law, it shall incorporate a gender focus in its plans and programs, and shall offer technical assistance for its obligatory application in the public sector. Fourth Section Of Health

Article 42. The State guarantees the right to health, its promotion and protection, through the development of food security, the provision of potable water and basic sanitation, the promotion of a healthy family, work and community environment, and the possibility of permanent and uninterrupted access to health services, in conformity with the principles of equity, universality, solidarity, quality and efficiency. Article 43. Public health programs and initiatives shall be free of charge for everyone. The public services for medical attention, shall be [free of charge] for those persons that need it. Emergency attention shall not be denied in public or private establishments for any reason. The State shall promote a culture of health and life, with emphasis on the food and nutritional education of mothers and children, and sexual and reproductive health [education], through the participation of society and the collaboration of the means of social communication. [The State] shall adopt programs that tend to eliminate alcoholism and other addictions. Article 44. The State shall create a national health policy and shall oversee its application; it shall control the functioning of the entities of the sector; it shall recognize, respect and promote the development of traditional and alternative medicines, the use of which shall be regulated by law[;] and it shall impulse scientific-technological advances in the area of health, subject to bioethical principles. Article 45. The State shall organize a national health system, which shall be composed of the public, autonomous, private and community entities of the sector. It shall function in a decentralized, dispersed and participatory manner. Article 46. The financing of the public entities of the national health system shall derive from obligatory, sufficient and timely contributions from the General Budget of the State, and persons who use its services and who have the means to contribute economically and other sources indicated by law. The fiscal allotment for public health shall increase annually in exact proportion to the growth in the common total revenue of the budget of the central government. There may not be budgetary reductions in this area.

Fifth Section Of Vulnerable Groups Article 47. In the political and private arena[,] children, adolescents, pregnant women, persons with a disability, those who suffer from highly complex catastrophic diseases and senior citizens shall receive prioritary, preferential and specialized attention. In the same manner, one shall attend to persons in situations of risk and victims of domestic violence, child abuse, [and] natural or human [antropogénicos] disasters. Article 48. It shall be the obligation of the State, society and the family to promote with maximum priority the integral development of children and adolescents and to assure the full exercise of their rights. In all cases the principle of the best interests of children shall be applied, and their rights shall prevail over those of all others. Article 49. Children and adolescents have all the shared rights of human beings, in addition to those [rights] specific to their age. The State shall assure and guarantee their right to life from conception; to physical and psychological integrity; to their identity, name and citizenship; to integral health and nutrition; to education and culture, to sports and recreation; to social security, to have a family and enjoy family and community companionship; to social participation, to respect of their liberty and dignity, and to be consulted in matters that affect them. The State guarantees their liberty of expression and association, [and] the free functioning of the student councils and other forms of assembly, in conformity with the law. Article 50. The State shall adopt measures that assure that children and adolescents have the following guarantees: 1. Prioritary attention to children less than six years old that guarantees their nutrition, health, education and daily care. 2. Special protection at work, and against economic exploitation through dangerous work conditions that prejudice their education or are noxious to their health or personal development. 3. Preferential attention for the full social integration of those who have a disability.

4. Protection against trafficking in minors, pornography, prostitution, sexual exploitation, use of narcotics, psychotropic substances and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 5. Prevention and actions against abuse, neglect, discrimination and violence. 6. Prioritary attention in instances of disasters and armed conflicts. 7. Protection against the influence of harmful programs or messages that are disseminated through any means of communication, and [programs or messages that] promote violence, racial or gender discrimination, or the adoption of false values. Article 51. Minors of less than 18 years are subject to the legislation on minors and the administration of specialized justice in the Judicial Function. Children and adolescents have the right to respect for their constitutional guarantees. Article 52. The State shall organize a national decentralized system of integral protection of childhood and adolescence, charged with assuring the exercise and guarantee of their rights. Its governing organ on the national level shall equally [paritariamente] consist of the State and civil society and shall be empowered to define policies. Public and private entities shall form part of this system. Division governments shall create local policies and assign preferential resources for services and programs oriented toward children and adolescents. Article 53. The State guarantees the prevention of disabilities and the integral attention and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities, especially in cases of indigency. Together with society and the family, it will assume responsibility for their social integration and preparation for opportunities. The State shall establish measures that guarantee to persons with a disability, the use of property and services, especially in the area of health, education, training, work and recreational opportunities; and measures that eliminate communication, urban, architectural, and access to transportation barriers, that make their movement difficult. Municipalities have the obligation to adopt these measures in the area of their powers and territorial demarcations [circunscripciones] . Persons with disabilities shall have preferential treatment in obtaining loans, exemptions and tax discounts, in conformity with the law.

The right of persons with disabilities to communicate through alternative means, such as Ecuadoran sign language for the deaf, lip reading [oralismo], the Braille system and others, is recognized. Article 54. The State guarantees to senior citizens and to retired persons the right to special assistance that ensures a dignified living standard, integral health services free of charge and preferential tax and services treatment. The State, society and the family shall provide senior citizens and other vulnerable groups with adequate economic and psychological assistance to guarantee their physical and mental stability. The law shall regulate the application and defense of these rights and guarantees. Sixth Section Of Social Security Article 55. Social security is a duty of the State and a right of all of its inhabitants that cannot be renounced. It shall be provided with the participation of the public and private sectors, in conformity with the law. Article 56. The national system of social security is established. Social security is governed by the principles of solidarity, obligatory participation, universality, equity, efficiency, subsidies [subsidiaridad] and sufficiency, to address individual and collective needs in the promotion of the common good. Article 57. Obligatory social security covers the contingencies of sickness, maternity, work risks, dismissal, old age, invalidity, disability and death. The protections of the obligatory general social security shall be progressively extended to the entire rural and urban population, in relation to employment [dependencia laboral] or without that relation, in conformity to that permitted by the general conditions of the system. Obligatory social security is a right that cannot be renounced and is imprescriptible for workers and their families. Article 58.

The provision of obligatory social security is the responsibility of the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security, an autonomous entity directed by a technical and administrative organ, integrated in thirds and in equal proportion [paritariamente] by those insured, employers and the State, who shall be designated in accordance with the law. Its organization and management is governed by the criteria of efficiency, decentralization and dispersal, and its services shall be timely, sufficient and of [high] quality. It may create and promote the formation of administrative resource institutions to strengthen the current system and improve the health services of affiliates and their families. The public force may have social security entities. Article 59. The payments and contributions of the State for the obligatory general social security must be recorded annually in the general budget of the State, and shall be timely and obligatorily transferred through the Central Bank of Ecuador. Payments of social security in money are not susceptible to cessation, seizure or retention, except in those cases of support owed by law or obligations entered into in favor of the insuring institution and shall be exempt from the payment of taxes. No new services or improvement of existing [services] for which the obligatory general social security is responsible may be implemented, if they are not duly financed, according to actuarial studies. The funds and reserves of the social security [system] shall be exclusive and distinct from those of the State, and will serve to adequately comply with the goals of its creation and function. No institution of the State may intervene in its funds and reserves nor affect its patrimony. The Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security's investment of resources derived from the obligatory social security shall be completed through the financial market, subject to the principles of efficiency, security and profitability, and it shall be made through a technical commission appointed by the technical and administrative organism of the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security. The competence of its members shall be approved by the superintendency which is responsible for the activities of the social security, and which also regulates and controls the quality of these investments. Pensions for retirement must be adjusted annually, according to the resources of the respective fund, which shall be capitalized to guarantee a pension that covers the basic necessities of sustenance and cost of living.

Article 60. Social security for peasants [campesinos] shall consist of a special regime of the obligatory social security to protect the rural population and the artisanal fisherman of the country. It shall be financed with the solidarity contributions of the insureds and employers of the national system of social security, the differentiated contributions of the protected families and the fiscal allotments that guarantee its strength and development. It shall offer health services and protection against the contingencies of invalidity, disability, old age and death. The private and public social securities that form part of the national system of social security shall obligatorily contribute to the financing of the peasant social security through the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security, in conformity with that determined by the law. Article 61. Complementary insurance shall be designed to protect against contingencies of social security not covered by the obligatory social security or to improve on its services, and shall be of an optional character. It shall be financed through the contributions of the insureds, and employers may make voluntary contributions. It shall be administered by public, private or mixed entities regulated by the law. Seventh Section Of Culture Article 62. Culture is the patrimony of the people and constitutes an essential element of their identity. The State shall promote and stimulate culture, creation, artistic development and scientific research. It shall establish permanent policies for the conservation, restoration, protection and respect for the tangible and intangible cultural patrimony, artistic riches, history, linguistics and archeology of the nation, as well as the collection of values and diverse declarations that configure the national, multicultural and multiethnic identity. The State shall support multiculturalness, [this concept] shall provide inspiration for its policies and shall cause its institutions to be formed according to the principles of equity and equality of cultures. Article 63. The State shall guarantee the exercise and participation of persons, in equality of conditions and opportunities, in property[,] services and manifestations of culture, and shall adopt measures so that society, the educational system, private business and the media contribute to creativity and cultural activities in their diverse manifestations.

Intellectuals and artists shall participate, through their organizations, in the creation of cultural policies. Article 64. The property of the State that forms part of the cultural patrimony cannot be alienated, attached, or prescribed. Private property that forms part of the cultural patrimony is subject to that provided in the law. Article 65. The State recognizes the economic and administrative autonomy of the Ecuadoran House of Culture, [and it] is regulated by its special law, organic statute and regulation. Eighth Section Of Education Article 66. Education is a right of persons that cannot be renounced, it is an inexcusable duty of the State, society and the family; an area of priority in public investment, a requirement of national development and a guarantee of social equity. The State has the responsibility of defining and executing policies that allow these goals to be reached. Education, inspired by ethical, popular, democratic, humanistic and scientific principles, shall promote respect for human rights, develop critical thinking, foment civism; provide skills for efficiency in work and production; stimulate creativity and the full development of the personality and the special abilities of each person; [and] provide the impetus for multiculturalness, solidarity and peace. Education prepares citizens for work and to produce knowledge. In all levels of the educational system students will be provided with extracurricular activities that stimulate the exercise and the production of artisanry, occupations and trades. The State guarantees education for persons with disabilities. Article 67. Public education shall be secular in all of its levels; obligatory until the basic level, and free of charge until high school [bachillerato] or its equivalent. In public establishments services of a social character shall be offered without cost to those who need them. Students in a situation of extreme poverty shall receive specific subsidies. The State guarantees liberty of instruction and learning [cátedra]; it rejects all types of discrimination; it recognizes the right of parents to choose an education in agreement

with their principles and beliefs for their children; it prohibits propaganda and political proselytism on school grounds; it promotes equality of gender, and promotes coeducation. The State shall create permanent education plans and programs to eradicate illiteracy and on a priority basis strengthen education in rural and border zones. Private education is guaranteed. Article 68. The national system of education shall include teaching programs in conformity with the diversity of the country. It shall incorporate in its strategic planning administrative, financial and pedagogical decentralization and dispersal. Parents, the community, teachers and students shall participate in the development of the educational processes. Article 69. The State guarantees an intercultural and bilingual educational system[,] in which the principal language of the respective culture is used; and Spanish as the language of intercultural relations. Article 70. The law shall establish organs and procedures so that the national educational system can periodically report to society on the quality of its teaching and its relationship with the requirements of national development. Article 71. In the general budget of the State[,] not less than thirty percent of the normal total revenue of the central government will be assigned to education and the eradication of illiteracy. Commissioned [fiscomisional], private-free of charge, special and artisanal education, duly qualified under the terms and conditions indicated by the law, shall receive support from the State. The organisms of the autonomous departmental regime [régimen seccional autonómo] may collaborate with public and private entities with the same goals, without prejudice to the obligations they assume in the process of decentralization. Article 72. Natural and juridical persons may make economic contributions to finance the infrastructure, furniture and didactic materials of the education sector, which shall be deductible from the payment of obligatory taxes, with the conditions indicated by the law. Article 73.

The law shall regulate the teaching career and salary policies, guaranteeing the stability, training, promotion and just remuneration of educators at all levels and modalities, based on the evaluation of their performance. Article 74. Higher education shall be made up of universities, polytechnical schools and superior technical and technological institutions. It shall be planned, regulated and coordinated by the National Council on Higher Education, whose integration, powers and obligations shall be provided in the law. There shall exist an interaction among institutions of higher education, society and the State which allows them to contribute[,] in an effective and up to date manner[,] to improving the production of goods and services and the sustainable development of the country, in harmony with national, regional and local plans. Article 75. The principal functions of the universities and polytechnical schools are scientific research, professional and technical development, creation and development of the national culture and its dissemination to social sectors, as well as the study and proposal of solutions to the problems of the country, with the goal of creating a new and more just Ecuadoran society, with specific methods and orientations for the fulfillment of these goals. The private and public universities and polytechnical schools shall be nonprofit autonomous juridical persons governed by the law and by its statutes, approved by the National Council of Higher Education. As a consequence of their autonomy, the Executive Function or its organs, authorities or functionaries, cannot completely or partially close or reorganize them, deprive them of their income or budgetary allotments or unjustifiably slow their transfer. Their campuses are inviolable. They may not be forcibly entered except in those cases and under those terms in which the domicile of a person may be entered. The surveillance and maintenance of internal order shall be of the competence and responsibility of their authorities. When they need the back up of the public force, the highest university or polytechnical authority shall solicit the pertinent assistance. Article 76. Universities and polytechnical schools shall be created by the National Congress through the law, following the favorable and obligatory report of the National Council of Higher Education, which shall authorize the functioning of those superior technical and technological institutions, in accordance with the law.

Article 77. The State shall guarantee equal opportunity to access higher education. No person may be deprived of access to it due to economic reasons; to that effect, the entities of higher education shall establish loan and scholarship programs. Those who satisfy the requirements established by the obligatory national system of admission and balancing can attend the universities and polytechnical schools. Article 78. To assure completion of the goals and functions of the state institutions of higher education, the State guarantees their financing and shall increase their patrimony. For their part, the universities and polytechnical schools shall create complementary sources of income and systems of contribution. Without prejudice to other sources of financing of public and private origin or achieved through means of self-management, the revenues currently assigned to universities and polytechnical schools in the general budget of the State shall be increased annually and in an obligatory manner, in accordance with the growth of the normal total revenue of the central government. Article 79. To assure the objectives of quality, institutions of higher education are required to provide a public accounting, for which an autonomous system of evaluation and accreditation shall be established, that will function in an independent manner in cooperation and in coordination with he National Council of Higher Education. For this same goal, in the ordering of university and polytechnical teaching the merits, training and specialization of postgraduate teachers shall be especially encouraged. Ninth Section Of Science and Technology Article 80. The State shall foment science and technology, especially at all educational levels, directed toward increasing productivity, competitiveness, the sustainable management of natural resources, and to satisfy the basic needs of the population. It shall guarantee the liberty of scientific and technological activities and the legal protection of their results, as well as the collective ancestral knowledge,

Scientific and technological research shall be completed in universities, polytechnical schools, superior technical and technological institutes and centers of scientific investigation, in coordination with the productive sectors when it is relevant, and with the public organism established by law, which shall also be regulated by the statute on the scientific researcher. Tenth Section Of Communication Article 81. The State guarantees the right of access to sources of information; to seek, receive, know and disseminate objective, true, plural, and timely information without previous censure, on occurrences of general interest that preserve the values of the community, especially by journalists and social communicators. Likewise, [the State] guarantees the clause of conscience [cláusula de conciencia] and the right to the professional secrets of journalists and social communicators or those who emit formal opinions as collaborators with the communication media. No reservation [to access] exists with respect to information in the public archives, except those documents for which the reservation exists for reasons of national defense and for other reasons expressly established in the law. The social communication media should participate in the educational process, cultural promotion and preservation of ethical values. The law shall establish the reach and limits of their participation. Publicity that[,] through any method[,] promotes violence, racism, sexism, [and] religious or political intolerance and which affects the dignity of human beings is prohibited. Eleventh Section Of Sports Article 82. The State shall protect, stimulate, promote and coordinate the physical culture, sports and recreation, as well as activities for the integral development of persons. It shall have resources and an infrastructure that allows for mass access to said activities. It shall patronize the preparation and participation of athletes of high ability in national and international competitions, and shall promote the participation of persons with disabilities. Chapter 5 Of Collective Rights

First Section Of Indigenous and Black or Afro-Ecuadoran Peoples Article 83. Indigenous peoples, that define themselves as nationalities with ancestral roots, and black and Afro-Ecuadoran peoples, form part of the sole and indivisible Ecuadoran State. Article 84. The State recognizes and guarantees to the indigenous peoples the following collective rights, in conformity with this Constitution and the law, [and] respect for the public order and human rights: 1. [The right to] maintain, develop and strengthen their spiritual, cultural, linguistic, social, political and economic identity and traditions. 2. [The right to] conserve communal lands as imprescriptible property, which shall be inalienable, unattachable and indivisible, except for the power of the State to declare their public use. These lands shall be exempt from the payment of predial taxes. 3. [The right to] maintain ancestral possession of the communal lands and to obtain their adjudication free of charge, in conformity with the law. 4. [The right to] participate in the use, profits, administration and conservation of natural renewable resources that are located on their lands. 5. [The right to] be consulted on plans and programs of exploration and exploitation of nonrenewable resources that can be found on their lands and that may affect them environmentally or culturally; to participate in the benefits that these projects report, when that is possible[,] and receive indemnification for the socio-environmental damages that [these projects] cause them. 6. [The right to] conserve and promote their practices of management of biodiversity and their natural surroundings. 7. [The right to] conserve and develop their traditional forms of coexistence and social organization, [and] of creation and exercise of authority. 8. [The right to] not be displaced, as peoples, from their lands. 9. [The right to] collective intellectual property of their ancestral knowledge; to their valuation, use and development in conformity with the law. 10. [The right to] maintain, develop and administer their cultural and historical patrimony.

11. [The right to] receive a quality education[;] to have a system of bilingual intercultural education. 12. [The right to] their systems, knowledge and practices of traditional medicines, including the right to protection of ritual and sacred sites, plants, animals, minerals and ecosystems of vital interest from their point of view. 13. [The right to] formulate priorities in plans and project for the development and improvement of their economic and social conditions; and to adequate financing of the State. 14. [The right to] participate in official organisms, through representatives, as determined by the law. 15. [The right to] use symbols and emblems that identify them. Article 85. The State recognizes and guarantees to black and Afro-Ecuadoran peoples, the rights determined in the previous article, in all that applies to them. Second Section Of the Environment Article 86. The State shall protect the right of the population to live in a healthy and ecologically balanced environment, that guarantees sustainable development. It shall provide oversight to make sure that this right is not affected and shall guarantee the preservation of nature. [The following] is declared of public interest and shall be regulated in conformity with the law: 1. The preservation of the environment, the conservation of ecosystems, biodiversity and the integrity of the genetic patrimony of the country. 2. The prevention of environmental pollution, recuperation of degraded natural spaces, the sustainable management of natural resources and the requirements that public and private activities should comply with to achieve these goals. 3. The founding of a national system of protected natural areas that guarantee the conservation of biodiversity and the maintenance of ecological services, in conformity with international agreements and treaties. Article 87.

The law shall classify violations and determine procedures to establish administrative, civil and criminal consequences corresponding to the acts or omissions of natural or juridical [or] national or foreign persons that violate the norms of environmental protection. Article 88. Every state decision that may affect the environment must previously have the criteria of the community, so that [the community] is duly informed. The law guarantees its participation. Article 89. The State shall adopt measures aimed at achieving the following objectives: 1. Promote the use of clean environmental technologies and alternative [sources of] energy that do not pollute in the public and private sector. 2. Establish tax incentives for those who complete healthy environmental actions. 3. Regulate genetically modified organisms through strict norms of biosecurity, propagation in the environment, experimentation, use, commercialization and importation. Article 90. The production, importation, possession and use of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, as well as the introduction of toxic nuclear residues and waste into the national territory, is prohibited. The State shall provide norms for the production, importation and use of those substances that, not withstanding their utility, are toxic and dangerous to people and the environment. Article 91. The State, its representatives and concessionaries, are responsible for environmental damage, under the conditions indicated in Art. 20 of this Constitution. [The State] shall take preventative measures in case of doubt on the negative environmental impact or the consequences of any action or omission, although there is no scientific evidence of harm. Without prejudice to the rights of those directly affected, any natural or juridical person, or human group, may exercise the actions foreseen in the law for the protection of the environment.

Third Section Of Consumers Article 92. The law shall establish mechanisms to control quality, procedures in defense of the consumer, repair and indemnification for deficiencies, injuries and the bad quality of goods and services, and for the interruption of public services[,] not caused by catastrophies, chance or force majeure, and sanctions for the violation of these rights. Persons that provide public services or produce or commercialize consumer goods are civilly and criminally responsible for the provision of the services, as well as for the conditions of the product offered, according to the publicity carried out and the description on their labels. The State shall support the creation of associations of consumers and users, and shall adopt measures for the accomplishment of its objectives. The State and the subordinate autonomous entities [entitidades seccionales autónomas] are civilly responsible for damages and prejudices caused to inhabitants, for their negligence and carelessness in carrying out the public services for which they are responsible and for the lack of services that have been paid for. Chapter 6 Of the Guarantee of Rights First Section Of Habeas Corpus Article 93. Every person who believes he is illegally deprived of his freedom may resort to the right of habeas corpus. This right may be exercised personally or through another person, without need for a written order, before the mayor under whose jurisdiction [the appellant] is located, or before whomever replaces him. The municipal authority, within 24 hours from the receipt of the request, shall immediately order the appellant to be brought before it, and reveal the order of detention. Its order must be obeyed[,] without observation or excuse, by those in charge of the center of social rehabilitation or place of detention. The mayor must make his decision within the following 24 hours. He shall order the immediate release of the appellant if he was not brought before him[,] or if the order [of detention] was not exhibited, or if the latter did not comply with the legal requirements, or if procedural defects were committed in the detention, or if the basis for the appeal [recurso] was justifiable. The mayor shall be civilly and penally responsible, in conformity with the law, if he does not process the appeal.

A functionary or employee who does not comply with the order shall be immediately discharged from his position or employment without further steps taken by the mayor, who shall report the dismissal to the State Comptroller General and to the authority who must appoint a replacement. The dismissed employee, after placing the detained in liberty, may protest his dismissal before the competent organs of the Judicial Function within eight days of being notified. Second Section Of Habeas Data Article 94. Every person has a right of access to documents, databases and reports about his person or property that are on record with public or private entities, as well as to know their use and purpose. If the data is erroneous or illegitimately affects his rights, he may solicit its update, correction, exclusion or voiding before the respective functionary. If the mistake causes prejudice, the affected person may demand indemnification. The law shall establish a special procedure for access to personal information that is recorded in archives related to the national defense. Third Section Of Amparo Article 95. Any person, on his own behalf or as the legitimate representative of a group, may propose an amparo case before the organ of the Judicial Function designated by law. Through this lawsuit, which shall be processed in a preferential and summary manner, one can request the adoption of urgent measures designed to halt, avoid the commission of, or immediately remedy the consequences of an illegitimate act or omission of a public authority that violates or may violate any right consecrated in the Constitution or in any international treaty or agreement in force, and that, imminently, threatens to cause grave harm. A case may also be presented if the act or omission is completed by people who provide public services or act through the delegation or concession of a public authority. Judicial decisions adopted through a trial are not susceptible to an amparo lawsuit. In addition, one may present amparo lawsuits against individuals, when their conduct gravely and directly affects a community or collective interest, or a widespread [difuso] right.

In amparo lawsuits the judge who hears the case may not recuse himself [inhibición] and all days are workdays. The judge shall immediately convoke the parties to hear them in a public audience within the 24 hours following hours, and in the same initial decision [providencia], if a basis exists, he shall order the cessation of any act that may translate into the violation of a right. Within the following 48 hours, the judge shall pronounce his decision, which shall be immediately complied with, without prejudice to the appeal of the decision for its affirmation or revocation before the Constitutional Tribunal. The law shall determine applicable sanctions for authorities or persons who do not comply with the decisions dictated by the judge; and the judges and magistrates that violate the procedure of amparo, independent of lawsuits that may arise. To assure compliance with the amparo decision, the judge may adopt the measures that he considers appropriate, including recourse to the public force. Procedural norms that oppose the amparo lawsuit and decisions that tend to retard its quick completion do not apply. Fourth Section Of the National Public Defender's Office [Defensoría del Pueblo] Article 96. There shall be a National Public Defender [Defensor del Pueblo] , with national jurisdiction, to promote and sponsor habeas corpus and amparo appeals for the people who require them; to defend and elicit observance of the fundamental rights guaranteed by this Constitution; to observe the quality of public services and exercise the other functions assigned to him by law. The National Public Defender shall possess the same qualifications required of a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice; he shall be elected by the National Congress from among non-members [de fuera de su seno] , with the favorable vote of two-thirds of its members, after hearing from the legally recognized human rights organizations. He shall carry out his responsibilities for five years, may be reelected one time, and shall submit annual reports on his activities to the National Congress. He shall have administrative and economic independence and autonomy; he shall enjoy privileges and immunities under the terms indicated by the law. Chapter 7 Of Duties and Responsibilities Article 97.

All citizens have the following duties and responsibilities, without prejudice to others foreseen in this Constitution and the law: 1. Obey and observe the Constitution, the law and the legitimate decisions of competent authorities. 2. Defend the territorial integrity of Ecuador. 3. Respect human rights and fight to prevent their infringement. 4. Promote the common good and place the common interest before individual interests. 5. Respect another's honor. 6. Work with efficiency. 7. Study and train oneself. 8. Tell the truth, perform contracts and keep promises [mantener la palabra empeñada] . 9. Honorably administer the public patrimony. 10. Pay the taxes established by law. 11. Practice justice and solidarity in the exercise of rights and in the use of goods and services. 12. Promote unity in diversity, and intercultural relations. 13. Assume public functions as a service to the collective, and answer to society and authority, in conformity with the law. 14. Denounce and combat acts of corruption. 15. Collaborate and maintain peace and security. 16. Preserve a healthy environment and use natural resources in a sustainable manner. 17. Participate in the political, civic and community life of the country in an honest and transparent manner. 18. Exercise a profession or trade subject to ethical rules. 19. Preserve the cultural and natural patrimony of the country, and care for and maintain public property, including that of general use, as well as that that has been expressly entrusted.

20. Ama quilla, ama llulla, ama shua. Do not be lazy, do not lie, do not rob. TITLE IV Of Democratic Participation Chapter 1 Of Elections Article 98. Legally recognized political parties may present or support candidates for positions [dignidades] of popular election. Citizens neither affiliated nor supported by political parties may also present themselves as candidates. Citizens elected to fulfill functions of popular election may be reelected indefinitely. The President and Vice-President of the Republic may be reelected after one period has expired following the one for which they were elected. The Constitution and the law shall indicate the requirements to take part as a candidate in a popular election. Article 99. In plural [pluripersonales] elections, citizens may select preferred candidates from one list or from several lists. The law shall reconcile this principle with that of proportional representation of minorities. Article 100. Dignitaries of popular election that present themselves as candidates for reelection shall receive a leave without pay from the date they record their candidacy. If they present themselves as a candidate for a distinct office they must renounce their position before registration. Article 101. [The following] may not be candidates to any position of popular election: 1. Those who have been sentenced or called to the plenary stage [etapa plenaria] through a criminal trial for misdeeds punished by incarceration, except if[,] in the second case[,] an exonerating sentence has been issued.

2. Public functionaries who are freely appointed and removed, and those who [are appointed for] a fixed period, unless they resign before the date they register their candidacy. Other public servants can be candidates and shall receive leave without pay from the date they register their candidacy; and upon being elected, while they exercise their functions. University professors do not require a leave to be candidates and exercise the office. 3. Magistrates and judges of the Judicial Function unless they resign from their responsibilities six months before the date of registering their respective candidacy. 4. Those who have exercised executive authority in de facto governments. 5. Members of the public force in active service. 6. Those who have contracts with the State, as national or foreign natural persons or as representatives of or persons with the power of attorney for juridical persons, if the contract was entered into for the execution of public works, provision of public services or exploitation of natural resources, through concession, association or any other contractual modality. Article 102. The State shall promote and guarantee the equitable participation of women and men as candidates in the popular electoral processes, in instances of leadership and decisions in the public arena, in the administration of justice, [and] in the organisms of control and political parties. Chapter 2 Of Other Forms of Democratic Participation First Section Of Popular Referendum [Consulta Popular] Article 103. Popular referendum shall be established in the cases foreseen by this Constitution. Decisions adopted in this manner are compulsory if the popular judgment has the support of an absolute majority of voters. The vote on a popular referendum is obligatory under the terms foreseen in the Constitution and the law. Article 104.

The President of the Republic has the power to convoke a popular referendum in the following situations: 1. To reform the Constitution, according to that foreseen in Art. 283. 2. When, in his judgment, an issue of transcendental importance to the country arises, which is distinct from that foreseen in the preceding number. Article 105. Citizens in enjoyment of their political rights and that represent eight percent of the national electoral register may request that the Supreme Electoral Tribunal convoke a popular referendum on matters of transcendental importance to the country, that are not constitutional reforms. The law shall regulate the exercise of this right. Article 106. When circumstances of transcendental character, that justify popular pronouncement, concern their community, the regional subordinate organisms [organismos del régimen seccional], with the favorable vote of three-fourths of their members[,] may decide to convoke a popular referendum for the citizens of the corresponding territorial district. Citizens in possession of their political rights that represent at least 20 percent of the number of registered persons in the corresponding district may, likewise, solicit convocation of a popular referendum. Article 107. The Provincial Electoral Tribunal of the corresponding district shall proceed to make the corresponding convocation once it determines compliance with the requirements established by these norms and by the law. Article 108. The results of the popular referendum are to be published in the Official Register within 15 days following their proclamation by the corresponding electoral tribunal. In no case may the referendum convoked by popular initiatives affect tax matters. Second Section Of Revocation of the Mandate Article 109.

Citizens have the right to decide to revoke the mandate granted to mayors, prefects and deputies [diputados] that they elected for acts of corruption or unjustified noncompliance with their stated agenda [plan de trabajo]. Each of the candidates for mayor, prefect or deputy shall present his work agenda before the corresponding electoral tribunal upon registering his candidacy. Article 110. The initiative of revocation of mandate shall be exercised by the number of citizens in possession of their political rights that represent at least thirty percent of those registered [empadronados] in the respective territorial district. Once the electoral tribunal verifies that the initiative complies with the requirements foreseen by this Constitution and by the law, it shall proceed to convocation within ten days immediately following the aforesaid verification. The electoral act shall be realized within thirty days following the convocation. Article 111. When [the revocation] concerns acts of corruption, the revocation may be solicited at any time during the period for which the official was elected. In cases of noncompliance with a stated agenda [a revocation] may be solicited after the first year has passed and before the last year of the exercise of his functions. In both cases, [a revocation may be called] only once during the same period. Article 112. All citizens that possess political rights must obligatorily participate in the referendum on revocation. The revocation decision shall be obligatory if an absolute majority of the voters in the respective territorial district make a favorable pronouncement. It shall have the immediate effect of terminating the functionary, and subrogation by the corresponding person according to the law. Article 113. In instances of popular referendum and revocation of mandate, the Provincial Electoral Tribunal of the corresponding district shall proceed to the convocation, once it has verified compliance with the requirements established by these norms and by the law. The expenses required to complete the referendum or the revocation of mandate shall be imputed to the budget of the corresponding subordinate organism. Chapter 3 Of Political Parties and Movements

Article 114. The right to found political parties and participate in them is guaranteed under the conditions established by the law. Political parties shall enjoy the protection of the State in their organization and operation. Article 115. For a political party to be recognized and to participate in the public life of the State, it must maintain doctrinal principles that individualize it, present a program of political action in consonance with the democratic system; be organized on the national level and have the number of affiliated persons required by the law. The political party or movement that does not obtain a minimum of five percent of the valid votes in two successive national plural elections shall be eliminated from the electoral register. Article 116. The law shall set limits on electoral expenditures. Political parties, movements, organizations and independent candidates shall surrender information to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal on the amount, origin and destination of resources used in electoral campaigns. Electoral publicity may only be transmitted thought the collective mass media during the forty-five days before the date ending the electoral campaign. The law shall sanction noncompliance with these dispositions. Chapter 4 Of the Statute of the Opposition Article 117. The political parties and movements that do not participate in the government shall have the full right to exercise, within the Constitution and the law, critical opposition and propose alternatives to governmental policies. The law shall regulate this right. TITLE V Of the Institutions of the State and the Public Function Chapter 1 Of the Institutions of the State Article 118.

[The following] are institutions of the State: 1. The organisms and dependencies of the Legislative, Executive and Judicial Function. 2. The electoral organisms. 3. The organisms of control and regulation. 4. The entities that form part of the subordinate autonomous regime [régimen seccional autónomo]. 5. The organisms and entities created by the Constitution or the law for the exercise of state power for the provision of public services or to develop economic activities assumed by the State. 6. Juridical persons created by a legislative subordinate act for the provision of public services. These organisms and entities form the public sector. Article 119. The institutions of the State, their organisms and dependencies and public functionaries[,] may not exercise other powers than those consigned to them in the Constitution and in the law, and shall have the duty to coordinate their actions to obtain general benefit. Those institutions determined by the Constitution and the law shall be autonomous in their organization and functioning. Chapter 2 Of the Public Function Article 120. No official, authority, functionary or public servant is exempt from responsibility for acts realized in the exercise of his functions or for his omissions. The exercise of public offices and functions constitutes a service to the community that demands ability, honesty and efficiency. Article 121. Norms to establish administrative, civil and penal responsibility for the management and administration of public funds, property or resources shall be applied to the officials, functionaries and servants of the organisms and institutions of the State.

Officials elected by popular vote, delegates or representatives of the associated [colegiados] bodies of the institutions of the State and public functionaries and servants in general, are subject to the sanctions established for the commission of crimes of peculation, bribery, extortion and illicit enrichment. Lawsuits to prosecute them and the corresponding penalties are imprescriptible and, in these cases, trials shall be initiated and continued even in the absence of the accused. These norms are also applicable to those who participate in these crimes even though they do not possess the aforementioned qualities; they shall be sanctioned according to their degree of responsibility. Article 122. Functionaries appointed and removed at will [de libre nombramiento y remoción], those appointed for a fixed period, those who manage resources or public property and citizens elected by popular vote, must present a sworn declaration of their patrimony at the beginning of their term, which shall include active and passive [interests] and if necessary authorization to lift the seal on their bank accounts. If they do not do this, they may not take possession of their posts. In addition, members of the public force must make a declaration of patrimony upon entering the institution, before obtaining promotions, and upon leaving [the institution]. Upon terminating their functions they shall also present a sworn declaration of patrimony that also includes active and passive [interests]. The State Comptroller General shall examine the two declarations and investigate the cases in which illicit enrichment is suspected. If a declaration is not presented upon the cessation of functions illicit enrichment will be presumed. When serious indications of use of a straw man exist, the Comptroller may solicit similar declarations from third persons connected to the person who exercises or has exercised a political function. Article 123. Those with interests or who represent third persons [with interests] in the areas to be controlled or regulated may not be functionaries or members of the managing organisms of entities that exercise the state powers of control and regulation. The public functionary should abstain from acting in cases in which his interests enter into conflict with those of the organism or entity to which he offers his services. Article 124. The public administration shall be organized and developed in a decentralized and dispersed manner. The law guarantees the rights and establishes the obligations of public servants and regulates their hiring, permanence, evaluation, promotion and termination. Hiring as well

as promotion within the civil service and administrative career shall be made through competitions based on merit and opposition. Public servants are subject to appointment and removal at will only by exception. Remuneration received by public servants shall be proportional to their functions, efficiency and responsibilities. In no case shall the political affiliation of a citizen affect his hiring, promotion or separation from a political function. Article 125. No one may hold more than one public post. Nonetheless, university professors may teach if their schedule permits. Nepotism is prohibited in the manner determined by the law. Violation of this principle shall be criminally punished. TITLE VI Of the Legislative Function Chapter 1 Of the National Congress Article 126. The Legislative Function is exercised by the National Congress, located in Quito. Under exceptional circumstances it may meet in any other part of the national territory. It is integrated by two legislators elected for each province, and one more [legislator elected] for each three hundred thousand inhabitants or fraction thereof over one hundred and fifty thousand. The number of inhabitants who serve as the basis for the election shall be established by the last national population census, which should be completed every ten years. Article 127. To be a deputy [diputado] one must be Ecuadoran by birth, be in full enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, be at least twenty-five years old at the time of registering one's candidacy and be a native [oriundo] of the respective province, or have continuously resided in it for at least three years immediately prior to the election. Deputies exercise their functions for a period of four years. Article 128.

Political parties or movements that have a number of deputies that represent at least ten percent of the National Congress may form a legislative block. The parties that do not have said percentage may unite with other [parties] to form one. Article 129. The National Congress shall elect a president and vice-president every two years. For the first two years, it shall elect its president from among the deputies who belong to the party or movement that has the largest legislative representation, and its first vicepresident from the party or movement with the second majority. The second vicepresident shall be elected from among the deputies that belong to the minority parties or movements. They shall carry out their functions for two years. For the following two years, the president and the first vice-president shall be elected from among the parties or movements that have obtained the second and first majority, respectively. The vice-presidents shall replace the president, following their order, in case of temporary or definitive absence, and the National Congress shall fill the vacancies when the situation arises. Article 130. The National Congress has the following duties and powers: 1. Install the President and Vice-President of the Republic who are proclaimed elected by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal. Take cognizance of their resignations; remove them after a political trial; establish their physical or mental disability or abandonment of their post, and declare them terminated. 2. Elect the President of the Republic in the instance [foreseen by] Art 168, second paragraph, and Vice-president, from the list of candidates proposed by the President of the Republic, in case of definitive absence. 3. Take cognizance of the annual report presented by the President of the Republic and pass judgment thereon. 4. Reform the Constitution and interpret it a generally obligatory manner. 5. Expedite, reform and derogate the laws and interpret them in a generally obligatory manner. 6. Establish, modify or suppress taxes, fees and other public revenues through laws, with the exception of the special fees and contributions that are destined to create the organisms of the autonomous subordinate regime [régimen seccional autónomo].

7. Approve or reject international treaties, in the cases in which [the responsibility] corresponds to them. 8. Oversee the acts of the Executive Function and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal and solicit the information it considers necessary from public functionaries. 9. Proceed to a political trial, on the petition of at least one fourth of the members of the National Congress, of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the ministers of state, the Comptroller General and the Attorney General [Procurador del Estado], the National Public Defender [Defensor del Pueblo] , the General Fiscal Minister; superintendents, the members of the managing boards [vocales] of the Constitutional Tribunal and Supreme Electoral Tribunal, during the exercise of their functions and until a year after their [functions] have ended. The President and Vice-President of the Republic may only be subject to a political trial for the commission of crimes against the security of the State or for crimes of extortion, bribery, peculation and illicit enrichment and their censure and removal can only be decided through a vote of two-thirds of the members of Congress. A criminal indictment is not necessary to start this process. The other functionaries referred to in this article may be subject to a political trial for constitutional or legal infractions committed while carrying out their post. Congress may censure them in case of a declaration of culpability through a majority [vote] of its members. Censure shall produce the immediate removal of the functionary, except in the case of ministers of state, whose permanence in the post is decided by the President of the Republic. If evidence of criminal responsibility is derived from the censure, [the Congress] shall arrange for the matter to come before the competent judge. 10. Authorize, with a vote of two-thirds of its members, the penal indictment of the President or Vice-President if the competent judge solicits it with good reason. 11. Appoint the Attorney General, the General Fiscal Minister, the National Public Defender, the superintendents; the members of the managing boards [vocales] of the Constitutional Tribunal and Supreme Electoral Tribunal, and the members of the board of the Central Bank; take cognizance of their recusals [excusas] or renunciations, and designate their replacements. In the instances in which the nominations are made from lists of candidates, these shall be presented during twenty days after the post becomes vacant. If the said lists of candidates are not received within the indicated period, the Congress shall proceed to make the appointments without them.

The National Congress shall effectuate appointments [designaciones] within thirty days from the date each list of candidates is received. If it does not [make the appointment], the first person recorded on each list of candidates shall be appointed. 12. Elect through a two-thirds majority the persons on the list of candidates for the appointment of the State Comptroller General. In case of definitive absence, it will proceed in the same manner to replace him. 13. Approve the general budget of the State and oversee its execution. 14. Fix the limits of public indebtedness, in accordance with the law. 15. Concede general amnesties for political crimes and pardons for common crimes through the favorable vote of two-thirds of its members. In both cases, the decision shall be justified when humanitarian motives intercede. Pardons shall not be granted for crimes committed against the public administration and for the crimes mentioned in the third paragraph of number 2 of Art. 23. 16. Constitute the special permanent commissions. 17. The other [duties and powers] recorded in the Constitution and in the laws. Chapter 2 Of Organization and Functioning Article 131. To complete its work, the National Congress shall be governed by the Constitution, the Organic Law of the Legislative Function, the Internal Regulation and the Code of Ethics. Article 132. The National Congress meets in Quito, without the need for convocation, from January 5 of the year in which the President of the Republic takes possession of his post, and is in session in ordinary and permanent form, with two recesses of one month each every year. The sessions of Congress are public. Under exceptional circumstances, it can meet in a private session, subject to the law. Article 133. During the periods of recess, the president of the Congress or the President of the Republic may convoke extraordinary session periods of the National Congress to take cognizance exclusively of the matters indicated in the convocation. The president of the National Congress can also convoke such extraordinary session periods upon the petition of two-thirds of its members.

Article 134. To carry out its powers, the National Congress shall create special permanent commissions in which all of its members will participate. The Organic Law of the Legislative Function shall determine the number, structure and powers of each of them. The creation of occasional commissions is prohibited. Chapter 3 Of Deputies Article 135. Deputies shall act in the national interest and are politically responsible to society for the performance of the duties peculiar to their investiture. The office of deputy implicates the exercise of a public function. Deputies, while they act as such, cannot perform any other public or private function, nor dedicate themselves to their professional activities if they are incompatible with their status as a deputy. They may act as university professors if their schedule permits. Deputies are prohibited from offering, controlling, receiving or administering resources of the General Budget of the State, except those [resources] allotted to the administrative functioning of the National Congress. Equally, they are prohibited from producing nominations for public posts. They may not receive allowances or other income from public funds that are not those of a deputy, nor form part of the board of directors of other associated bodies of institutions or businesses in which the State participates. Deputies that, after their election, accept remunerated appointments, delegations, commissions or distinctions of the Executive Function shall lose their status as [deputies]. Article 136. Deputies that incur violations of the Code of Ethics shall be sanctioned with the [favorable] vote of a majority of the members of the Congress. The sanction may cause the loss of the status of deputy. Article 137. Deputies are not civilly or penally responsible for the votes and opinions they emit in the exercise of their functions. Criminal charges cannot be initiated against them without the previous authorization of the National Congress, nor will they be deprived of their liberty, except in cases of flagrante delicto. If the petition of a competent judge for authorization to make a judgment is not contested within a period of thirty days it will be understood as granted. The passing of the aforementioned period is suspended during recesses.

Criminal trials initiated before the post is occupied shall continue to be heard before the competent judge. Chapter 4 Of the Legislation and Codification Commission Article 138. There shall be a Legislation and Codification Commission that consists of seven board members [vocales] designated by a majority of the members of the National Congress from persons who are not members [fuera de su seno] , who will work in a permanent manner. The board members who form this Commission shall maintain their functions for six years and may be reelected. They shall be partially renewed every three years and their respective substitutes must be elected in the same manner. They may not perform any other public, private or professional function that impedes the exercise of their posts or that is incompatible with the activities for which they were designated, with the exception of university professor. The board members must possess the same requirements necessary for the designation of magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 139. [The following] are the powers of the Legislation and Codification Commission: 1. Prepare bills of law in conformity with the procedure foreseen in the Constitution. 2. Codify laws and carry out their publication. 3. Systematically compile Ecuadoran legislation and place it in order. Chapter 5 Of the laws First Section Of the Classification of laws Article 140. The National Congress, in conformity with the dispositions of this section, shall approve generally obligatory norms of general interest as laws. The powers of Congress that do not require passing a law shall be exercised through agreements and resolutions.

Article 141. Passage of a law is required for the following subjects: 1. To regulate the fundamental liberties and rights guaranteed in the Constitution. 2. To classify infractions and establish the corresponding punishments. 3. To create, modify or suppress taxes, without prejudice to the powers that the Constitution confers to the organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime [régimen seccional autónomo]. 4. To attribute powers or duties to the organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime. 5. To modify the political-administrative division of the country, except in that relating to parishes. 6. To grant to public organisms of control and regulation the power to expedite norms of a general character in the matters within their competence, however they cannot alter or devise the legal dispositions. 7. To reform or derogate laws and interpret them with a generally obligatory character. 8. The instances determined by the Constitution. Article 142. Laws are organic and ordinary. Organic laws are: 1. Those which regulate the organization and activities of the Legislative, Executive and Judicial Functions; those of the subordinate autonomous regime and of the organisms of the State established by the Constitution. 2. Those relating to the regime of parties, to the exercise of political rights and to the electoral system. 3. Those which regulate the guarantee of fundamental rights and the procedures for their protection. 4. Those determined by the Constitution and that are issued with this character. Other [laws] are ordinary laws. Article 143.

Organic laws are approved, reformed, derogated and interpreted by an absolute majority of the members of the National Congress. An organic law cannot modify or prevail over an ordinary law, not even if it is declared a special law. Second Section Of the Initiative Article 144. The initiative for the presentation of a bill corresponds: 1. To the deputies, with the support of a legislative block or ten legislators. 2. To the President of the Republic. 3. To the Supreme Court of Justice. 4. To the Legislation and Codification Commission. Article 145. The Constitutional Tribunal, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the State Comptroller General, the Attorney General, the General Fiscal Minister, the National Public Defender and the superintendents shall have the power to present bills on the matters that correspond to their specific powers. Article 146. One fourth of one percent of those who are registered in the electoral registry, [if they are all] in enjoyment of their political rights, may present bills. The right of national movements of a national character to exercise the initiative of presenting bills is recognized. The law shall regulate the exercise of this right. Bills on criminal matters or any others where the initiative corresponds exclusively to the President of the Republic may not be presented through these procedures. Article 147. Only the President of the Republic can present bills through which taxes are created, modified or suppressed, [or that] raise the public expenditure or modify the politicaladministrative division of the country. Article 148.

Bills of law must refer to a sole matter and must be presented to the president of the Congress with a corresponding statement of motives. If the bill does not satisfy these requirements it will not be processed. Article 149. Those who present a bill in conformity with these dispositions may participate in its debate, personally or through a delegate who is accredited for the case. When a bill is presented by citizens, the names of two citizens who will participate in the debates must be indicated. Third Section Of the Ordinary Processing Article 150. Within eight days after receiving the bill, the president of the Congress must order that it distributed to the deputies and an abstract shall be disseminated publicly. After twenty days counted from the day of its reception, the bill shall be sent to the corresponding specialized commission that will initiate the required process for its cognizance. The organizations which and citizens who have an interest in the approval of the bill, or who consider that their rights may be affected by its issuance, can present their points of view before the commission. Article 151. Congress shall hold the first debate on the bill with the report of the commission, during which the pertinent observations can be presented. Afterwards[,] [the bill] will be returned to the commission so that it can present a new report for the second debate within the period of time established by law. Article 152. In the second debate, the bill will be approved, modified or denied by the vote of the majority of those present at the session, except in the case of organic laws. Article 153. Once the bill is approved, Congress shall send it immediately to the President of the Republic so that he can approve or object to it. If the law is approved or if there are no objections within ten days after the President of the Republic received it, it will be promulgated immediately in the Official Register.

If the President of the Republic completely objects to the bill, Congress can only consider it again after one year from the date on which the objection was made. After this period has expired, Congress may ratify it in one sole debate with the vote of two-thirds of its members and shall immediately send it to the Official Register for its promulgation. If the objection was partial, Congress must consider it during a period of no longer than thirty days counted from the date the presidential objection was delivered and may, in one sole debate, yield to [the objection] and amend the bill, with the favorable vote of a majority of those attending the session. It may also ratify the initially approved bill with a vote of two-thirds of its members. In both cases, Congress shall send the bill to the Official Register for its promulgation. If Congress does not consider the objection during the indicated period, it shall be understood that it has yielded to it and the President of the Republic may arrange for the promulgation of the law in the Official Register. Every objection shall have a basis and in the case of partial objection, the President of the Republic shall present an alternative text. In the cases indicated in this disposition and in Art. 152, the number of persons attending the session may not be less than half of the members of Congress. Article 154. If the objection of the President of the Republic is based on the partial or total unconstitutionality of the bill, it shall be sent to the Constitutional Tribunal so that it can issue its judgment within a period of thirty days. If the judgment confirms the total unconstitutionality of the bill it will be set aside. If it confirms its partial unconstitutionality, the National Congress shall make the necessary amendments so that the bill can then be passed on for the approval of the President of the Republic. If the Constitutional Tribunal judges that there is no unconstitutionality, Congress shall order its promulgation. Fourth Section Of Bills of Economic Urgency Article 155. The President of the Republic may send bills classified as economically urgent to the National Congress. In this case, Congress must approve, modify or deny them within a maximum period of thirty days, counted from when they were received. The process for the presentation, discussion and approval of these bills shall be ordinary, except the previously established periods of time. During the discussion of a bill classified as urgent, the President of the Republic may not send another one, except if a state of emergency is decreed.

Article 156. If Congress does not approve, modify or deny the bill within the period indicated in the previous article, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it as an executive decree [decreto-ley] in the Official Register. The National Congress can, at any time, modify or derogate it according to the ordinary process foreseen in the Constitution. Fifth Section Of the Process in the Commission Article 157. The National Congress may delegate the elaboration of bills or the study and cognizance of bills that have been presented for its consideration to the Legislation and Codification Commission, according to the norms relative to the initiation of laws, which will be processed in conformity with this section. The Commission may not act on bills for tax laws, nor those classified as urgent economic matters. Article 158. The bills elaborated by the Commission through delegation shall be remitted to the National Congress with the corresponding statement of motives[.] [Congress] will decide through the vote of a majority of its members, if the bill will be submitted through the ordinary process or the special [process] established in this section. If Congress decides that the bill should follow the special process, the deputies, within a period of thirty days counted from the date on which they became aware [of the bill], shall express their observations in writing and with these [observations] the president of Congress shall return it to the Commission so that it can examine the observations made. The Commission shall remit the definitive bill to the president of Congress together with a report that explains the modifications made and the reasons why it did not include other observations. Congress shall take cognizance of the report of the Commission and may: 1. Approve or deny the bill completely. 2. Take cognizance of and decide on the observations that were not included by the Commission. 3. Take cognizance of, approve or reject, one by one, the articles of the bill sent by the Commission.

In these cases, Congress shall approve the resolution in one sole debate and through the vote of the majority of its members. If the bill is approved, it shall be remitted to the President of the Republic for his sanction or objection. This same special process shall be followed when the Commission presents reports on bills that have been remitted by Congress for its study and cognizance. Article 159. The Legislation and Codification Commission, through its own initiative, may prepare bills and send them to the president of Congress so that they can be processed ordinarily, unless Congress decides through a majority of its members to process it in the special manner established in this section. Article 160. Bills of codification prepared by the Commission shall be sent to the National Congress so that the deputies can make observations. If they do not do so within a period of thirty days or if an agreement is reached on the [observations] presented, the Commission shall remit the bill to the Official Register for its publication; if they are not resolved, the National Congress shall make a pertinent decision on the observations that constitute the controversy. Chapter 6 Of International Treaties and Agreements Article 161. The National Congress shall approve or reject the following international treaties and agreements: 1. Those that refer to territorial or border matters. 2. Those that establish political or military alliances. 3. Those that bind the country to agreements of integration. 4. Those that attribute the exercise of powers derived from the Constitution or the law to international or supranational organisms. 5. Those which refer to the fundamental rights and duties of the people and the collective rights. 6. Those that contain a commitment to issue, modify or derogate any law. Article 162.

The ratification of treaties and agreements shall be made in one sole debate and with a conforming vote of the majority of Congress' members. The judgment of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be previously solicited with respect to the conformity of the treaty or agreement with the Constitution. A treaty or agreement that requires a constitutional reform may not be approved unless said reform is made beforehand. Article 163. The norms contained in international treaties and agreements, once promulgated in the Official Register, form part of the juridical order of the Republic and prevail over laws and other norms of a lower hierarchy. TITLE VII Of the Executive Function Chapter 1 Of the President of the Republic Article 164. The President of the Republic exercises the Executive Function, he is chief of State and of the government, and the person responsible for the public administration. His period of government lasts four years, starting on January 15 of the year following his election. Article 165. One must be Ecuadoran by birth, be in enjoyment of one's political rights and be at least thirty-five years old at the time of the registration of candidacy to be President of the Republic. The President and the Vice-President, whose names shall be recorded on the same ballot, shall be elected by an absolute majority of votes cast in a universal, equal, direct and secret manner. If in the first vote no joint Presidential and Vice-Presidential team [binomio] has an absolute majority, a second election will be performed during the following forty-five days, and in that [election] the candidates who obtained the first and second places in the first elections will participate. The second election is not necessary if the Presidential and Vice-Presidential team that obtained first place obtained more than forty percent of the valid votes and there is a difference of more than ten percent between the vote obtained by the [team] in second place. The ten percentage points will be calculated based on the totality of valid votes.

Article 166. [The following] cannot be candidates for the presidency of the Republic: 1. The spouse, parents, children or siblings of the current President of the Republic. 2. The Vice-President of the Republic and the ministers of State, unless they resign before the date of inscribing their candidacy. 3. Those who are subject to the prohibitions recorded in Art. 101. Article 167. The President of the Republic shall cease in his function and leave his post vacant in the following cases: 1. Because of termination of the period for which he was elected. 2. Because of death. 3. Because of a resignation accepted by the National Congress. 4. Because of physical or mental disability, legally proven and declared by the National Congress, that impedes the exercise of his post. 5. Because of removal from office after a political trial. 6. Because of abandonment of the post, declared by the National Congress. Article 168. In case of the definitive absence of the President of the Republic, the Vice-President will take his place for the time that remains to complete the corresponding constitutional period. If the President and Vice-President of the Republic are simultaneously and definitively absent, the [p]resident of the National Congress shall temporarily assume the Presidency and shall convoke the National Congress so that within a period of ten days it elects the President of the Republic who will remain in office until the respective presidential period is complete. Article 169. In case of temporary absence of the President of the Republic, he shall be replaced by, in the following order, the Vice-President of the Republic or the minister of State who is designated by the President of the Republic.

[The following] are causes of temporary absence of the President of the Republic[:] sickness or another circumstance that temporarily impedes him from exercising his function, or a leave of absence granted by the National Congress. Absence from the country for matters inherent to the exercise of his functions is not considered a temporary absence, without prejudice to which, the President may delegate certain powers to the Vice-President of the Republic. Article 170. The President of the Republic, during his mandate and until one year after he ceases his functions, must communicate to the National Congress, with anticipation, his decision to leave the country. Article 171. The following are the powers and duties of the President of the Republic: 1. Within the field of his competence, comply with and enforce the Constitution, the laws, international treaties and agreements and other juridical norms. 2. Present, in the moment he possesses it, a plan of government with the fundamental focus of his policies and actions that he will develop during his permanence. 3. Establish general policies of the State, approve the corresponding plans of development and oversee compliance with them. 4. Participate in the process of formation and promulgation of laws, in the form foreseen in this Constitution. 5. Issue the regulations necessary for the application of the laws, without contradicting or altering them, as well as those that favor good progress in their administration. 6. Convoke a popular referendum in agreement with that foreseen in the Constitution. 7. Present to the National Congress, on January 15 of every year, a report on the execution of the plan of government, the indicators of human development, the general situation of the Republic, the objectives that the government proposes to reach during the following year, the actions that will be carried out to accomplish them, and what remains to be developed. At the end of the presidential period, when the new president is inaugurated, he shall present a report between January 6 and 14. 8. Convoke the National Congress to extraordinary session periods. The convocation shall determine the specific matters that will be addressed during said periods.

9. Direct the public administration and expedite the norms necessary to regulate the integration, organizations and procedures of the Executive Function. 10. Freely name and remove the ministers of State, the heads of the diplomatic missions and other corresponding functionaries, in conformity with the Constitution and the law. 11. Designate the State Comptroller General from the list of candidates proposed by the National Congress; take cognizance of his declination or resignation and designate his replacement in the form foreseen in the Constitution. 12. Define foreign policy, direct international relations, [and] enter into and ratify international treaties and agreements that have been previously approved by the National Congress, when required by the Constitution. 13. Oversee maintenance of the national sovereignty and the defense of the integrity and the independence of the State. 14. Exercise maximum authority over the public force, designate the members of the highest military and political command, grant hierarchical promotions to generals and approve the organic regulations of the public force, in accordance with the law. 15. Assume the political direction of war. 16. Maintain internal order and public security. 17. Send the proposal for the General Budget of the State to the National Congress for its approval. 18. Decide upon and authorize government borrowing, in accordance with the Constitution and the law. 19. Set the population policies of the country. 20. Pardon, decrease or commute sentences, in conformity with the law. 21. Exercise the other powers conferred upon him by the Constitution and the laws. Chapter 2 Of the Vice-President of the Republic Article 172. To be elected Vice-President one must comply with the same requirements as those for the President of the Republic. He shall carry out his functions for four years. Article 173.

The Vice-President, when he does not replace the President of the Republic, shall exercise the functions assigned to him. Article 174. In case of the definitive absence of the Vice-President, the National Congress shall elect his replacement, with a vote of the majority of its members, from a list of candidates presented by the President of the Republic. The Vice-President elected shall remain in office for the time that is left to complete the period of government. When the absence is temporary, substitution is not necessary. Article 175. The prohibitions established in Art. 166 for the President of the Republic also govern the Vice-President in that in which they are applicable. Chapter 3 Of the Ministers of State Article 176. The ministers of State shall be freely appointed and removed by the President of the Republic and shall represent him in matters corresponding to the ministry in their charge. They shall be responsible for acts and contracts that they complete in the exercise of this representation. The number of ministers, their denomination and the matters of their competence shall be determined by the President of the Republic. Article 177. The ministers of State shall be Ecuadorans of more than thirty years and must be in the enjoyment of their political rights. Article 178. [The following] cannot be ministers: 1. The spouse, parents, children or siblings of the President or Vice-President of the Republic. 2. Persons who have been sentenced for crimes punished by prison, or who are called to the plenary stage of a criminal trial, except for in the second case, if they received an absolving sentence.

3. Those who have contracts with the State, as a national or foreign natural person or the representative of or a person with a power of attorney from a juridical person, if the contract was entered into for the execution of public works, provision of public services or the exploitation of natural resources, through concession, association or any other contractual modality. 4. Members of the public force in active service. Article 179. The ministers of State have the following [powers or duties]: 1. To direct the policy of the ministry in their charge. 2. To sign[,] along with the President[,] the decrees issued on matters that concern their ministry. 3. To inform the National Congress on matters for which they are responsible each year and when it is required. 4. To attend the sessions of the National Congress and participate in the debates, with voice but no vote, on matters of interest to their ministry. 5. To appear before the National Congress when they are subjected to political trial. 6. To expedite, norms, agreements and resolutions that are required for the management of their ministry. 7. To exercise the other powers established by the laws and other juridical norms. Chapter 4 Of the State of Emergency Article 180. The President of the Republic shall decree a state of emergency in all or part of the national territory in case of imminent external aggression, international war, grave internal disturbance or natural catastrophes. The state of emergency can affect all or some of the activities of society. Article 181. Once a state of emergency is declared, the President of the Republic shall assume the following powers or some of them: 1. Decree the anticipatory collection of taxes or other contributions.

2. Invest for the defense of the State or to face a catastrophe, public funds designated for other purposes, except those corresponding to education and health. 3. Move the seat of government to any other place in the national territory. 4. Establish all or part of the national territory as a zone of security, subject to the law. 5. Provide for the prior restraint [censura previa] of the social communication media. 6. Suspend or limit one or several of the rights established in numbers 9, 12, 13, 14 and 19 of Art. 23 and in number 9 of Art. 24 of the Constitution; but in no case may he use expatriation, or confine a person outside the capitals of provinces or in a region distinct from that in which he lives. 7. Provide for the use of the public force through the corresponding organisms, and call to active services all or part of the reserves. 8. Provide for the necessary mobilization, demobilization and requisitions, in accordance with the law. 9. Provide for the closing or opening of ports. Article 182. The President of the Republic shall notify the National Congress of the state of emergency within forty-eight hours after the publication of the corresponding decree. The National Congress may revoke the decree at any time if the circumstances justify it. The decree of a state of emergency shall have effect for a maximum period of sixty days. If the reasons that motivated it persist, it may be renewed, [and] the National Congress shall be notified thereof. When the reasons that motivated the state of emergency have disappeared, the President of the Republic shall decree its termination and, with the respective report, immediately notify the National Congress. Chapter 5 Of the Public Force Article 183. The Armed Forces and the National Police shall integrate the public force. The law shall regulate its mission, organization, preparation, work and control.

The fundamental mission of the Armed Forces shall be the preservation of national sovereignty, the defense of the integrity and independence of the State and the guarantee of its juridical order. In addition to the permanent Armed Forces, reserve forces shall be organized according to the needs of national security. The fundamental mission of the National Police is to guarantee security and public order. It shall constitute an auxiliary force of the Armed Forces for the defense of the national sovereignty. It shall be under the supervision, evaluation and control of the National Council of Police, whose organization and functions shall be regulated in the law. The law shall determine the collaboration that the public force, without neglecting the exercise of its specific functions, shall provide for the social and economic development of the country. Article 184. The public force is dependent [se debe] on the State. The President of the Republic shall be its highest authority and may delegate [his authority] in case of national emergency, in accordance with the law. Military and police command shall be exercised according to the law. Article 185. The public force shall obey and not deliberate. Its authorities are responsible for the orders they emit, but obedience to superior orders shall not exempt those who execute them from responsibility for the violation of the rights guaranteed by the Constitution and the law. Article 186. The members of the public force shall have the same obligations and rights as all Ecuadorans, excluding those exceptions established by the Constitution and the law. The stability and professional [attributes] of the members of the public force are guaranteed. They may not be deprived of their degrees, honors or pensions except for the reasons and in the manner foreseen by the law. Article 187. The members of the armed forced shall be subject to a special jurisdiction for the judgment of the infractions they commit during the exercise of their professional labors. In the case of common infractions, they are subject to ordinary justice.

Article 188. Military service is obligatory. Citizens shall [sic] be assigned a civil service within the community if they invoke an objection of conscience based on moral, religious or philosophical reasons, in the form determined by law. Article 189. The National Security Council, whose organization and functions are regulated by law, shall be the superior organism responsible for the national defense, [and] with which Ecuadorans and resident foreigners are required to cooperate. Article 190. The Armed Forces may participate in economic activities related to the national defense. TITLE VIII Of the Judicial Function Chapter 1 Of General Principles Article 191. The exercise of the judicial power corresponds to the organs of the Judicial Function. Unity of jurisdiction is established. There shall be justices of the peace, responsible for equitably deciding individual, community or neighbor conflicts, in accordance with the law. The authorities of the indigenous peoples shall exercise functions of justice, applying their own norms and procedures for the resolution of internal conflicts in conformity with their customs or customary law, as long as these are not in conflict with the Constitution and the law. The law shall make these functions compatible with the national judicial system. Article 192. The trial system shall be a means of bringing about justice. It shall enforce the guarantees of due process and oversee compliance with the principles of immediacy, celerity and efficiency in the administration of justice. Justice shall not be sacrificed for the sole omission of formalities. Article 193.

Procedural laws shall achieve the simplification, uniformity, efficiency and agility of procedures. Delay in the administration of justice, imputable to the judge or magistrate, shall be sanctioned by the law. Article 194. The substantiation of trials, which includes the presentation and contradiction of evidence, shall be carried out through an oral system, in accordance with the [following] principles: definitiveness, concentration and immediacy. Article 195. Except in those cases expressly indicated by law, trials shall be public, but the courts may deliberate privately. The transmission of judicial proceedings through the communication media, or their recording for persons unrelated to the parties and their defenders, is prohibited. Article 196. Administrative acts generated by any authority of the other functions and institutions of the State, may be challenged before the corresponding organs of the Judicial Function, in the form determined by the law. Article 197. In case of contradictory decisions dictated by the Chambers of Cassation [Salas de Casación], District Tribunals or Superior Courts on the same point of law, the Supreme Court of Justice[,] in plenary session, shall issue annulling norms of an obligatory character if the law is not contrary [to the norm]. Chapter 2 Of the Organization and Functioning Article 198. [The following] are the organs of the Judicial Function: 1. The Supreme Court of Justice. 2. The courts, tribunals and other judicial forums [juzgados] established by the Constitution and the law. 3. The National Council of the Judicature The law shall determine its structure, jurisdiction and competence.

Article 199. The organs of the Judicial Function shall be independent in the exercise of their duties and powers. No function of the State may interfere with matters corresponding to those [duties and powers]. Magistrates and judges shall be independent in the exercise of their jurisdictional authority[,] even before the other organs of the Judicial Function; they are only subject to the Constitution and the law. Article 200. The Supreme Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction in all of the national territory and its seat shall be in Quito. It shall act as a court of cassation, through its specialized chambers, and shall additionally exercise all the powers attributed to it by the Constitution and the laws. Article 201. To be a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice it is required: 1. To be an Ecuadoran by birth. 2. To be in the enjoyment of one's political rights. 3. To be over forty-five years of age. 4. To have a degree of doctor of jurisprudence, law or legal sciences. 5. To have practiced with known integrity the profession of lawyer, judge or university professor in legal sciences for a period of at least fifteen years. 6. The other requirements of competence determined by the law. Article 202. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall not be subject to a fixed term in the exercise of their posts. They shall cease their functions for the reasons determined by the Constitution and the law. If a vacancy is produced, the plenary [session] of the Supreme Court of Justice shall designate the new magistrate with a favorable vote of two-thirds of its members, observing the criteria of professionalism and the judicial career, in conformity with the law.

In this designation, professionals shall be selected who have exercised been judges, university professors or those who have engaged in the private sector [libre ejercicio profesional], in the alternative [and] in that order. Article 203. The President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall annually inform the National Congress of its work and programs in writing. Article 204. The judicial career is recognized and guaranteed[;] its regulations shall be determined by law. Magistrates, judges, functionaries and employees of the Judicial Function shall be appointed through competitions of merit and opposition, as the case may warrant, in accordance with that established by the law, with the exception of the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 205. Magistrates and judges are prohibited from exercising advocacy or carrying out any other public or private position, with the exception of that of university professor. They may not exercise functions in political parties, or intervene in electoral contests. Chapter 3 Of the National Counsel of the Judicature Article 206. The National Counsel of the Judicature shall be the governing, administrative and disciplinary organ of the Judicial Function. The law shall determine its integration, the manner of appointing its members, its structure and functions. The administrative, economic and financial management of the Judicial Function shall be completed in a decentralized manner. Article 207. In criminal, labor, and support cases, and those concerning minors, the administration of justice shall be free of charge. In other cases, the National Counsel of the Judicature shall set the level of fees for judicial services. These funds shall constitute income peculiarly of the Judicial Function. Their collection and administration shall be completed in a decentralized manner.

The person who litigates imprudently shall pay the person who won the case the fees paid by the latter, without allowance for any exceptions. Chapter 4 Of the Penitentiary Regime Article 208. The penal system and incarceration shall have the goal of educating and vocationally training the sentenced person, with the goal of achieving rehabilitation that allows for adequate social incorporation. Detention centers shall have adequate material resources and installations to attend to the mental and physical health of the imprisoned. They shall be administered by state or private non-profit institutions supervised by the State. Those adjudicated or accused through criminal trials[, and] who are deprived of their liberty, shall be held in centers of provisional detention. The only persons who can be interned in the centers of social rehabilitation are those who are declared guilty and sanctioned with a sentence depriving them of liberty through an executed condemnatory sentence. No person adjudged guilty of a common crime shall fulfill his sentence outside of the social rehabilitation centers of the State. TITLE IX Of Electoral Organization Article 209. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal, with its seat in Quito, and jurisdiction throughout the national territory, is a juridical person of public law. It possesses administrative and economic autonomy for its organization and the achievement of its role of organizing, directing, overseeing and guaranteeing the electoral processes, and judging the accounts surrendered by political parties, movements, organizations and candidates on the amount, origin and use of the resources they employed in their electoral campaigns. The law shall determine its organization, duties and powers. It shall be integrated by seven principle board members [vocales] , who shall have respective substitutes, who represent the political parties, movements or political alliances that obtained the highest numbers of votes in the last national elections with more than one candidate [pluripersonales] [. These political bodies] shall present lists of candidates to the National Congress from which the principal board members and substitutes shall be selected.

The board members shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the National Congress, shall remain in office for four years[,] and may be reselected. The public force shall collaborate with the Supreme Electoral Tribunal to guarantee the liberty and purity of suffrage. Article 210. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall organize, supervise and direct the electoral processes to elect representatives to deliberative organisms with international powers, when that is provided for in international agreements or treaties in force in Ecuador. TITLE X Of the Organisms of Control Chapter 1 Of the Office of the State Comptroller General Article 211. The Office of the State Comptroller General is the supreme technical organism of control, with administrative, budgetary and financial autonomy, directed and represented by the State Comptroller General, who shall carry out his functions during four years. It shall have power to control revenues, expenditures, investments, the use of resources, [and] administration and custody of public property. It shall audit the management of entities and organisms of the public sector and their employees, and shall judge the legality, transparency and efficiency of institutional results. Its actions shall extend to entities of private law, exclusively in regard to their property, income and other subsidies of a public character. The Office of the Comptroller shall issue regulations of a general character to achieve its functions. It shall obligatorily provide advice, when it is requested, on matters of its competence. Article 212. The Office of the State Comptroller General shall have exclusive power to determine culpable administrative and civil responsibility and indicia of criminal responsibility, and shall permanently and timely assure compliance with its dispositions and controls. Functionaries who harm and prejudice the public interest or the interests of third persons in the unjustified exercise of their powers of control shall be civilly and criminally responsible. Article 213.

[The following] is required to be State Comptroller General: 1. To be an Ecuadoran by birth. 2. To be in possession of one's political rights. 3. To have a professional university degree. 4. To have exercised with known professional integrity the profession or the teaching of university subjects for a minimum period of fifteen years. 5. To comply with the other requirements of competency set by the law. Chapter 2 Of the Office of the State Attorney General Article 214. The Office of the State Attorney General is an autonomous organism, directed and represented by the State Attorney General, appointed for a period of four years by the National Congress from a list of candidates presented by the President of the Republic. Article 215. The Attorney General is the juridical representative of the State and he may delegate said representation, in accordance with the law. He must possess those qualifications required to be a minister of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 216. The Attorney General shall be responsible for the protection [patrocinio] of the State, legal guidance and the other functions determined by law. Chapter 3 Of the Public Ministry Article 217. The Public Ministry is individual, indivisible and independent in its relations with the other branches of the public power and shall be composed of the functionaries determined by law. It shall have administrative and economic autonomy. The State General Fiscal Minister shall exercise its legal representation. Article 218.

The National Congress shall elect the Fiscal Minister through a majority of its members from a list of candidates presented by the National Counsel of the Judicature. He must satisfy the qualifications required of a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice. He shall carry out his functions during six years and may not be reelected. Article 219. The Public Minister shall prepare for the presentations of lawsuits, [and] direct and promote criminal pretrial investigations and trials. If cause is found, he shall accuse the alleged infringers before the competent judges and tribunals, and shall impel the accusation through the presentation of evidence in criminal trials. The General Fiscal Minister shall organize and direct a specialized police force and a medical-legal department to fulfill his functions. He shall oversee the functioning and the application of the penitentiary regime and the social rehabilitation of the delinquent. He shall ensure the protection of victims, witnesses and other participants in criminal trials. He shall coordinate and direct the fight against corruption, with the collaboration of all entities that, within their powers, have an equivalent duty. He shall contribute to public protection to maintain the supremacy of the Constitution and the law. He shall have other powers, exercise the functions and comply with the duties determined by the law. Chapter 4 Of the Commission of Civic Control of Corruption Article 220. The Commission of Civic Control of Corruption is a juridical person of public law, with its seat in Quito, with economic, political and administrative autonomy and independence. In its representation of citizens its shall promote the elimination of corruption; it shall accept denunciations of presumed illicit acts committed within the institutions of the State in order to investigate them and solicit their judgment and punishment. It may promote its organization in provinces and districts [cantones]. The law shall determine its integration, administration and functions, the institutions of civil society that will designate [its members,] and the duration of the tenure of its members who are outside of the Supreme Court.

Article 221. When the Commission has finalized its investigations and has found indicia of responsibility, it shall bring its conclusions to the cognizance of the Public Ministry and the Office of the Comptroller General of the State. It may not interfere with the authority of the judicial function, but [the judicial function] must process its petitions. It may demand the information it considers necessary to advance its investigation from any organism or functionary of the institutions of the State. Functionaries that refuse to provide it shall be sanctioned in conformity with the law. Persons that collaborate to clarify occurrences shall enjoy legal protection. Chapter 5 Of the Superintendencies Article 222. The superintendencies are technical organisms with administrative, economic and financial autonomy and have juridical existence of public law[; they are] charged with supervising public and private institutions so that the economic activities and services they provide are subject to the law and serve the general interest. The law shall determine the areas of activity that require control and supervision, and the scope of each superintendency's actions. Article 223. The superintendencies shall be directed and represented by superintendents elected by the National Congress with the vote of a majority of its members from lists of candidates presented by the President of the Republic. They shall carry out their functions during four years and may be reelected. To be designated a superintendent one must be at least thirty-five years old, have a university degree in a profession related to the function that he will carry out[,] and have at least ten years of experience in the exercise of his profession, having demonstrated known integrity. TITLE XI Of the Territorial Organization and Decentralization Chapter 1 Of the Administrative and Subordinate [Seccional] Regime Article 224.

Ecuadoran territory is indivisible. There shall exist provinces, districts and parishes for the administration of the State and political representation. There shall be indigenous and Afro-Ecuadoran territorial districts that will be established by law. Article 225. The State shall promote[,] through decentralization and dispersal, the harmonic development of the country, strengthening the participation of citizens and subordinate entities, [and] the distribution of public revenues and wealth. The central government shall progressively transfer functions, attributes, powers, responsibilities and resources to the autonomous subordinate autonomous entities [entitidades seccionales autónomas] or to others of a regional character. It shall decentralize its management by delegating powers to functionaries of the subordinate dependent regime. Article 226. The powers of the central government may be decentralized, except those of national defense and security, the administration of foreign policy and international relations, the economic and tax policies of the State, the management of foreign debt and those expressly excluded by the Constitution and international agreements. By virtue of decentralization, there may not be transfers of powers without the transfer of equivalent resources, or the transfer of resources without the transfer of powers. Decentralization shall be obligatory when a subordinate entity requests it and has the operational capacity to assume it. Chapter 2 Of the Dependent Subordinate Regime Article 227. There shall be a Governor, the representative of the President of the Republic, who shall coordinate and supervise the policies of the national government and direct the activities of functionaries and representatives of the Executive Function, in each province. Chapter 3 Of the Subordinate Autonomous Governments Article 228. The subordinate autonomous governments shall be carried out by the provincial councils, municipal councils, parish boards [juntas] and other organisms determined by law for the administration of indigenous and Afro-Ecuadoran territorial districts.

The provincial and district [cantonal] governments shall enjoy full autonomy and, in using their legislative ability [they] may dictate ordinances, [and] create, modify and suppress taxes and special improvement contributions. Article 229. The provinces, districts and parishes may associate themselves for their economic and social development and for the management of natural resources. Article 230. Without prejudice to that foreseen in this Constitution, the law shall determine the structure, integration, duties and powers of the provincial councils and municipal councils, and ensure the efficient application of the principles of autonomy, administrative decentralization and citizen participation. Article 231. The subordinate autonomous governments shall generate their own financial resources and shall participate in the income of the State, in conformity with the principles of solidarity and equity. The resources within the General Budget of the State that correspond to the subordinate autonomous regime shall be assigned and distributed in conformity with the law. Their assignment and distribution shall be governed by the following criteria: number of inhabitants, basic unsatisfied needs, contributory capacity, achievements in improving the quality of life and administrative efficiency. Release of resources to organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime shall be predictable, direct, timely and automatic. [Their release] shall be under the responsibility of the branch [ramo] ministry, and shall be effected through the transfer of accounts of the national treasury to the accounts of the corresponding entities. The annual preliminary draft of the [G]eneral [B]udget of the State shall obligatorily determine increases in the income of these organisms, in equal proportion to [the budget's] global increase. Article 232. Resources for the functioning of the organisms of the subordinate autonomous government shall be made up of: 1. The income generated by their own ordinances.

2. Transfers and interests that correspond to them. The funds assigned [asignaciones] to the organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime may not be less than fifteen percent of the total general revenue of the budget of the central government. 3. The resources they collect and those assigned to them by law. 4. The resources they receive by virtue of a transfer of powers. All discretionary assignments of funds are prohibited, except in instances of catastrophes. Article 223. There shall be a provincial council in each province with its seat in the capital. It shall consist of a number of counselors fixed by law, in direct relation to its population; and, they shall carry out their functions during five years. One half plus one of the counselors shall be elected by popular vote, and the rest shall be appointed[,] in conformity with the law[,] by the municipal councils of the province and they shall be from different districts from those counselors elected by popular vote. The provincial prefect shall be the highest officeholder in the provincial council, who shall preside with an annulling vote. He shall be elected by popular vote and shall carry out his functions during four years. His power and duties shall be recorded in the law. The Provincial Council shall represent the province, and in addition to the attributes foreseen in the law, it shall promote and carry out street building, environmental, and irrigation works within the province and management of the watersheds and microwatersheds within the jurisdiction. It shall complete works exclusively in rural areas. Article 234. Each district shall constitute a municipality. Its government shall be the responsibility of a municipal council, whose members shall be elected by popular vote. The law shall determine the duties and powers of the municipal council and the number of its members. The mayor shall be the highest officeholder in the municipal council, who shall preside over it with an annulling vote. He shall be elected through a popular vote and shall carry out his functions during four years. His powers and duties shall be recorded in the law. The municipal council, in addition to the powers assigned to it by the law, may in a direct manner plan, organize and regulate land transit and transportation through concessions, authorizations and other forms of administrative agreements [contratación], in agreement with the needs of the community. Article 235.

Each rural parish shall have a parish board [empowered through] popular election. The law shall determine its integration and powers. Its president shall be the principle officeholder and shall have the responsibility and power indicated by the law. Article 236. The law shall establish the powers of the organs of the subordinate autonomous regime to avoid superimposition and duplication of powers, and shall regulate the procedures to resolve conflicts of powers. Article 237. The law shall establish the form of social control and rendering of accounts of the entities of the subordinate autonomous regime. Chapter 4 Of the Special Regimes Article 238. There shall exist special regimes of territorial administration for demographic and environmental considerations. For the protection of areas subject to a special regime, the [regimes] may limit within their boundaries the right to internal migration, work or any other activity that may affect the environment. The law shall create norms for each special regime. The residents of the respective areas, affected by the limitation of their constitutional rights, shall be compensated through preferential access to the available natural resources and in the creation of associations that guarantee family patrimony and well being. In other matters, each sector shall regulate itself in accordance with that established by the Constitution and the law. The law may create metropolitan districts and regulate any type of special organization. Preference shall be given to works and services in zones of relative underdevelopment, especially in border provinces. Article 239. The province of Galapagos shall have a special regime. The National Galapagos Institute or that [organization] that replaces it, shall perform provincial planning, approve the budgets of the entities of the subordinate dependent and autonomous regime and control its execution. It shall direct a council integrated by the governor, who shall preside; the mayors, the provincial prefect, representatives of the scientific and technical areas, and other persons and institutions allowed by law.

Provincial planning shall be realized by the National Galapagos Institute, which shall have technical and scientific assistance[,] and with the participation of the entities of the subordinate dependent and autonomous regime, which shall be unique and obligatory. Article 240. In provinces of the amazon region, the State shall give special attention to sustainable development and ecological preservation, with the goal of maintaining biodiversity. Policies that compensate for its lesser development and consolidate the national sovereignty shall be adopted. Article 241. The law shall regulate the organization, competencies and powers of the administrative organs of the indigenous and Afro-Ecuadoran territorial districts. TITLE XII Of the Economic System Chapter 1 General Principles Article 242. The organization and functioning of the economy must correspond to the principles of efficiency, solidarity, sustainability and quality, with the goal of assuring inhabitants a dignified existence and equal rights and opportunities to access to work, property and services, and to the property of the means of production. Article 243. The permanent objectives of the economy are: 1. Equitable, regionally balanced, environmentally sustainable and democratically participatory development. 2. Preservation of the macroeconomic equilibrium, and sufficient and sustained growth. 3. Growth and diversification of production directed at the offer of goods and services of quality that satisfy the needs of the internal market. 4. Elimination of indigence, prevailing over poverty, reducing unemployment and underemployment; improving the quality of life of inhabitants, and the equitable distribution of wealth.

5. Competitive and diverse participation of Ecuadoran production in the international market. Article 244. Within the social economy of the market, the State shall: 1. Guarantee the development of economic activities, through the legal regime and institutions that promote, foment and generate confidence in these [activities]. Public and private business activities shall receive the same legal treatment. Equal conditions of national and foreign investment are guaranteed. 2. Develop, in a decentralized and participatory manner, obligatory plans and programs for public investment and guidelines for private [investment]. 3. Promote the development of activities and competitive markets, impel free competition and sanction monopolistic practices and other practices that impede and distort it, in conformity with the law. 4. Assure that economic activities comply with the law and regulate and control them in defense of the common good. Nepotism [anatocismo] is prohibited in the credit system. 5. Create physical, scientific and technological infrastructures; and provide basic services for development. 6. Engage in economic activities when it is required by the general interest. 7. Rationally exploit, directly or with the participation of the private sector, property of its exclusive dominion. 8. Protect the rights of consumers, sanction fraudulent information, deceptive advertisement, adulteration of products, alteration of weights and measurements, and noncompliance with the norms of quality. 9. Maintain a disciplined fiscal policy; encourage saving and investment; increase and diversify exports and take care that the public debt is compatible with the ability of the country to pay. 10. Provide incentives for full employment and improvement in real salaries, taking into account increases in productivity, and grant specific subsidies to those who need them. Article 245. The Ecuadoran economy shall be organized and develop itself in coexistence and concurring with the public and private sectors. Economic businesses may be private,

public, mixed and community or sole proprietorships [autogestión] in their holding of property and management. The State shall recognize, guarantee and regulate them. Article 246. The State shall promote the development of community businesses or sole proprietorships, as cooperatives, artisanal workshops, boards that administer potable water and other similar [businesses], whose property and management pertain to the community or to the persons who permanently work with them, use their services or consume their products. Article 247. Nonrenewable natural resources and, in general, products of the subsoil, minerals and substances that have a distinct character from the soil, including those found in areas covered by the waters of the territorial sea[,] are inalienable and the imprescriptible property of the State. These goods shall be exploited in the national interest. Their rational exploration and exploitation may be carried out by public, mixed or private businesses, in accordance with the law. The concession of the use of electromagnetic frequencies for the dissemination of radio and television signals, and [the signals of] other media is within the exclusive power of the State. Equality of conditions in the concession of said frequencies shall be guaranteed. The transfer of concessions and any form of direct or indirect State or individual monopolization of the expression and social communication is prohibited. The waters are national property of public use; dominion over them is inalienable and imprescriptible; their use and exploitation corresponds to the State or to those who obtain such rights, in agreement with the law. Article 248. The State has sovereign rights over biological diversity, natural reserves, protected areas and national parks. Their conservation and sustainable use shall be achieved with the participation of the affected populations, as the case may be, and private initiatives, according to the programs, plans and policies that contemplate them as factors of development and quality of life and in conformity with international agreements and treaties. Article 249. Provision of public services of potable water and irrigation, sanitation, electrical power, telecommunication, roads, port facilities and other of a similar nature are the responsibility of the State. It may offer them directly or through delegation to mixed or

private businesses through concessions, associations, capitalization, transfer of stock [propiedad accionaria] or any other contractual method, in agreement with the law. Laws or other dispositions may not unilaterally modify the agreed upon contractual conditions. The State shall guarantee that the public services, provided under its control and regulation, comply with the principles of efficiency, responsibility, universality, accessibility, continuity and quality; and it shall guard over the fairness of prices or tariffs. Article 250. The Solidarity Fund shall be an autonomous organism designed to combat poverty and to eliminate indigence. Its capital shall be used for secure and profitable investments and it may not be spent or used for the acquisition of titles emitted by the central government or public organisms. Only its profits may be used to exclusively finance education, health and environmental sanitation programs, and to attend to the social impact of natural disasters. The capital of the Solidarity Fund shall be administered according to the law [and] it originates from the economic resources generated by the transfer of patrimony of businesses and public services, except those that originate from the transfer of property and stock of the National Financial Corporation, Bank of Growth and organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime. Article 251. The subordinate autonomous governments of territorial districts in which nonrenewable natural resources are exploited and industrialized shall have the right to participate in the profits received by the State. The law shall regulate this participation. Article 252. The State guarantees liberty in land, air, maritime and river transportation within or through the national territory. The law shall regulate the exercise of this right, without privileges of any kind. The State shall exercise the regulation of land, air and aquatic transportation and airports and ports on water through autonomous entities, with the participation of the corresponding entities of the public force. Article 253. The State recognizes commercial transactions by barter and similar means.

It shall create better conditions for the participation of the low-income formal sector in the national economic system through specific credit, information, training, commercialization and social security policies. Free ports and exempt zones may be constituted, according to the structure established by law. Chapter 2 Of Economic and Social Planning Article 254. The national system of planning shall establish the permanent national objectives in economic and social matters, shall set goals for short, medium and long-term development to be achieved in a decentralized manner, and should obligatorily guide investment in the public sector and provide guidelines for [investment in] the private sector. Age, ethno-cultural, local and regional differences shall be taken into account and a gender focus shall be incorporated. Article 255. The national system of planning shall be the responsibility of a technical organism dependent on the President of the Republic, with the participation of the subordinate autonomous governments and the social organizations determined by the law. Organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime may establish planning departments responsible for the provincial and district development plans, in coordination with the national system Chapter 3 Of the Tax Regime Article 256. The tax system is governed by the basic principles of equality, proportionality and generality. Taxes, in addition to serving as a means of obtaining budgetary resources, are instruments of general economic policy. Tax laws stimulate investment, reinvestment, savings and their use in national development. They strive [to create] a just distribution of income and wealth among all the inhabitants of the country. Article 257.

They may only be established, changed or eliminated by a legislative act of the competent organ. Tax legislation may not be decreed to take retroactive effect to the detriment of taxpayers [contribuyentes] . Tax rates and special contributions shall be established and regulated in accordance with the law. 'The President of the Republic may fix or modify the customs tariffs. Chapter 4 Of the Budget Article 258. The preparation of the preliminary draft of the General State Budget corresponds to the Executive Function, which shall elaborate it according to its plan of development and present it to the National Congress before the first of September of each year. The Central Bank shall present a report to the National Congress on said preliminary draft. Congress in plenary session shall take cognizance of the preliminary draft and approve or reform it before the thirtieth of November, in one sole debate, by sections on revenues and expenditures. If it is not approved before this date, the preliminary draft elaborated by the Executive shall enter into effect. In the year that the President of the Republic enters into office, the preliminary draft shall be presented before the thirty-first of January and approved before the twenty-eighth of February. Until then, the budget of the prior year shall govern. Congress may not increase the estimated amount of revenues and expenditures foreseen in the preliminary draft. During creation of the budget, the Executive must have the prior approval of Congress to increase expenditures over the percentage determined by law. Article 259. The general budget of the State shall contain all the revenues and expenditures of the non-financial public sector, except those of the organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime and the public businesses. The National Congress shall also take cognizance of the budgets of the state public businesses. Common expenses cannot be financed through public debt. No public organism shall be deprived of the necessary budget to comply with the ends and goals for which it was created.

The executive shall inform the National Congress of the execution of the budget and its annual liquidation twice a year. Funds of reserved use can only be assigned for national defense purposes. Article 260. The formulation and execution of fiscal policy shall be the responsibility of the Executive Function. The President of the Republic shall determine the mechanisms and procedures for the administration of public finances, without prejudice to the control of the pertinent organisms. Chapter 5 Of the Central Bank Article 261. The functions of the Central Bank of Ecuador, a legal person of public law with technical and administrative autonomy, are to establish, control and apply the monetary, financial, loan and exchange policies of the State[,] and, its objective is to ensure the stability of the currency. Article 262. Five members proposed by the President of the Republic and confirmed by a majority of the members of the National Congress shall integrate the board of directors of the Central Bank. It shall exercise its functions for a period of six years, with partial renewal every three years. The National Congress shall make confirmations within ten days counted from the date on which it received the nomination of the candidates. If it does not do so within this period, the persons proposed by the President of the Republic will be understood to be confirmed. If Congress rejects any of the names or the entire list of nominations, the President of the Republic must propose new candidates. The members of the board of directors shall elect from amongst themselves [the Central Bank's] president, who shall carry out his functions for three years; he may be reelected and shall have a competent vote in the decisions of the organism. The minister that is responsible for public finance and the superintendent responsible for controlling the financial system may attend the sessions of the board of directors with voice, but no vote. The members of the board of directors of the Central Bank may not realize other work activities, except that of university professor. They may not have a work or social connection with public or private institutions of the financial system during the exercise of and until six months after they separate from their posts. The removal of members of the board of directors shall be proposed by the President of the Republic according to the law, and resolved by two-thirds of the members of the National Congress.

Article 263. The board of directors of the Central Bank shall issue regulations of a generally obligatory character[,] which shall be published in the Official Register; it shall present reports to the President of the Republic and the National Congress twice a year, and shall inform them of the limits on public indebtedness, which must be set by the National Congress. Article 264. The emission of currency with unlimited power of transfer [poder liberatorio ilimitado] is the exclusive domain of the Central Bank. The monetary unit is the Sucre, [and] the Central Bank shall fix its exchange relationship with other currencies. Article 265. The Central Bank shall not grant loans to institutions of the State or acquire bonds or other financial instruments issued by those [institutions], except if a state of emergency has been declared due to a violent conflict or natural disaster. It may not grant guarantees or loans to institutions of the private financial system, except short term ones that have been classified as indispensable to overcome situations of temporary insolvency. Chapter 6 Of the Agricultural and Livestock Regime Article 266. The permanent objective of State policies shall be the prioritary, integral and sustainable development of agricultural, livestock, water [acuícola] , fishery and agriculturalindustrial activities that provide quality products for internal and external markets, the development of infrastructure, the creation of technologies for and the recuperation of lands, [and] scientific research and the transfer of technology. The State shall stimulate forestry and reforestation projects, above all [those that will affect] endemic species, in conformity with the law. One cannot affect areas reserved for these projects. National associations of producers, which represent groups of people engaged in agricultural activities [agricultores] [and] peasants and professionals of the agricultural and livestock sector, shall participate with the State in defining sectoral policies and [policies] of social interest. Article 267.

The State shall guarantee possession of land used for production and shall stimulate agricultural business. The public sector shall create and maintain the infrastructure necessary for promotion of agricultural and livestock production. It shall take the measures necessary to eradicate rural poverty, guaranteeing the access of poor people to productive resources through redistributive measures. It shall prohibit the monopolization of land and large landed estates [latifundios] . It shall stimulate community and cooperative production, through the integration of units of production. It shall regulate direct and spontaneous colonization, with the goal of improving the quality of life of peasants and strengthening the live frontiers of the country, taking precautions to preserve natural resources and the environment. Article 268. It shall grant loans to the agricultural and livestock sectors under preferential conditions. The State shall resolve to create a social security system [seguro] for people engaged in agricultural and livestock, forestry and fishing activities. Article 269. The small agrarian property, as well as the small agricultural or livestock business [microempresa] , shall enjoy the special protection of the State, in conformity with the law. Article 270. The State shall give priority to research on agricultural and livestock matters, with the fundamental objectives of recognizing the population's nutrition and food security and the development of the country's international competitiveness. Chapter 7 Of Investment Article 271. The State shall guarantee national and foreign funds invested in production, destined specially for internal consumption and exportation. The law may concede special treatment to public and private investment in less developed zones or in activities of national interest.

The State may establish special guarantees and securities in contracts entered into with investors in order to prevent the contracts from being modified by laws or other dispositions of any class that could affect their clauses. TITLE XIII Of the Supremacy, Control and Reform of the Constitution Chapter 1 Of the Supremacy of the Constitution Article 272. The Constitution shall prevail over any other legal norm. The disposition of organic and ordinary laws, decree-laws, decrees, statutes, ordinances, regulations, resolutions and other acts of public power shall maintain conformity with its dispositions and shall be void if they contradict it or alter its prescriptions in any way. If there is a conflict between norms of distinct hierarchies, the courts, tribunals, judges and administrative authorities shall resolve it through the application of the superior hierarchical norm. Article 273. The courts, tribunals, judges and administrative authorities have the obligation to apply the pertinent norms of the Constitution although the interested party does not expressly invoke them. Article 274. Any judge or tribunal, sua sponte or upon the petition of a party, may declare that a legal principle contrary to the norms of the Constitution or international treaties or agreements is inapplicable in the lawsuits of which he or it takes cognizance, without prejudice to his or its decision on the disputed matter. This declaration shall not have binding power except in the lawsuit in which it is pronounced. The judge, tribunal or chamber shall present a report on the declaration of unconstitutionality so that the Constitutional Tribunal can make a general and obligatory resolution on the matter. Chapter 2 Of the Constitutional Tribunal Article 275. The Constitutional Tribunal, with national jurisdiction, shall maintain its seat in Quito. Nine board members, who shall have respective substitutes, shall integrate it. They shall

carry out their functions for four years and may be reelected. The organic law shall determine the norms for its organization and functioning, and the procedures for its hearings. The board members of the Constitutional Tribunal must satisfy the same requirements as the ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, and shall be subject to the same prohibitions. They are not responsible for the votes that they omit and for the opinions that they formulate in the exercise of their responsibilities. The National Congress shall designate them by the majority of its members, in the following manner: Two, from lists of candidates sent by the President of the Republic. Two, from lists of candidates presented by the Supreme Court of Justice which do not include any of its members [de fuera de su seno] . Two, selected by the National Congress, who do not exhibit the characteristics [dignidades] of legislators. One, from the list of candidates presented by the municipal mayors and the provincial prefects. One, from the list of candidates presented by the legally recognized national workers headquarters [centrales de trabajadores] and the national indigenous and peasant organizations. One, from the list of candidates sent by the legally recognized Production Chambers [Cámaras de Producción]. The law shall regulate the procedure for creating the lists of candidates referred to in the three proceeding paragraphs. The Constitutional Tribunal shall elect, from among its members, a president and vicepresident, who shall carry out their functions for two years and may be reelected. Article 276. The Constitutional Tribunal is responsible for [the following]: 1. To take cognizance of and resolve complaints of substantive or procedural unconstitutionality that are presented regarding organic or ordinary laws, decree-laws, decrees, ordinances, statutes, regulations and resolutions, emitted by organs of the institutions of the State, and totally or partially suspend their effect.

2. To take cognizance of and resolve the unconstitutionality of administrative acts of all public authorities. The declaration of unconstitutionality shall bring about the revocation of the act, without prejudice to the administrative organ that adopts necessary measures to preserve respect for constitutional norms. 3. To take cognizance of resolutions that deny habeas corpus, habeas data and the amparo , and instances of appeal foreseen in the amparo lawsuit. 4. To make a determination with respect to objections of unconstitutionality made by the President of the Republic during the process of forming laws. 5. To make a determination on whether international treaties or agreements conform to the Constitution before they are approved by the National Congress. 6. To settle conflicts of competence or of powers assigned by the Constitution. 7. To exercise the other powers conferred to it by the Constitution and the laws. Judicial decisions on incidental matters [providencias] of the Judicial Function shall not be susceptible to control by the Constitutional Tribunal. Article 277. Complaints of unconstitutionality may be presented by: 1. The President of the Republic, in the cases foreseen in number one of Art. 276. 2. The National Congress, after agreement of the majority of its members, in the instances foreseen in numbers one and two of the same article. 3. The Supreme Court of Justice, after the Tribunal in Plenary Session has so resolved, in the cases described in numbers one and two of the same article. 4. The provincial councils or the municipal councils, in the instances foreseen in number two of the same article. 5. A thousand citizens in enjoyment of their political rights, or any other person after the Public Defender issues a favorable report on its propriety, in the cases of numbers one and two of the same article. The President of the Republic may request the decision established in numbers four and five of the same article. The decision foreseen by number six of the same article, may be solicited by the President of the Republic, by the National Congress, by the Supreme Court of Justice, the provincial councils or the municipal councils.

The power referred to in number three of the same article shall be exercised upon the request of the parties or the Public Defender. Article 278. The declaration of unconstitutionality shall cause a judgment to be issued [ejecutoría] and promulgated in the Official Register. It shall enter into effect from the date of its promulgation and shall nullify the disposition or act that was declared unconstitutional. The declaration shall have no retroactive effect, nor shall there be any recourse from it. If thirty days have passed since the publication of the resolution in the Official Register, [and] the responsible functionary or functionaries have not complied with it, the Tribunal, sua sponte or upon the petition of a party, shall sanction them in conformity with the law. Article 279. The Constitutional Tribunal shall annually inform the National Congress in writing about the exercise of its functions. Chapter 3 Of the Reform and the Interpretation of the Constitution Article 280. The Political Constitution may be reformed by the National Congress or through popular referendum. Article 281. Proposals for the reform of the Constitution may be presented before the National Congress by a number of deputies equal to twenty percent of its members or a legislative block; the President of the Republic, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Constitutional Tribunal[,] or a number of persons in exercise of their political rights, whose names are recorded in the electoral registry, and who equal one percent of the persons recorded in it. Article 282. The National Congress shall take cognizance of and discuss bills of constitutional reform, [and] follow the same procedure foreseen for the ratification of laws. The second debate, which requires the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total members of Congress, may not be carried out until one year after the realization of the first [debate]. Once the bill is approved, the National Congress shall remit it to the President of the Republic for its sanction or objection, in conformity with the dispositions of this Constitution.

Article 283. The President of the Republic, in cases of urgency, previously approved by the National Congress with a vote of the majority of its members, may submit the approval of constitutional reforms to popular referendum. In other cases, a referendum shall proceed when the National Congress has not taken cognizance of, approved or denied the reforms in a period of one hundred and twenty days counted from the expiration of the period of one year referred to in the previous article. In both events, concrete texts of constitutional reform shall be submitted for the consideration of the electorate, which, if approved, shall be immediately incorporated into the Constitution. Article 284. In case of doubt over the scope of norms contained in this Constitution, the National Congress may interpret them in a generally obligatory manner. The same people or organisms that have the power to present bills to reform [the Constitution] shall have the initiative for the presentation of bills of constitutional interpretation, which shall be processed in the same way as the issuance of laws. Their approval shall require the favorable vote of two-thirds of the members of the National Congress. Transitory Dispositions Of Inhabitants First.—When the laws or international conventions in force refer to "nationality," "citizenship" shall be understood, and when the laws refer to the "rights of citizenship," "political rights" shall be understood. Of Social Security Second.—The Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security, shall in an immediate and urgent manner, initiate a profound process of transformation to rationalize its structure, modernize its management, institute decentralization and dispersal, recuperate its financial balance, optimize the collection and payment of past due loans; complement the installed capacity for universal health coverage, overcome the problems of organization, management, financing and coverage, in order to comply with the principles of social security and deliver quality assistance and services, in a timely and efficient manner. For this purpose, a tripartite commission shall be created to intervene in the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security with a representative of the insured, a representative of employers and a representative of the Executive Function, who shall all be appointed before the thirty-first of August of 1998 by the President of the Republic who takes possession in that same year. The superior council shall immediately cease its functions, which shall be assumed by the interventionary commission, which shall appoint from

outside its midst the director and president of the appellate commission; it shall provide for the realization of corresponding actuarial studies and, through independent auditing companies of international prestige, it shall bring the balances[,] financial records, and the economic and administrative audit of the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security up to date. During a period of six months counted from its integration, the interventionary commission shall present the Legislation and Codification Commission of the National Congress with a proposal to reform the social security law and other laws for the modernization and reorganization of the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security. It shall deliver an integral plan of reform for the same Institute to the President of the Republic and [the plan's] execution shall be initiated immediately. The interventionary commission, among the bills of law presented to the National Congress and after completing the pertinent studies, shall recommend the remuneration from which the contributions to the obligatory social security and its percentages shall be calculated, and it shall also present a proposal for the reform or suppression of special retirements. The interventionary commission shall cease in its functions at the moment the new directors take office in conformity with the law, who shall continue the process of restructuring the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security. The bills presented to the National Congress by the interventionary commission shall benefit from the special procedures established for the Legislation and Codification Commission. Third.—The national government shall discharge the debt it maintains with the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security for the financing of forty percent of the pensions and for other obligations, including the respective interest payments, in equal and successive annual payments of dividends, within a period of ten years from 1999, if the process of restructuring has been initiated. These dividends shall be recorded in the General Budget of the State and may not be assigned to common or operational expenditures. The forty percent owed for the financing of pensions shall be assigned to the pension fund, and that owed against other obligations shall finance the corresponding services. Fourth.—The funds from payments made for the different services shall be maintained in a separate manner and may not be used for different services than those for which they were created. One of these funds shall be the peasant social security [system]. The funds for invalids, old age, death, work risks and dismissal shall be administered and maintained separately from the patrimony of the Institute of Social Security.

Fifth.—The personnel that is dismissed as a consequence of the transformation and rationalization of the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security, shall have the right to indemnifications for the termination of the relationship that are in force on the date on which they no longer provide their services. Of Education Sixth.—The school year shall last two hundred work days in the entire national educational system starting from the 1999-2000 period. Seventh.—The State shall progressively establish obligatory service of rural education, which shall be completed as a prerequisite to obtaining the title of professional in education. The law shall determine that pertinent to comply with this duty. Eighth.—The conversion of schools with one teacher to schools with more than one teacher shall be encouraged. Ninth.—The National Congress shall issue the law of Higher Education within a period of six months. In the meantime[,] the National Council of Universities and Polytechnical Schools shall continue to function with the composition and powers established in the current law. Tenth.—The law shall establish that the National Council of Higher Education shall be composed of nine members; five of them shall be rectors elected by the universities, polytechnical schools and technical and technological superior institutes, (two by the university officials; one by the polytechnical officials; one by the private universities; [and,] one by the technical and technological superior institutes); two [shall be elected] by the public sector, and one [shall be elected] by the private sector, and one [shall be] the president of the council, elected by the other members, who must be the former rector of a university or a polytechnical school or an academic with prestige. The Secretary General of CONUEP shall be the basis for the creation of the technical administrative organ of the National Council of Higher Education. The law shall regulate the functioning of an assembly of the Ecuadoran university integrated by rectors and by representatives of professors, students, employees and workers of the universities and polytechnical schools. Eleventh.—The superior technical and technological institutes shall continue to depend on the Ministry of Education until the National Council of Higher Education is in place. Twelfth.—The National Council of Higher Education, in a period of six months counted from its integration, shall form a national system of admission and ranking, to which the universities and polytechnical schools shall obligatorily submit themselves. Those that have a system of admission and ranking shall continue to apply it until the national

system is approved. Those that do not have one shall establish one starting in the 19992000 school year. Thirteenth.—The contributions of students established by the universities and polytechnical schools, must only be tuition adjusted according to their socio-economic level. The universities and polytechnical schools may continue to charge fees and rates for services. Fourteenth.—Only the private universities that now receive fees and rates from the State, in agreement with the law, shall continue to receive them in the future. These shall be increased under the terms established by paragraph three of Art. 78 of this Constitution. Fifteenth.—The statutes of the Polytechnical School of the Army and the Andian Simon Bolivar University shall be approved and reformed by the organisms that establish their norms. Sixteenth.—The rights and duties of Ecuadoran citizens shall be taught at all levels of education. Of Elections Seventeenth.—Women shall have a twenty percent participation in the lists of candidates for multi-person elections, as well as all the rights and guarantees recorded in laws and international treaties in force. Eighteenth.—The election of representatives before the Andean Parliament shall be governed by the law of elections, until the Andean Community of Nations establishes a uniform electoral regime. Of the Public Sector Nineteenth.—The actual value of the family subsidy shall be equalized for the public servants that receive it. Of the National Congress Twentieth.—The president and the vice-president of the National Congress that enter into office during August 2000, shall exercise their [office] until the fourth of January of the year 2003. Twenty-first.—The National Congress installed during August 1998, shall create and approve the Code of Ethics within thirty days after its installation. Twenty-second.—The National Congress, in a period of six months, shall determine the laws in effect to be classified as organic.

Twenty-third.—Three of the board members of the Legislation and Codification Commission, elected for the first time after this Constitution enters into effect and selected through a lottery, shall cease their functions three years after their election. The National Congress shall designate their replacements for the constitutional period of six years. Twenty-fourth.—If the National Congress does not pass the laws foreseen in this Constitution in the period fixed by it, the President of the Republic shall send the corresponding bills to the Congress which shall process them as if they were [bills] of economic emergency. Twenty-fifth.—The functionaries and members of organisms appointed by the National Congress and the Comptroller General of the State from the tenth of August of 1998 for a period of four years, by virtue of the dispositions of this Constitution, shall remain in office until January of 2003. Of the Judicial Function Twenty-sixth.—All the magistrates and judges that depend on the Executive Function shall pass to the Judicial Function, and while the laws do not provide something different, they shall be subject to their own organic laws. This disposition includes the military, police and juvenile judges. If the administration of justice on certain matters is within the powers of other public functionaries, they shall lose [that power], and it shall be given to the corresponding organs of the Judicial Function. The National Council of the Judicature shall present the National Congress with bills that modify the relevant laws, so that these dispositions may be complied with. The administrative personnel that currently works with the military, police and juvenile courts, tribunals and judicatures, whose stability is guaranteed, shall become part of the Judicial Function. The property and budget of these dependencies shall also be transferred to the Judicial Function. Twenty-seventh.—The implementation of the oral system shall be carried out during a period of four years, for which the National Congress shall reform the necessary laws and the Judicial Function shall adjust its dependencies and installations to adapt them to the new system. Of the Penitentiary and Social Rehabilitation Regime Twenty-eighth.—Those denounced for crimes punished by imprisonment that have now been detained for more than one year, without sentence, shall obtain their immediate liberty, without prejudice to the continuation of their criminal trial until their termination.

The application of this norm shall be the responsibility of the judges who possess cognizance of the corresponding criminal cases. The National Council of the Judicature shall sanction those judges who have acted negligently in the respective trials. Of the Public Ministry Twenty-ninth.—The National Congress shall reform the pertinent laws, during the period of one year, so that the Public Ministry will comply with the functions established in this Constitution. Of the Commission of Civic Control of Corruption Thirtieth.—Until the corresponding law is issued, the Commission of Civic Control of Corruption shall be integrated by seven members, appointed by the President of the Republic elected in 1998, who represent the institutions of civil society. To be a member of the commission one must: 1. Be an Ecuadoran by birth and over forty years old. 2. Have no legal impediment to exercising public office. 3. Enjoy recognized honesty. 4. Be a person who [does not] [sic] exercise functions in political parties or movements. The current members of the Anticorruption Commission may be designated to integrate [the Commission]. Of the Superintendencies Thirty-first.—The existing superintendencies shall continue to function, in conformity with the Constitution and its respective laws The National Congress shall issue or reform the laws of the sector so that[,] if [so required, the sector] will be regulated and controlled by the corresponding superintendency or equivalent institution, as the case may be. Of Decentralization Thirty-second.—To achieve decentralization and deconcentration, the national government shall elaborate an annual plan and inform Congress of its execution. Thirty-third.—Political offices shall continue until a law is issued that regulates the parish boards and the justices of the peace. The stability of administrative personnel who

are not hired at will and who work in political headquarters and offices is guaranteed in conformity with the law. Thirty-fourth.—The National Congress, before the possession [of office] of the subordinate authorities to be elected in 2000, shall issue the necessary laws related to the regional or provincial organisms that currently function in the country, which are distinct from the provincial councils and municipal councils. Thirty-fifth.—The municipalities created after the issuance of special laws that assign revenues to these institutions, shall have access to such allotments under similar conditions as others. Of the Economy Thirty-sixth.—The National Congress shall dictate the modifications to pertinent laws, for the full application of the dispositions of [C]hapter 1 of [T]itle XII. Thirty-seventh.—The revenue from fees charged for the use of airport and port facilities must be exclusively assigned to cover the need for investment in and operation of airports, ports and adjacent infrastructure, as well as the organisms that regulate and control these activities, except contributions in favor of the House of Ecuadoran Culture established by existing laws. Thirty-eighth.—Free ports shall be established in the provinces of Esmeraldas and El Oro in conformity with the norms issued for that purpose. Of Economic Planning Thirty-ninth.—The functionaries and employees that currently work for the National Council of Development [Consejo Nacional de Desarrollo (CONADE)], shall form part of the organism referred to in Art. 255 of this Constitution, with the stability that they enjoy in accordance with the law. Until the law founding the organism enters into effect, the aforementioned personnel shall be under the command and control of the President of the Republic. The property belonging to CONADE shall also be transferred to this organism. Of the Central Bank Fortieth.—Two of the members of the board of the Central Bank, elected for the first time after this Constitution enters into effect and selected by lottery, shall leave office three years after their election. The President of the Republic shall propose candidates to replace those dismissed, and the National Congress shall designate the replacements, in the form and for the period foreseen by Art. 262. During the period of six months, the National Congress shall dictate the reforms to the law of the Monetary and Bank Regime of the State that are necessary for the application of that provided for in this Constitution.

Forty-first.—The board of directors of the Central Bank shall assume the powers and duties that correspond to the Monetary Board [Junta Monetaria] , without prejudice to that provided in the law. Forty-second.—Until the State has adequate legal instruments to face financial crises[,] and for a period of no more than two years counted from the date this Constitution enters into effect, the Central Bank of Ecuador may grant loans of stability and solvency to financial institutions, as well as loans to attend to the preference rights of natural person who are depositors in the institutions that enter into the process of liquidation. Official Register Forty-third.—Until the corresponding law is issued, the Official Register with its personnel, property and budget, shall become dependent on the Constitutional Tribunal. The National Congress, during a period of one year, shall issue the law that establishes the autonomy of the Official Register. General [Transitory Provisions] Forty-fourth.—The State shall promote, along with the countries that border it, agreements that tend to promote the development of border zones and to resolve the problems of identification, certification, and transit of its inhabitants. Forty-fifth.—The periods established in this Constitution shall be counted from the date of its entry into effect, unless the contrary is determined in express form. Forty-sixth.—The reconstruction of the provinces of the Coast and other regions of the country, devastated by the phenomena of El Niño is declared to be a national policy. The national government is responsible for its execution. FINAL DISPOSITION The present codified Constitution, approved today the fifth of June of 1998, in Riobamba—the seat of the founding of the Ecuadoran state in 1830—, that contains reforms and unreformed text, shall enter into force on the day that the new President of the Republic enters office in the present year of 1998, date on which the Constitution in force is derogated. [This Constitution] shall be promulgated and published in the Constitutional Gazette and disseminated by other social communication media, without prejudice to its publication in the Official Register. Luis Mejia Montesdeoca Diego Ordóñez Guerrero President General Secretary

