CONSTITUTION
of the REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
December 31, 1946 In the name of God the people of Ecuador, through their representatives met in assembly, issue the following Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador. FIRST PART ORGANIZATION
TITLE I
NATION, SOVEREIGNTY AND GOVERNMENT

Art. 1. The Ecuadorian Nation is composed of the Ecuadorian people associated under the dominion of the same laws and customs. Art. 2. The Republic of Ecuador, the form of state in which the Ecuadorian nation is constituted, is unitary, sovereign, independent, and democratic; and its government is of the people, representative, elective, accountable and one in which the office of President may not be held successively by the same person. Art. 3. The national sovereignty is exercised by means of the organs of the public power which this Constitution establishes. Art. 4. In addition to the continental provinces situated in South America, the national territory embraces the adjacent islands, the Archipelago of Columbus, also known as Galapagos, the territorial seas, the subsoil and the atmosphere above them. The national territory is inalienable, and no pact may be entered into which affects its integrity, or which impairs the national sovereignty; the foregoing being without prejudice to the duties imposed by the international juridical community. Art. 5. The Republic of Ecuador respects the rules of international law, and proclaims the principle of co-operation and good neighborliness between states, and the solution of international controversies by juridical methods.
of 1946, Art. 7. 


Art. 6. Within the world community of nations, Ecuador will collaborate especially with the Ibero-American states, to which it is united by ties of solidarity and interdependence originating from their identity of origin and culture, for the defense of their common territorial, economic, and cultural interests. Consequently it may form associations for the defense of such interests with one or more of said states. Art. 7. The official language of the Republic is Spanish. The national emblem, flag, and anthem are those determined by law. Art. 8. The capital of the Republic is the city of Quito.
TITLE II
NATIONALITY

Art. 9. Ecuadorians are such by birth or by naturalization. The following are Ecuadorian by birth: (1) Those born in the national territory who are included in any of the following cases: (a) If both parents are Ecuadorian or foreigners domiciled in Ecuador at the date of the birth of the child or if both parents are unknown; (b) If only one of the parents is Ecuadorian and the child resides in Ecuador or has been inscribed as an Ecuadorian in the registry of births before the age of eighteen years, or if, having reached the said age, he does not manifest a contrary desire; (c) The child of foreign parents, not domiciled in Ecuador, who, having reached eighteen years of age, declares his desire to be Ecuadorian. (2) Those born in foreign territory and included in any of the following
cases:

(a) If the father or the mother, or both, are Ecuadorians who are abroad in the service of Ecuador on the date of birth of the child; (b) If the father or the mother, or both, are Ecuadorians who are exiled or temporarily absent from the country, on said date; and (c) If the father or the mother, or both, are Ecuadorians or foreigners domiciled in Ecuador on the date of the birth of the child, and the latter, having reached the age of eighteen years, does not manifest a contrary desire. Art. 10. In general it is presumed that a person born in the territory of the Republic is Ecuadorian by birth. Art. 11. The following are Ecuadorians by naturalization: (a) Those who have obtained Ecuadorian nationality from Congress for having rendered service to the country; (b) Those who have received a certificate of naturalization in conformity with the law; (c) Those born abroad of foreign parents who later become naturalized in Ecuador while the former are under the age of eighteen years. In this case, they retain such nationality if they do not expressly renounce it. Art. 12. Neither marriage nor its dissolution alters the nationality of the spouses. Art. 13. Those who, in conformity with previous constitutions, have had or acquired Ecuadorian nationality, and have not lost it, shall continue in its enjoyment. Art. 14. Juridical entities authorized by Ecuadorian law are Ecuadorian.


Art. 15. Ecuadorian nationality is lost: Sa) By treason to the country, judicially determined; b) By naturalization in another state, and c) By cancellation of the certificate of naturalization. Art. 16. Nationality may be regained in accordance with the law. TITLE III
CITIZENSHIP

Art. 17. Every Ecuadorian, man or woman, over eighteen years of age, who knows how to read and write, is a citizen, and, in consequence, as a general rule, may elect or be elected or appointed a public official. Art. 18. Rights of citizenship are lost: (1) By insolvency, adjudged fraudulent; (2) By sentence, in case of fraud in the management of public funds; (3) By sentence, in case of the breaking of constitutional provisions by public employees or officials, and (4) In the other cases established by the Constitution and the laws. Art. 19. Rights of citizenship are suspended: (1) By offenses against the freedom of suffrage; (2) By judicial injunction, for the duration thereof; 3) By order issued for cause, until final judgment be rendered, if of acquittal, or until the sentence has been complied with, if condemnatory; (4) By not having presented the accounts of public funds within the time fixed by law, or by not having paid the balances therein declared, the same to be for the duration of the delay; and (5) In the other cases established by the law.
TITLE IV
SUFFRAGE

Section I Concerning Elections Art. 20. There shall be direct and indirect elections in accordance with the Constitution and the laws. Art. 21. The representation of minorities is guaranteed in direct elections, when it is a case of electing more than two persons in the same election. The law shall determine the form in which said representation will be made effective and shall establish, moreover, the cases in which the same will be applied to indirect elections. Art. 22. To be a voter one is required to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship and to fulfill the other conditions required by the law. Subject to these conditions, the vote in popular elections is obligatory for men and optional for women. The law shall determine the corresponding penalty for non-compliance with this duty. The public forces guarantee the sanctity of the electoral process. They do not have the right to vote in universal suffrage. Their representation will be functional. 1

I That is, by one

of the "functional" senators provided for in Article 42.

Section II Concerning Electoral Tribunals Art. 23. In the capital of the Republic, and with jurisdiction throughout the Republic, there shall be an autonomous supreme court of elections, which shall be organized in the following form: Three members designated by Congress; Two by the President of the Republic, and Two by the Supreme Court. Twice as many substitutes shall be designated. The members shall hold office for four years and may be indefinitely re-elected. Said office shall be obligatory, and the members shall receive, for each session, the pay which the law fixes. Art. 24. The following are powers and duties of the supreme court of elections: (a) To regulate and watch over, personally or through their agents, the diverse acts of the electoral process; as well as to give instructions and to prescribe the necessary measures for its proper fulfillment; (b) To resolve doubts concerning the interpretation and correct application of the law of elections, in each case that may be presented; (c) To resolve, in the second and final instance, the complaints which any citizen may present in respect to infractions of the law or improprieties in the
vote; and to impose or order the corresponding sanctions;

(d) To count the vote as required of it by the law of elections, and to issue the corresponding election certificates, and (e) To elect officers from among its members, to prescribe its rules and to designate the members of the provincial courts of elections. Art. 25. All administrative authorities must co-operate with the courts of elections for the fulfillment of the functions with which the latter are entrusted.
TITLE V
CONCERNING THE LEGISLATIVE FUNCTION

Section I General Provisions Art. 26. The legislative function is exercised by the national Congress, composed of two houses: that of the senators and that of the deputies. Art. 27. The regular session of the Congress will convene annually on the tenth of August in the capital of the Republic, even when not convoked. The sessions shall last sixty days and may be extended thirty days more by decision of the Congress in joint session. There shall be an extraordinary session of the Congress when the executive convokes it in conformity with Article 92, section 4, and when the president of the Congress convokes it, on petition subscribed by at least two-thirds of the members of the Congress. The extraordinary session of the Congress may deal only with the subjects expressed and concretely determined in the convocation. Art. 28. The sessions shall be public, unless the Congress in joint session or either of the houses resolves to deal with some subject in secret session.


Art. 29. Neither of the houses may come into session without the attendance of two-thirds of its entire membership, nor continue the sessions without a majority of the entire membership. Art. 30. The functions of senator and deputy are obligatory in conformity with the law. No senator or deputy may withdraw from the house to which he belongs without the permission of the said house, and if he does so, the same shall suspend his exercise of the rights of citizenship for two years. Art. 31. The houses must convene on their own initiative, open and close their sessions the same day, and function in the same town, and only by common consent may they move to another place or suspend their sessions for more than three days. Art. 32. If the number of senators and deputies prescribed in Article 29 is not present on the day designated for the convening of the Congress, or if, thereafter, either of the houses cannot continue its sessions for lack of a majority, the members present shall take legal measures to compel the attendance of absent members until the required majority is obtained. Art. 33. Senators and deputies will not be responsible for the opinions which they express in Congress, and they will enjoy immunity for thirty days before the sessions, during the sessions, and for thirty days thereafter. They shall not be sued, arrested, or prosecuted unless the house to which they belong previously authorizes the suit, arrest, or prosecution by vote of the majority of the members present. When a senator or deputy is caught in the act of committing a crime or offense, the matter shall be placed at the disposition of the house to which he belongs, to the end that it may decide, on summary proceedings, whether or not proceedings shall continue. But if the crime or offense be committed when the Congress has closed its sessions, the prosecution of the senator or deputy shall proceed freely. Art. 34. Senators or deputies who accept commissions or employment paid for by the executive, leave vacant, by the very act of acceptance, the post of legislator which they were occupying in the house for which they were elected. Art. 35. Each of the houses is empowered to elect its officers from among its members; to hear the complaints which may be presented with respect to the judgments rendered by the supreme court of elections; to pass on the fitness of its members and to accept or deny their excuses and resignations; to appoint employees, and to issue rules for the direction of their work. Art. 36. The following may not be elected senators or deputies, nor carry out those functions except where they have ceased to exercise their duties at least six months before the elections and except as provided in Article 179: The President and Vice-President of the Republic; ministers of state; ministers of the gospel of any denomination; the comptroller general of the nation and the assistant comptroller; the attorney general of the nation; the superintendent of banks and the presidents of banks established by the State; diplomatic agents and consuls; magistrates, Iudges, officials, states attorneys and official secretaries who are not merely occasional employees of the tribunals and courts, and the salaried officials and employees freely appointed and removed by the executive.

The prohibition relative to the salaried employees of the executive department does not refer to the functional senators. Nor may any person be elected by a province if, within six months previous to the elections, he has or has had any civil, political, or military command or jurisdiction of more than occasional character in the whole or any part of the said province. Art. 37. Nor may the following be elected senators or deputies: the members and secretaries of the courts of elections, except those who have relinquished the exercise of their duties at least two months before the elections. As to the former, the act of accepting candidacy annuls the obligation stated in the final paragraph of Article 23. Art. 38. Those who have contracts or concessions with the State for the exploitation of the national wealth or public utilities, and the representatives or attorneys-in-fact of such persons, or of foreign companies of like nature, may not be elected senators or deputies, nor discharge such functions. Art. 39. One may not be elected senator or deputy for a province who is not a native thereof, unless he has been domiciled therein at least three continuous years immediately preceding the date of his election. Art. 40. If the same citizen be elected senator or deputy for several provinces, or both senator and deputy at the same time for one or more provinces, he shall choose a single one of the said functions; and, having taken office, shall lose conclusively the right to the others. Art. 41. If for some reason the election of one or more of the senators or deputies has not taken place, this circumstance will not prevent the convening of the Congress, provided that there be the number of senators and deputies stipulated in Article 29. Section II The Senate Art. 42. The Senate is composed of two senators for each province of the sierra ' and of the coast,' elected by direct popular vote. It shall have, moreover, a senator for the Galapagos Islands,' and one for each of the eastern provinces,' elected by direct suffrage; and The functional senators designated as follows: one for public education, elected by the universities; one for private education; one for the press and the academies and societies of sciences and letters which are juridical entities and have been established for at least five years prior to the date of the elections; one each for the agriculture, the commerce, the laborers, and the industry of the coast; one each for the agriculture, the commerce, the laborers, and the industry of the sierra, and one for the public forces. The law shall determine the form of election of these senators and one may not be elected a functional senator who has not been carrying on the activity which he represents, at least during the year immediately preceding the date of the election, and he shall cease to be such in case of termination of the said activity. Art. 43. Senators shall continue in office for four years and may be indefinitely re-elected, except as provided in the final part of the preceding article. 1 Ecuador is divided geographically and also politically into four sections; the sierra (being the interandine basins), the coast, the Galapagos Islands and the region east of the Andes.


Art. 44. In order to be a senator it is required: (1) That one be Ecuadorian by birth and be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; (2) That one be not included in any of the cases of disability provided for in this Constitution or in the law of elections, and (3) That one be at least thirty-five years of age. Art. 45. The following are the exclusive powers of the Senate: (1) To hear charges brought by the House of Deputies against the officers referred to in Article 50, section 2. (2) To restore the enjoyment of the rights of nationality or of citizenship, m cases in which such rehabilitation is not effected by the ministry of the law. (3) To elect each year, from its members, a counselor of state and two substitutes. (4) When innocence is established, to restore the honor or the memory of those unjustly condemned, and (5) To require the President of the Republic to compel observance of the responsibilities of public officers and employees who have abused their powers or failed to comply with their duties. In case of proceedings against the President of the Republic, the VicePresident or the one charged with the executive function, the Presiding Judge of the Supreme Court shall preside over the Senate. Art. 46. When the Senate considers a charge relative only to official conduct, it may not impose any other penalty than that of suspension or dismissal from office, or disqualification from public office for the period it deems proper. If the act which is the subject of the charge also makes the accused penally responsible, the Senate, after having adjudged the official conduct, shall proceed in the manner determined by the following paragraph. When the matter is not one of official conduct, the Senate will be limited to deciding whether or not there shall be a trial; and if it decide in the affirmative, it shall place the accused at the disposition of the proper judge or court.
Section III

The House of Deputies Art. 47. The House of Deputies is composed of the citizens whom the provinces of the Republic elect in conformity with the law of elections. Each province shall elect a deputy for each fifty thousand inhabitants; and, if there remains an excess of twenty-five thousand or more, it shall elect another deputy. Each province, except the Archipelago of Galapagos, shall elect at least two deputies even when it does not have fifty thousand inhabitants. Art. 48. In order to be a deputy, one is required: (1) To be Ecuadorian by birth; (2) To be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship; (3) To be at least twenty-five years of age, and (4) Not to be included in any of the cases of disability provided for in this Constitution and in the law of elections. Art. 49. Deputies shall continue in office for two years and may be indefinitely re-elected. Art. 50. The following are exclusive powers of the House of Deputies:

(1) To elect each year, from among its members, a counselor of state and two substitutes; (2) To examine the charges which may be made against the President or the Vice-President of the Republic, the person charged with the executive function, the ministers and counselors of state, the judges of the Supreme Court, the senators and deputies in the case with which Article 33 is concerned, and the members of the supreme court of elections. If it deem said charges well founded, it must present them to the Senate. Art. 51. If the House of Deputies refuse to make the charge, or the Senate reject it as unfounded, it may not be renewed as to the same acts which caused it to be brought, unless at the same time it constitutes a common crime. Art. 52. Charges with reference to official conduct may be made only by Ecuadorian citizens, within the period of the exercise of the respective public functions of the accused and for one year thereafter. Section IV Powers of the Congress Divided into Houses Art. 53. The following powers are vested in the Congress divided into houses: (1) To exercise the powers granted in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 189 of this Constitution, causing its resolutions or interpretations to be expressly recorded in law; (2) To approve amendments to the Constitution in accordance with the provisions of Article 190; (3) To enact the laws necessary to carry out the constitutional guarantees and, in general, for the fulfillment of all the provisions of the Constitution and the achievement of the purposes of the State; (4) To care for, either directly or through organs created for the purpose, the legal and proper administration and due investment of the revenue of the State; (5) To levy or abolish taxes, assessments, and other public revenue; (6) To authorize the executive to enter into contracts for loans and bonds which pledge the public credit, but the same shall not be executed without first being ratified by the Congress in joint session; (7) To examine the public debt and determine the manner of accomplishing its conversion, amortization, consolidation, and cancellation; (8) To regulate the administration of the national property and to order and authorize the alienation or hypothecation of publicly held realty. The sale of personalty of the State shall be provided for by law; (9) To require, by simple resolution of either of the houses, that the proper authorities compel observance of the responsibility of public employees who have abused their powers or failed to comply with their duties; except as provided in Article 45, section 5; (10) To see that the public administration renders good service, creating or abolishing offices and employment if necessary; without prejudice to the powers granted by the law to other authorities; (11) To decide upon, in conformity with the law and with reference to the respective decree, the legal and financial responsibility or irresponsibility of the ministers of state; (12) To bestow honorary citations upon those who have rendered services to the nation, or bestow public honors in their memory;

 (13) To determine and make uniform the fineness, weight, value, and denomination of the national currency and to regulate the admission and circulation of foreign currency. Both for the currency and for weights and measures, the decimal system is adopted as official; (14) To fix, annually, the maximum of the armed forces which must remain in service in time of peace; (15) To approve or disapprove public treaties and other conventions, which may not be ratified or exchanged without this approbation; (16) To grant general or particular amnesty and pardon for political crimes, and general amnesty and pardon for common crimes, when some important reason so requires. Except for such cases, Congress may not obstruct the judicial process or the execution of the judgments or decrees of the judiciary; (17) To permit or refuse transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic and the transit or putting in of surface or submersible warships in the waters of the Republic for a greater time than that permitted by international custom. The same authority applies to the transit, arrival, and sojourn of warplanes. These provisions do not apply to cases of forced arrival or grounding; (18) To create or abolish provinces or cantons and to fix their boundaries; (19) To open and close ports; (20) To declare such public works as it deems necessary to be of national character, without prejudice to the power to this effect which the law grants to other authorities and institutions; (21) To issue national codes and other laws and decrees which have for their purpose the enactment, maintenance, modification, or repeal of law, and also to interpret them in a way generally obligatory, to amend and repeal them, and to regulate the various branches of the public administration; When Congress is in recess, in case the various parts of the Supreme Court render or have rendered contradictory judgments on the same point of law or on the interpretation of a law, it is the function of the Supreme Court to establish the rule which shall be binding upon all in the future, so long as no law contravenes; (22) To issue decisions, resolutions, and other acts which, while legislative, are not covered in any of the cases of the previous subdivisions; and (23) To exercise the other powers which this Constitution confers on it.

Art. 54. It is prohibited for the legislature: (1) To intervene in matters which, according to the Constitution, are the province of another authority or governmental body; (2) To impair the authority which this Constitution confers upon another national or sectional authority or body; (3) To order any payment, if the credit is not found to have been previously approved according to law, or to decree indemnities without the same having been preceded by a final judgment; (4) To remit balances and other debts in favor of the government; (5) To order new life pensions and increase existing ones, with the exception of those which they may confer on the constitutional ex-presidents of the Republic; (6) To establish or recognize lifetime public jobs or offices; (7) To delegate to one or more members or to any other person, body, or authority any of the powers set forth in the previous Article or any function incumbent on it; (8) To suggest promotions or reinstatements of officers of the armed forces and promote them, without previous petition of the President of the Republic; and (9) To execute any act prohibited by this Constitution.

Section V

Powers of the Congress in Joint Session Art. 55. The following are powers of the Congress in joint session: (1) To amend the Constitution, subject to the provisions of Article 190; (2) To declare the President and Vice-President of the Republic legally elected, in conformity with Articles 84 and 102, and receive their oaths of office; (3) To accept or deny the excuse or renunciation of the President or VicePresident of the Republic, and to declare their physical or mental incompetence to discharge their duties; (4) To elect Judges of the Supreme Court and the Superior Courts, the comptroller general of the nation, the Attorney General of the nation, the of the legislative commission, and other officers of banks, members superintendent with whose designation it is concerned. The of the Attorney General of the nation, the superintendent of banks andelection the comptroller general of the nation shall be from amongst three names previously submitted by the President of the Republic; (5) To receiv e e oath of such officers as it may appoint and to accept or deny their excuses or renunciations; (6) To approve or deny, by secret ballot, such promotions to general or colonel as the President of the Republic may request in accordance with law; (7) To examine the official conduct of ministers of state, and to censure them if there be reason to do so; (8) To issue the national budget in the form which the Constitution establishes; (9) To grant or deny extraordinary powers to the President of the Republic, or withdraw them, as the case may be, and to examine the use which he has made of them; (10) To receive the President of the Republic and the Presiding Judge of the Supreme Court, who shall, in person, give an account of the matters with which the executive and judicial departments are respectively concerned; (11) To take cognizance of the matters which have been submitted to it by either of the houses; (12) To declare war and settle the peace, having regard for the recommendation of the President of the Republic; (13) To discuss and approve or deny the bills which the legislative commission may present, and also to approve or disapprove the emergency decrees which the executive has issued pursuant to the power granted in Article 80; and (14) To exercise the other powers provided for in this Constitution. Art. 56. The Presidency of the Congress in joint session is vested in the Vice-President of the Republic, the President of the House of Deputies, the Vice-President of the Senate and the Vice-President of the House of Deputies, in the order mentioned. Art. 57. It is necessary that the numerical majority of both the Senate and the House of Deputies be present at the meetings of the Congress in joint session. Every decision or election of the Congress in joint session, to be binding, requires the concurring vote of at least two-thirds of the legislators present. In case a two-thirds vote is not had, the matter shall be decided at the next session. And if at this second session it is still impossible to obtain the said number, the decision shall be taken at the following session by majority of the votes of those present.

Section VI Legislation Art. 58. Laws and legislative decrees may originate, as the case may be, either in the Congress in joint session or in one of the houses, on the proposal of at least three of their members, the executive, the Supreme Court, the legislative commission, or the national economic council. Art. 59. Every proposed law or decree shall be accompanied by a report as to its purposes, and shall be referred to a commission to advise concerning the desirability or non-desirability thereof. In case of approval or favorable report, the bill shall follow the usual course. A proposed law or decree which is rejected in the house of origin may not be reconsidered by the same legislature unless it be presented again with substantial modifications. The functional senators and the authors of a bill shall be ex-officio members of the respective commission. In case of an unfavorable report, the house or the Congress, as the case may be, will decide as it deems advisable. Art. 60. When a proposed law or decree has been approved in the house of origin, it shall send it immediately to the other house, noting the days upon which it was discussed. The latter may or may not give its approval or may make such changes, additions, or modifications as it deems proper. Art. 61. If the reviewing house rejects, in whole or in part, the bill that has come from the house of origin, or if it modifies it, it shall return it to the latter, pointing out the reasons for the total or partial rejection or the modification. If the house of origin concurs with a total rejection by the reviewing house, the bill shall be tabled; but if it concurs in a partial rejection or in a modification, the bill will follow its course as revised. Finally, if the house of origin does not accept the revision of the reviewing house, both houses shall unite in joint session to reconcile the differences in a single discussion. Art. 62. Every proposed law or decree, in order to be considered approved by the legislature, must have been discussed and approved in two debates and on separate days in each House. Laws proposing amendments to the Constitution, bills proposed by the legislative commission or the national economic council, and the national budget law shall be discussed and approved in joint session, in two debates and on separate days. Art. 63. If bills concerning the same matter be presented in both houses, preference shall be granted to the one that was presented first; for which purpose the secretaries of the houses must advise each other as to the reception or presentation of all new bills. Art. 64. A declaration of Congress concerning an object of common or private interest, respectively, when it creates, modifies, or extinguishes rights, or modifies, interprets, or derogates the law, shall be considered a law or decree for legislative effect. Congress shall use the words "decision" (acuerdo) or "resolution" for decisions as to mere procedure or rules, or for other legislative acts not covered in the preceding paragraph. Art. 65. A proposed law or decree, definitely approved in the indicated manner, shall be sent to the executive for ratification or objection. If the


executive approve it, he shall promulgate it; if he object to it, he shall return it to the house of origin within ten days, with his observations, whether they be as to unconstitutionality or inadvisability. Art. 66. When the house of origin has received a bill with the objections of the executive, it shall invite the co-legislative body to hear them in joint session, irrespective of whether they relate to the bill as a whole or whether they constitute mere amendments or modifications. If the objections are not based on unconstitutionality, the Congress in joint session shall resolve the matter in a single discussion, and may insist upon the original bill, rejecting the modifications or amendments or accepting one or more of them. In case it agree with an objection to the bill as a whole, it shall order that the bill be tabled. In case it insist on the bill, it shall return it to the executive, who must ratify it and promulgate it. Art. 67. When the executive considers a proposed law or decree to be unconstitutional, he shall be obliged to object to it, and shall return it to the Congress with his respective reasoned objections. If the Congress in joint session accepts them, the bill shall be tabled; but if it does not accept them, it shall remit the bill to the Supreme Court which must render its report within the maximum period of eight days. If the Supreme Court also considers the bill to be unconstitutional, Congress may not insist on the bill, and shall table it. Otherwise, the bill shall follow the appropriate course. Art. 68. If the objections relate to both unconstitutionality and inadvisability of the bill, in whole or in part, once the constitutionality has been resolved in accordance with the preceding article, the Congress in joint session shall consider the other objections of the executive, observing the provisions of Article 66 for such a case. Art. 69. If the executive does not return the bill, ratified or objected to, within ten days, or if he does not ratify it after the constitutional requisites have been fulfilled, the bill shall have the force of law. Bills whose ratification has remained pending in the office of the executive, when the sessions of the Congress have dissolved or adjourned, and those to which timely objection has been made, shall be published with the objections, in the official register, within the period of twenty days, and shall be introduced at the next legislature during the first three days of its sessions. If they have not been published in the manner mentioned, the bills shall have the force of law. Art. 70. The law is not binding except by virtue of its promulgation, which shall be accomplished by publishing the same in the official register. Art. 71. Treaties and conventions will be considered by the Congress in joint session in a single discussion, without prejudice to the provisions of section 15 of Article 53, and the respective decree which is issued will not be subject to the general rules regarding the period for ratification. In consequence, the executive may delay ratification, if he deem the same to be advisable, reporting to Congress concerning his decision, in public or secret session, at his discretion. Art. 72. Bills which pass to the executive for ratification shall be sent in duplicate, with both copies signed by the presidents and secretaries of the two houses and certified as to the days on which they were discussed. Art. 73. The decisions or resolutions of the Congress in joint session or of the houses shall be issued after a single discussion, shall not require
the ratification of the executive, and shall be communicated to whoever must comply with them. Art. 74. In the laws, decrees, decisions, and resolutions which the legislature issues, it shall use, as the case may be, the following introductions: "The Congress of the Republic of Ecuador," "decrees," "decides," "resolves," "requires," "The Senate," "The House of Deputies," "decides," "resolves." The executive, according to the case, will use these: "Let it be executed" or "objected to." Art. 75. Laws and decrees shall be promulgated by the executive within fifteen days after their ratification; and if he does not do so before this period lapses, the council of state shall do so within the ten days following. Art. 76. If in the enactment of a law, some formal constitutional requirement has been omitted, and, nevertheless, it has been promulgated as law, the Supreme Court shall suspend, at any time, upon hearing the cause, the effects of such promulgation; and shall place the same before the next Congress, which, in joint session and on a single discussion, shall take suitable action; all of which shall be published in the official register. Neither a decision of the Supreme Court nor a resolution of the Congress shall have retroactive effect. Section VII Legislative Commission Art. 77. With the object of drawing up, of its own initiative, proposals as to amendment or interpretation of the Constitution and bills in general (with the exception of those of an economic character which shall be presented at the initiative of the national economic council) and with the further object of codifying and editing laws, there is established in the capital of the Republic, a legislative commission composed of five members, as follows: One representative of the Senate; One representative of the House of Deputies; One representative of the executive department; One representative of the judicial department, appointed by the Supreme Court; all of whom shall occupy office for four years and may be indefinitely re-elected, and The dean of the law school of the Central University. For each of the regular members there shall be two substitutes. Art. 78. In order to be a member of the legislative commission, the same conditions are required as to be a senator, and those who embark upon the office may not carry on any other, not even those the acceptance of which is obligatory, except in the cases provided by law. Section VIII National Economic Council Art. 79. For the study of economic problems and the correlation of the finances of the country, there is established a national economic council. The law shall determine its form of organization and functioning. Art. 80. In order to issue emergency decree-laws of economic order, the President of the Republic shall resort to the national economic council
so that this organ may indicate the measures which should be adopted to normalize the situation or that it may pass judgment on that which the executive proposes. The executive may not issue emergency legal measures of an economic character without first consulting the national economic council. The said decrees must be promulgated with the respective report of the national economic council, a requisite without which they will not have the force of law. The President of the Republic will be obligated to report to the Congress concerning this class of decrees, indicating the reasons he had for issuing them when the opinion of the national economic council was unfavorable.
TITLE VI
CONCERNING THE EXECUTIVE FUNCTION

Art. 81. Republic. Art. 82. In order to be President of the Republic, one must be Ecuadorian by birth, in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, and have reached the age of thirty-five. Art. 83. The President of the Republic shall continue four years in office and cannot again be President, nor can he be Vice-President, until after four years counted from the end of the presidential term for which he was elected. Art. 84. The President of the Republic shall be elected by direct and secret ballot the first Sunday of June every four years, in conformity with the law of elections. The presidential term shall begin the following first of September. The supreme court of elections shall check the counting of the vote, the result of which it shall refer to the Congress the first day of the session, together with the certificate, the ballots and all other basic documents. The Congress in joint session, having first reviewed the returns, in case it believes it necessary, shall declare elected the citizen who has obtained the greatest number of votes. In case of a tie vote, the election shall be decided by the vote of the majority of the legislators present, by secret ballot limited to the citizens who have received the same number of votes in the popular election. Should there be a tie in this vote, the decision shall be by lot. In case the supreme court of elections has not made the election returns within the term provided by law, the Congress shall do so. The president of the Congress shall advise the person elected of his election and the latter shall take the oath of office the thirty-first of August; but, if for some reason he cannot take it on that date, he shall have sixty days to take office, after which the office will be vacant and the provisions of Articles 88, 89, and 91 shall be observed. In the meantime, the provisions of Article 90 will be in force. If on the date on which the person elected may take the oath of office, Congress is not in session, the council of state shall receive the oath.

Section I General Provisions The executive function is exercised by the President of the

The President of the Republic, on taking office, shall take the following oath: accept the office of President of the Republic, I and I solemnly swear that I will obey and defend the Constitution and the laws of Ecuador. Art. 85. The following may not be elected President of the Republic: (a) The relatives of the President within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity; (b) The Vice-President of the Republic; (c) He who, at the time of the election, is occupying the Presidency.of the Republic, he who has occupied it within six months immediately prior to the election, and their relatives within the said degrees; (d) Ministers of state who were such at the time of the election, or their relatives within the second degree of consanguinity or the first degree of affinity, and (e) He who has occupied the office of minister of state within six months immediately prior to the election. Art. 86. Without authorization of the Congress, if it be in session, or otherwise of the council of state, neither the President of the Republic nor he who takes his place may absent himself from the national territory while exercising his functions, or for a year thereafter. Art. 87. The functions of the President of the Republic are finally terminated: by the end of the term fixed in the Constitution; by death, dismissal and acceptance of renunciation; by abandonment of office or by permanent physical or mental incapacity, declared by the Congress. The act of absenting himself from the Republic without corresponding authorization, or of remaining absent longer than authorized, constitutes abandonment of office. In case of the death of the President, the council of state shall call to the presidency him who is entitled thereto. If, when Congress is in recess, the council of state considers with reason that there has been an abandonment of office on the part of the President, or that he is physically or mentally incapacitated, the said council shall call to office provisionally the respective substitute and shall by the same act convoke a special session of the Congress to the end that it issue the proper resolution. Physical or mental incapacity may not be considered by the council of state except by virtue of a written petition of the Supreme Court, which shall be accompanied by the documents establishing the facts complained of. That which is said in this article with respect to the President of the Republic shall apply, in turn, to anyone occupying the presidency. Art. 88. Whenever, either definitively or temporarily, there is no titular or elected President of the Republic in office, the office shall fall to the Vice-President of the Republic. Art. 89. If there also be no Vice-President, either definitively or temporarily, the presidency of the Republic shall be exercised by one of the following officers in the following order: (1) The president of the House of Deputies; (2) The vice-president of the Senate; (3) The vice-president of the House of Deputies.

Art. 90. Whenever a person who legally should substitute for the President is lacking or suffers some accidental impediment, his place shall be taken by the next person mentioned in the preceding article until the exercise of the executive function has been assumed by the person called to office in accordance with the provisions of the said article. Art. 91. He who, in conformity with the order and circumstances established in the three preceding articles, finally occupies the office of President of the Republic shall continue in office during the entire term for which the titular President was elected. Section II Powers and Duties of the President of the Republic Art. 92. Republic: The following are powers and duties of the President of the

(1) To maintain internal order and to watch over the external security of the Republic; (2) To ratify and promulgate the laws and decrees of the Congress and to issue administrative rules which neither interpret nor alter them; (3) To comply with the Constitution and the laws of the Republic and see that they are complied with; (4) To call the Congress into ordinary sessions and special sessions when he deems it necessary; (5) To direct the public forces, as their chief, when the defense and the public service of the nation so require; (6) Freely to appoint and remove ministers of state, governors of provinces, and the other administrative officers and employees whose appointment and removal are not conferred upon some other authority by the Constitution and the laws; (7) To direct the international relations and diplomatic negotiations of the Republic; to enter into treaties and ratify them, having first secured the approval of Congress, and to exchange ratifications; (8) To appoint and remove diplomatic and consular agents. The authorization of the Senate, or, if it is not in session, that of the council of state, must precede the appointment of ambassadors and ministers plenipotentiary; (9) To solicit from the Congress promotions to the rank of general and colonel and to confer the rank of lieutenant colonel and major in agreement with the council of state; all in accordance with the law; (10) To grant, in conformity with the law, certificates of incapacity, orders of retirement, and pensions to the dependents of deceased military men; (11) To authorize and cancel letters of naturalization in conformity with the Constitution and the laws; (12) To issue navigation permits; (13) To take care of the national property and of the collection, administration, and investment of the public revenue, as well as to see to it that the respective accounts are rendered and balances collected in accordance with the law; (14) To issue patents and to grant certificates of exclusive property right, in the form prescribed by the law; (15) To pardon, reduce, or commute, in accordance with the law, the sentences imposed in penal proceedings. In order to exercise this power there must first be: (a) A final pronouncement of sentence; (b) A report from the judge or court, and (c) A favorable report from the council of state;
(16) To establish and close ports temporarily during recess of the Congress, in agreement with the council of state; (17) To grant the permits, to which section 17 of Article 53 refers, during recess of the Congress, and with authorization of the council of state; (18) To comply with and exercise the other duties and powers which the Constitution and the laws impose and confer upon him.

Art. 93. The President, or he who occupies the office, shall advise the Congress, on the first day after it has reconvened, concerning the political and military state of the Republic and concerning its revenues and resources, indicating the improvements and reforms which must be made in each branch of the administration. Art. 94. In case of imminent threat of invasion from without, or international conflict or internal disturbances, the executive shall appeal to the Congress, if in session, and if not, to the council of state, in order that, after considering the urgency, according to the report and corresponding probative documents, it may grant or deny all or some of the following extraordinary powers, with such restrictions as it deems proper: (1) To declare the army on a wartime basis for the duration of the danger. In case of internal disturbances, the declaration that the army be on a wartime basis shall be limited to one or more provinces, according to the requirements of the circumstances; (2) To increase the armed forces and to establish military authorities wherever he deems it advisable; (3) To order the collection of taxes and other revenue in advance for a period up to a year; (4) To contract for loans; (5) To invest the state funds in the defense of the State and preservation of public order, even though they may have been destined for other objects, with the exception of those set aside for public welfare and health; (6) To change the capital of the Republic, if it be menaced, or when a grave necessity requires it, until the threat or necessity ceases; (7) To close and temporarily establish ports; (8) To arrest those suspected of abetting an invasion from without or disturbances within or of taking part in them; but, within six days at most, he shall place them at the disposition of a judge of competent jurisdiction with the record of the proceedings taken, and the other documents which have caused the arrest, or he shall order imprisonment within the said six days. The detention shall be in an abode that is not a prison for common criminals; (9) To incarcerate those suspected of inciting war and those charged with taking part in internal disturbances. The confinement may not take place other than in a provincial capital. It is especially prohibited that confinement be in the eastern provinces or in the Archipelago of Galapagos or that the suspect be obliged to go to the place of detention by roads that are not the customary ones. It is likewise prohibited to confine residents of the sierra in the provinces of the coast and vice versa; unless the person arrested voluntarily elects, in accord with the authority and in writing, a place so excluded. If the suspect requests a passport to leave the Republic, it shall be granted to him, giving him a judicious period of not less than eight days to regulate his affairs, and letting him select his route of his own free will. Upon termination of the extraordinary powers, the person imprisoned and the person expatriated shall recover their liberty thereby and may return to their homes without a safe-conduct pass or passport.

The provisions of the preceding paragraphs do not prevent the suspects from being brought to trial and punished by the civil courts provided that they have not been pardoned. If a criminal sentence be pronounced, the time of detention or expatriation shall be credited against the sentence; (10) To establish preventive censorship; (11) To declare as a security zone, a stated portion of the national territory or the whole thereof, and to impose martial law. Art. 95. In case of catastrophe, such as fire, earthquake, flood, etc., the executive may invoke the last-mentioned power, without the necessity of applying previously to the Congress or the council of state and with the sole obligation of reporting immediately to the one or the other, as the case may be, so that it may decide what is advisable. Without prejudice to the foregoing, he may also request others of the powers set forth in the preceding article, observing the procedure for the same. Art. 96. The powers granted to the President of the Republic by Article 94, are limited to the time, place, and objectives indispensable to the re-establishment of the tranquillity and safety of the Republic; all of which shall be set forth in the decree granting the powers. As soon as the circumstances which have caused the concession of extraordinary powers have terminated, the council of state shall recall them, on its own responsibility. The President of the Republic may not delegate the extraordinary powers except to governors of provinces upon consent of the council of state. Governors may not imprison without an express order of the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic and the civil authorities he commands to execute his orders shall be directly responsible for abuses they commit. The authorities to which the previous paragraph refers shall also be responsible for complying with orders of the President of the Republic which exceed his powers. Art. 97. The fact of the convening of the Congress shall terminate the exercise of extraordinary powers by the President of the Republic, and during the first eight days of the session he shall present a detailed report of the use which he has made of such powers. The Congress shall adopt a resolution approving the proceedings of the government or declaring it responsible therefor. Art. 98. The President of the Republic, or anyone who acts as such, is prohibited from: (1) Violating the provisions of the Constitution and the laws; (2) Obstructing or interfering with the electoral process, or employing methods of physical or moral duress or influence to bring about a given result in the elections; (3) Attacking the independence of judges or imposing his authority in judicial proceedings; (4) Dissolving the Congress or obstructing the free exercise of its functions; (5) Admitting foreigners to the military service, unless a contract has previously been entered into according to law; and (6) Exercising his functions outside of the national territory, or absenting himself from the capital of the Republic for more than thirty consecutive days. During absence from the capital of the Republic for not more than thirty consecutive days, the President may exercise his functions wherever he may be within the national territory.

Art. 99. The President of the Republic, or whoever is acting as such, incurs a particular responsibility above all for treason or conspiracy against the Republic. He is also especially responsible for: infringing upon the Constitution and the laws; violating constitutional guarantees; attacking the other departments of the State; refusing to give the sanction of law when obliged to give it, or hindering the promulgation thereof; provoking unjust war and exercising extraordinary powers not duly received according to the Constitution, or the abuse thereof. Section III Concerning the Vice-President of the Republic Art. 100. There shall be a Vice-President of the Republic, elected every four years by popular and secret ballot. Art. 101. In order to be elected Vice-President of the Republic, the same conditions are required as to be President. Art. 102. The provisions contained in Articles 82 to 87 and 90 of this Constitution extend to the Vice-President of the Republic in so far as applicable. Art. 103. In all cases of permanent or temporary absence from office of the President of the Republic, the Vice-President shall exercise the functions of the latter in conformity with the provisions of Articles 88 and 90. Art. 104. The Vice-President, while not acting as President of the Republic, shall be the ex-officio president of the Senate, but he shall have only the deciding vote. Art. 105. In case it become settled that there is no Vice-President because he has become acting President on a permanent basis, or for some other reason, the officers specified in Article 89 shall take over the vicepresidency of the Republic in the order and manner therein established. This substitution shall last until the next Congress, which, in joint session, presided over by the president of the House of Deputies, shall elect a VicePresident to complete the balance of the constitutional term of the vicepresidency. In case of temporary absence from office, the substitution shall last for the time of such absence. Art. 106. The term of the Vice-President of the Republic shall be four years and his election shall take place simultaneously with that of the President, by popular and secret ballot. Section I V Concerning the Ministers of State Art. 107. The President of the Republic shall appoint ministers of state for the activities belonging to the executive function. The law shall determine the number of ministers and the branch of service, powers, and duties of each of them. No portfolio shall remain without a titular minister for over thirty days for any reason whatsoever. Art. 108. To be a minister of state one is required to be Ecuadorian by birth, to be in full exercise of the rights of citizenship, and to be at least thirty-five years of age.
Art. 109. Decrees, decisions, and resolutions of the executive must be authorized by the respective minister of state; otherwise they shall lack validity and shall not be obeyed. Excepting the appointment and removal of the ministers of state themselves, which the President of the Republic alone orders, every minister of state is personally responsible for the acts of the executive which he authorizes with his signature. Art. 110. The ministers of state are, moreover, responsible for the execution of the acts set forth in Articles 98 and 99 and for taking bribes, extortion, misappropriation of public funds, undue compulsion, negligence, or delay in the execution of the laws or executive decrees, and for any other serious default which is duly proved. Art. 111. Ministers of state who have been censured by the Congress shall cease to be such, and may not be such during the two years following or in the same presidential term. There shall be no votes of lack of confidence. Art. 112. The ministers of state shall publish not later than June thirtieth of each year reports by which they shall acquaint the nation with the state of affairs of their respective departments, and include their proposals as to laws or decrees which they deem necessary. Ministers of state must render all reports relative to the affairs of their ministries to the houses of the legislature with the knowledge of the President of the Republic. Furthermore, they must render to the legislative houses, with the knowledge of the President of the Republic, all data the houses of the legislature may request concerning the matters dealt with in the reports. When these are of confidential nature, in the judgment of the executive, they must be presented in secret session. Ministers of state must appear before the legislature when called. TITLE VII
CONCERNING THE JUDICIAL FUNCTION

Art. 113. The judicial function is exercised by the Supreme Court, the superior courts, and the other tribunals, courts, and officers that the Constitution and the laws establish. Art. 114. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall report to the Congress concerning the administration of justice throughout the entire Republic in a message personally delivered on the opening day of Congress. Art. 115. The Supreme Court has jurisdiction throughout the Republic and its headquarters in the capital. The superior courts and other tribunals and courts shall have jurisdiction in so far as granted in the organic judicial law. Art. 116. In order to be a judge of the Supreme Court one must be Ecuadorian by birth; be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; have practised as an attorney or have been a provincial or superior court judge, in both cases in good standing and for not less than twelve years in all, and be at least forty years of age. Judges of the Supreme Court hold office for six years and may be indefinitely re-elected. Art. 117. Judges of the superior courts hold office for four years and may also be indefinitely re-elected.


When the Congress is in recess, the Supreme Court shall hear the excuses and resignations of its members and those of the members of the superior courts and shall fill vacancies on a provisional basis. Art. 118. The Supreme Court, by one or more of its judges, shall appear before the Congress when called; and shall have the right to attend, in the same manner, in order to take part, without voting, in the discussion of bills it presents to the legislature. Art. 119. The law shall determine the number of judges of which the Supreme Court and the superior courts must be composed. It shall also determine the province or provinces embraced in the jurisdiction of each of the superior courts; the powers of the said courts and of all the judges; the manner and form of their appointment and the term of office. Art. 120. In order to be a judge of the superior court one must be Ecuadorian by birth; be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, have practised as an attorney or have been a judge, in both cases successfully and for a period of not less than eight years in all, and be at least thirty-five years of age. Art. 121. In no case shall there be more than three stages of judicial proceedings (inclusive of appeals). Public hearing of lawsuits is essential, but the courts may confer in secret. Judgments shall contain an opinion expressing the law and principles upon which they are based. In procedural law, the greatest speed in handling cases shall be paramount. Except for the cases otherwise provided by law, the administration of justice is gratuitous when rendered by judges, and remunerated when special masters intervene. The organic judicial law shall determine the structure of the tribunals and courts. Art. 122. Magistrates and judges have no other powers than those which the laws grant them and, in conformity with the said laws, they are responsible for the carrying out of their duties. Art. 123. While in office, magistrates and judges may not carry on their profession except in the cases determined by law; nor may they occupy any other public office or employment or intervene in electoral contests or political parties.
TITLE VIII
SECTIONAL REGIME

Art. 124. The territory of the Republic is divided into provinces, cantons, and parishes. In each province there shall be a governor; in each canton, a Cantonal Executive; and in each parish a Parochial Executive. The law shall determine the duties and powers of these officers. The eastern provinces and the Archipelago of Galapagos may have a special organization. Art. 125. In each provincial capital, with the object of contributing to its progress and integrating it with the central government, there shall be a provincial council, the members of which shall be elected by popular and secret ballot on the date fixed by the law. They are autonomous and independent of other public functions. Their structure and functioning shall be determined by the law.

In order to be a provincial councilor one must be Ecuadorian by birth, be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship and be at least twentyfive years of age. Art. 126. The State guarantees the relative autonomy of the provinces, in accordance with the law. The necessities, productive capacity, and distribution of all of the provinces and each of them shall be taken into account in reference to the allocation of national disbursements for special services and public works for the provinces. The law shall determine everything related to the provinces for the fulfillment of their economic and administrative ends. Art. 127. Each canton constitutes a municipality. The municipal government is controlled by the cantonal or municipal council, elected by popular and secret ballot in accordance with the law. In the councils of the provincial capitals, in order to direct municipal affairs, there shall be a mayor elected by popular and secret ballot, who shall preside over the municipal body, having only a deciding vote. Art. 128. The municipalities are autonomous and independent of other public functions, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the laws. The law shall determine their powers and duties and may establish, within constitutional limitations, separate regimes, considering the population, economic resources, and importance of each canton. The members of the municipal government shall be held responsible, before the respective judges, for the abuses which they commit either collectively or individually. Art. 129. No subsequent law may deprive the municipalities, in whole or in part, of the right that they have to the receipts from taxes on urban property. The law shall fix the specific taxes and income in such a way as to guarantee their economic autonomy. Art. 130. Neither the decisions nor the ordinances or resolutions of the provincial or cantonal councils shall be valid or enforced in so far as they are contrary to the Constitution or the laws. All claims shall be heard and decided by the Supreme Court.
TITLE IX
CONCERNING THE NATIONAL BUDGET

Art. 131. The revenue and expenses of the State shall be set forth in the general budget law, which shall be issued annually in accordance with the provisions of this Title. The provincial, municipal, and special revenue and expenses shall be regulated in laws appertaining thereto. Art. 132. All general revenue of the State shall constitute a single fund applicable to general expenses. No revenue for a special purpose may be applied to general expenses of the State. Administrative expenses of permanent character may not be met by means of loans. Art. 133. The budget may not be issued unless it contain an item destined to the payment of the national debt. Art. 134. National defense and public education shall receive preferential attention in the budget.

Art. 135. The preparation of the pro forma general budget of the State lies with the budgetary technical commission, which shall consist of: The minister responsible for the state finances, who shall preside and have the deciding vote in case of a tie; The minister responsible for the national economy, or his representative; A legislator appointed by the Congress in joint session from the members of the budgetary commission of the legislature, together with two substitutes and A representative of the national economic council, appointed from among its members. The director of the budget shall act as secretary. Art. 136. In preparing the pro forma budget, the budgetary technical commission shall consider the suggestions of the provincial authorities, governmental bodies, and legislatures with respect to the necessities of the respective provinces. Art. 137. The Executive shall present the pro forma budget to the regular session of the Congress within the first three days thereof, and he shall present it with a message in which he explains the situation of the exchequer, of the internal and foreign credit, and the general financial position of the government. Art. 138. The Congress shall submit the pro forma budget to the internal budget commission for study. The said commission shall consist of a representative, either senator or deputy, of each of the provinces of the Republic in conformity with the regulations of the Congress in joint session. This commission, having studied the pro forma budget, shall present such observations as it deems appropriate to the technical budgetary commission and shall send up its report, together with the answer of the latter, to the Congress in joint session, with notations as to all the discrepancies which arose between the two commissions not solved by mutual consent. The Congress shall then proceed to approve or disapprove the report, a two-thirds vote of those voting being required for disapproval or any modification. The Congress shall then vote the budget, chapter by chapter, the details thereof being thus approved. The technical budgetary commission shall be charged with carrying out the resolutions of the Congress with respect to the budget. Art. 139. No pro forma budget, the expenditures of which are not in balance with revenue, may be presented to the Congress. If the aggregate ordinary revenue requires the imposition of new taxes, appropriate tax bills shall be presented jointly with the pro forma budget, but separately stated. The bills shall be duly drafted and explained as well as the details of the corresponding expenditures. Art. 140. The internal budget commission of the Congress may not propose, or the latter approve, additional items of revenue nor the increase of those set forth in the pro forma budget drawn up by the technical commission of the budget; and if, in fact, the actual revenues during the fiscal year exceed those set forth in the pro forma budget, they shall serve only for the general liquidation of the budget and to constitute a possible surplus. Art. 141. The Congress shall issue the budget by the ninth of October of each year, after two debates. Should it not be issued within this period, it shall be considered in consecutive sessions to the end that it
may be approved before the close of the regular legislative session. If the Congress does not succeed in approving it within the latter period, the original pro forma budget will go into force. The budget shall take effect from the first day of the fiscal year following its promulgation. Art. 142. The Congress may not enact laws repealing or modifying those which establish revenues covered by the current budget or by that issued for the following fiscal year, except on condition that at the proper time it create new income or increase existent income to make up for the income it deals with in such modification or repeal; and in no case may it approve any law that throws the budget out of balance by new expenditures. When the Congress discusses bills that increase expenses or create or increase taxes it shall first consult the minister who is in charge of the finances of the country, and he must render his opinion within the period that the Congress designates. If for any reason the minister does not make known his opinion, the Congress may proceed freely. Art. 143. No expenditure or transfer may take place except in accordance with specific provision of the law. The items concerning education and those concerning national, provincial, or local public works, may not be diverted to other objects, except for the case provided for in section 5 of Article 94 and in case of public calamity. Art. 144. When a deficit appears in the final liquidation of the budget, the President of the Republic shall dispatch a message to the Congress, with corresponding documents, explaining the said deficit.
TITLE X VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS

Section I Concerning the Council of State Art. 145. There shall be a council of state with headquarters in the capital of the Republic, which shall consist of the following members: The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, who shall preside over it; A Senator elected by the Senate; A Deputy elected by the House of Deputies; Two citizens, elected by the Congress in joint session; The Attorney General of the nation; The Comptroller General of the nation; A representative of the National Economic Council, elected by it; The presiding justice of the Supreme Court of elections; A general officer, or officer with the rank of major or higher, appointed annually by the armed forces; The President of the National Institute of Social Security. The Senate, the House of Deputies and the Congress in joint session shall elect two substitutes for each member. The members elected by the legislature shall hold office for one year. The members of the President's cabinet are likewise members of the council of state and participate in the deliberations, without vote.


In case of the occasional absence of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the member designated by the body shall preside over the session. Art. 146. The following are powers and duties of the council of state: (1) To guard the observance of the Constitution and the laws and especially to protect the constitutional guarantees, seeing to it that they are respected and not violated by the President of the Republic, the courts of justice, and the other authorities entrusted with them; (2) To render opinions concerning decrees, decisions, rules, and resolutions which have been issued or may be issued in manifest violation of the Constitution or the laws. This provision does not cover judgments issued by the courts of the judicial department of government. If the opinions are not accepted by the authority or body affected by them, the council of state shall publish them in the press and shall present them to the consideration of the Congress, to the end that it may decide upon the alleged unconstitutionality or illegality. The acceptance of an opinion of unconstitutionality or illegality by the authority or body mentioned shall be published in the official register for the effects that will issue therefrom; (3) To decide, when the legislature is in recess, concerning the legality of the absence or excuse of the senators and deputies; to call the respective substitute, if the occasion arises, and report this to the corresponding house at the beginning of the legislative term; the foregoing being without prejudice to the right of the house to review the decision; (4) To convoke the Congress into special sessions in the case covered by paragraph 4 of Article 87; (5) To give its advice concerning the contracts which are not covered in section 6 of Article 53 and which, because of their size, require bids, and also concerning subjects upon which the executive wishes to or must consult it; (6) When the Congress is in recess, to receive and handle the charges that may be presented against the President of the Republic and the other officers enumerated in Article 50; (7) When the Congress is in recess, to grant or deny extraordinary powers to the President of the Republic, in accordance with the provisions of Article (8) To hear and determine disputed administrative questions; (9) When the Congress is in recess, to fill provisionally all offices subject to congressional appointment under section 4 of Article 55, except the justices of the supreme and superior courts; This power also extends to the appointment of citizen councilors in case of default of both the member and the substitutes. The person elected by the council of state shall hold office for the rest of the term for which he whom he replaces was elected; (10) To present, by its president, to the regular session of the Congress, a report relative to its work and its suggestions for the enactment of the laws it deems advisable; (11) When the Congress is in recess, to authorize the President of the Republic to appoint ambassadors and ministers plenipotentiary; (12) To authorize the executive to grant promotions to the rank of lieutenant colonel and major; (13) When the Congress is in recess, to authorize the President of the Republic to alienate and hypothecate realty of the State; (14) To permit or deny transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic and the transit or putting in of warships or submarines in territorial waters, for a greater time than that permitted by international custom; The same power applies to the transit, arrival, and sojourn of warplanes.
94;

The provisions of this subdivision do not apply to cases of forced arrival or landing; and (15) To exercise the other powers which are conferred upon it by the Constitution and the laws. Section II Concerning the Ministry of Prosecution Art. 147. The Attorney General of the nation, the prosecuting attorneys of the courts of justice, and the other officials that the law designates function as the ministry of prosecution under the direction of the President of the Republic. Art. 148. The Attorney General of the nation shall hold office for four years and must have the requisites needed for being a judge of the Supreme Court. He shall be appointed by the Congress in joint session. The law shall determine the powers and duties, as well as the occasions for removal and substitution, of the Attorney General and other officials of the ministry of prosecution. Section III The Department of the Comptroller General and that of the Superintendent of Banks Art. 149. The department of the comptroller general shall supervise the proper collection and investment of the public funds and shall pass judgment on the respective accounts. The comptroller general of the nation shall be elected every four years by the Congress in joint session. In so far as the comptroller general of the nation adjudges and passes upon accounts of those who render them, he discharges a judicial function and this function and the others with which he is concerned shall be specified in the respective laws. Art. 150. The office of the comptroller general of the nation is autonomous in its administrative functions. The comptroller general is granted the power to appoint the personnel of his department, in conformity with the law. The comptroller shall report annually to the Congress concerning his work. Art. 151. There shall be a technical and autonomous banking department directed by the superintendent of banks appointed by the Congress in joint session, in order to provide supervision over the functioning of institutions of bank credit. The office of the superintendent of banks shall also supervise insurance companies, savings plan companies, and mutual credit companies. Other corporations may also be supervised in accordance with the law. The superintendent shall hold office four years and may be re-elected. He shall appoint the personnel of his department in accordance with the law. The officials and employees of this department shall have banking experience. The budget of the office of the superintendent of banks is independent of the State. The superintendent shall study and approve the budgets of the banks established by the law and shall advise the Congress concerning his work.

Art. 152. The law shall determine the powers, duties, and functions of the office of the comptroller general of the nation and of the office of the superintendent of banks, as well as the cases of removal and substitution of the comptroller general and of the superintendent of banks.
TITLE XI
CONCERNING THE PUBLIC FORCES

Art. 153. For the defense of the Republic and the maintenance of constitutional order, there shall be a military armed force organized in accordance with the law. For the protection of internal order and security and social services, there shall be a civil police force which is governed by special laws. Art. 154. All Ecuadorians and foreigners domiciled in the country are obliged to co-operate in the national defense in the form and manner determined by the law. Moreover, the law shall establish the system of compulsory military service. Art. 155. The public forces are not deliberative. The authorities giving orders shall be solely responsible for orders which are manifestly contrary to the Constitution and the laws. Art. 156. Military power and jurisdiction are exercised over the members of the armed forces on active service. The law shall regulate the professional relations between retired military men and the respective ministry. Art. 157. In case of war, the President of the Republic may delegate his authority as chief of the armed forces to the commander of the mobilized forces. In a zone declared to be a zone of operations, the latter shall have power and jurisdiction over the civil and military authorities. Art. 158. Frontier commands have civil powers in conformity with the law. SECOND PART RULES OF ACTION
TIrLE I FUNDAMENTAL PRECEPTS

Art. 159. All inhabitants of the national territory are obliged to respect and obey the Constitution, the laws, and the authorities of the Republic. Art. 160. In Ecuador there shall be no authority exempt from responsibility in carrying out its functions. Art. 161. No contract shall be valid in which one person is put at the absolute and indefinite disposition of another; nor may the laws establish conditions which detract from human dignity. Art. 162. The State shall cherish maternity and protect the mother and the child irrespective of their antecedents. The State shall create adequate conditions for the protection and development of children under fourteen who lack family and economic protection. Art. 163. The State protects and the laws regulate marriage, domestic relations, and family property.

Art. 164. Not only legitimate children but also the illegitimate have the right to be brought up and educated by their parents and to inherit from them within the limits that the law establishes. In case there are both legitimate and illegitimate children, each illegitimate child shall have a hereditary share equal to one-half of that of each legitimate child. Art. 165. The law shall regulate everything relating to filiation and its rights, and investigation as to paternity. In registering births, no statement may be required concerning legitimacy. Art. 166. Inalienable and unattachable family rights of inheritance are established, the amount and other conditions of which shall be regulated by the law. Art. 167. The right to leave property by will and the right to inherit are guaranteed within the limitations established by the law. Art. 168. Liberty of conscience in all its aspects and manifestations is guaranteed in so far as not contrary to moral requirements and public order. The law shall make no discrimination for religious, ideological, or racial reasons. Art. 169. All persons are equally entitled to protection of the law. No rights may be granted or obligations imposed to or upon anyone, which put him in a better or worse condition than others. No one may be deprived of a hearing before the proper judge, or condemned without prior trial under a law antedating the material facts of the matter adjudged, or judged by special commissions, or deprived of the right of defense in every stage of the proceedings. Art. 170. Work is compulsory for all members of the Ecuadorian community, consideration being given to conditions of age, sex, health, etc., and with freedom of choice. Art. 171. Education of children is primarily the duty and right of the parents or those who stand in their place. The State shall watch over the compliance with this duty and facilitate the exercise of this right. Education and instruction shall enjoy freedom within moral limits and those of republican institutions. The municipalities may subsidize free private instruction. These subsidies may not exceed twenty per cent of the revenue set aside for education. When the executive deems it advisable to grant any aid, he will need the approval of the council of state in order to grant it. Primary instruction and instruction in the arts and crafts are gratuitous when of official character; and primary instruction, whether official or private, is obligatory. Social services shall be furnished without distinction to the students who need them in the free, official, or private schools. In all grades of education special emphasis shall be given to the moral and civic training of the students. The indigenous race shall receive special attention both in public and private schools. All of the teaching staffs of the country, both public and private, shall be represented on the national supervisory boards, in conformity with the law. Public education whether of the State, the province, or the municipality is secular, that is to say, the State as such neither teaches nor attacks any religion.

The State shall respect the right of parents, or those who represent them, to give to their children the instruction they deem advisable. Art. 172. Both public and private universities are autonomous. In order to effectuate this autonomy in the official universities, the law will support the creation of endowment funds. Art. 173. The State shall found and maintain special establishments for free instruction in arts, crafts, commerce, agriculture, and other means of compensated labor, which shall at the same time give moral and civic education. The schools and institutions of learning shall cultivate the aptitudes of the students for gainful employipent in special sections of objective training. In public primary schools and public schools of arts and crafts, the State shall furnish, free of charge to students who need them, such tools as are indispensable in the training. Art. 174. The following are also duties of the State. (a) To find work for the unemployed; (b) To support production; (c) To foster the culture of the native indians and the peasants, effectively; (d) To maintain public welfare; (e) To accomplish the apportionment and utilization of undeveloped lands in accordance with social necessities, by expropriation if that be necessary. Art. 175. There is no real estate in Ecuador that may be held inalienable or indivisible in perpetuity. Nor shall there be obligations which must be complied with in perpetuity, or obligations which may not be extinguished by some legal means. Art. 176. The debts of the State shall be paid in conformity with its respective contracts and the law of public credit, which shall classify them according to their origin and other circumstances. The State may set aside certain revenue to secure its obligations; but in no case may it cede to the creditor the right to collect the same. Art. 177. Every contract which a foreigner or a foreign company enters into with the government of Ecuador, or any Ecuadorian person or legal entity, shall always carry the express or tacit condition that all diplomatic protest is waived. Art. 178. Public officials or employees who violate any of the guaranties proclaimed in this Constitution shall be financially responsible for the damages and injuries which they cause; and with respect to the crimes which the violation of such guaranties entails, the following provisions shall be observed: (1) They may be denounced by any one; (2) The punishments which have been imposed on a delinquent official or employee may not be revoked, reduced, or commuted during the constitutional term in which the crime was committed, or thereafter, unless at least half of the penal term has been served; (3) The statute of limitations with regard to these crimes, as well as the sentences imposed on those responsible, shall not commence to run until after the said constitutional term. Civil responsibility is independent of penal responsibility. It is understood that this article is without prejudice to the provisions with respect to high officials contained in Articles 46 and 50. Art. 179. No one may simultaneously hold two or more remunerated public offices, under any title, with the exception of university professors and those who exercise functions which are strictly technical or obligatory of acceptance, who may hold up to two offices with corresponding salaries. With the exception contained in the previous paragraph, the holding by the same person of an office in the central bank, in the banks of the development credit system and in the social service institute and its agencies is incompatible with a salaried public office. However, the President of the national social service institute, the managers or provincial delegates of the social service agencies, and the managers of the banks previously mentioned may not hold any salaried public office. In the cases of incompatibility to which this article refers, a person may not be considered to have been discharged with the effect of giving a right to damages. No Ecuadorian may carry out public service functions of permanent character without a corresponding appointment or the record of his election, nor may he do his work as a public officer on a contract basis. The performance of the function of legislator is not a public office, but rather a democratic mandate. Offices and functions compatible with this mandate shall not lapse by reason of such performance.
TITLE II
CONCERNING GUARANTEES

Section I General Guarantees Art. 180. In Ecuador foreigners enjoy, within the limits of the law, the same rights as Ecuadorians, with the exception of political rights and the guarantees which the Constitution establishes in favor of Ecuadorians only. Art. 181. Freedom to practise professions is guaranteed within the requirements of the law. The law shall determine the cases in which a license is required and the method of obtaining it. Art. 182. No taxes or other revenue may be created except by virtue of a law and in proportion to the economic capacity of the taxpayer. Art. 183. Property rights are guaranteed when in harmony with their social function. Confiscation of wealth is prohibited, and if it takes place, it shall not cause any change in the rights of the prejudiced party or loss thereof, and a summary action for damages shall arise against the authority that ordered the confiscation and against the State. No one may be deprived of property rights, or of the possession of his property, except by virtue of judicial decree or of expropriation, legally carried out, for public use. Only the State, the municipalities and other institutions of public law may institute expropriations for public use. Expropriation for construction, grading, and improvement of roads, railways, aviation fields, and towns shall be governed by special laws. Only authorities which exercise some sort of judicial function, by virtue of law, may issue orders which obstruct or interfere with the freedom to contract concerning property and the transfer thereof. Any order in this respect which comes from any other authority shall have no effect whatsoever and shall not be obeyed. Art. 184. The law shall determine the frontier zone in which foreigners are prohibited from acquiring or holding rights in real property or the

administration thereof, under penalty of losing such rights in favor of the State. This prohibition shall not prevent there being foreigners in the personnel of institutions of national character, or prevent them from establishing themselves in frontier regions for reasons of national interest, under agreement or contract with the executive; provided, however, that the director and the legal representative of thesi institutions be Ecuadorians. Art. 185. The State shall see that justice in the relations between employers and employees is observed, that the dignity of the employee is respected, that he be assured a decent existence and be granted a just salary with which he may take care of the necessities of himself and his family. The law shall regulate everything relative to employment, in accordance with the following fundamental rules: (a) A contract of employment, in the form established by the law, is obligatory for employers and employees; (b) The rights of the employee may not be renounced and every stipulation to the contrary shall be void; (c) The State shall establish a minimum wage for the different types of work and shall favor the establishment of a fair wage taking into consideration the number of dependents; (d) Wages shall not be subject to garnishment, save for debts incurred for board, and they may not be paid with I.O.U's, tokens or other means which are not legal tender, nor may they be for periods greater than a month; (e) The maximum working day shall be eight hours, with half holiday on Saturday afternoon, so that the work-week will not exceed forty-four hours, save for the exceptions which the law may establish. The night shift shall be given extra pay, and women and children under eighteen years of age may not be used on such shift. The maximum period of actual work underground shall be six hours daily and the total shift shall not exceed seven hours; (f) Every employee shall have weekly time off of forty-two consecutive hours as well as an annual vacation. This weekly rest period, vacations, and legal holidays shall be remunerated. The application of this rule shall be governed by regulations; (g) The right to form syndicates and unions for their professional welfare is guaranteed to employers and employees. No one may be required to join such a syndicate or union. Public employees, as such, may not form unions; (h) Union contracts shall be particularly protected; (i) The right of employees to go on strike and that of employers to conduct a lockout are recognized, under regulation as to the exercise thereof. Employees of public works and institutions of public service may not go on strike, except in accordance with special rules; (j) An employee who is a mother shall be the object of particular solicitude. A pregnant woman may not be obliged to work during the period fixed by law prior to and subsequent to birth, during which time she has the right to full pay. Moreover, the mother shall enjoy the time off during her work necessary for nursing the child; (k) Labor of children under fourteen years of age is prohibited save for the exceptions which the law establishes, and labor by children up to eighteen years of age shall be regulated; (1) The employer is obliged to provide for apprenticeship, in the manner determined by law, in industry and work which requires technical knowledge; (11) For the solution of industrial conflicts, conciliation and arbitration courts shall be constituted, which shall be composed of employees and employers and presided over by an officer of the department of labor;

(m) Hygiene and safety in work shall be regulated in order to guarantee the health and life of the employees; (n) All employees shall participate in the net profits of the respective enterprises, in the percentage which the law directs, which may not be less than five per cent. The law shall regulate the division thereof; (fi) That which the employer owes to the employees for salaries, wages, damages, and retirement pay are a lien of the first class, with preference even over contract liens; (o) Agricultural labor, particularly by natives, shall be especially regulated in respect to everything connected with daily hours of labor. The other aspects of labor shall likewise be regulated, particularly that of artisans, miners, domestics, and home craft; (p) The taking away without just cause of the land designated for use of the worker (huasipungo) shall be considered as untimely discharge of the worker; (q) For equal work there shall be equal pay without distinction as to sex, race, nationality, or religion, but specialization and experience in the execution of the work shall be taken into account in respect to the amount of pay; and (r) The administrative career of public employees shall be regulated by the law. The public authority is obliged to promote, preferentially, the moral, intellectual, economic, and social betterment of the native indians and the peasants in order to encourage their incorporation into the national life and their access to property, and is also obliged to stimulate the construction of hygienic homes on the farms and to bring about the abolition of alcoholism, particularly in rural districts. Art. 186. There shall be freedom of contract except as restricted by the law. Section II Art. 187. Ecuador: (1) The right to live. There shall be no death penalty. Mutilation, flagellation and other tortures and infamous punishments are forever prohibited as penalties or as correctional methods, and finally, as methods of criminal investigation; (2) The right of every person to keep his good reputation and be presumed innocent so long as he is not declared guilty in conformity with the laws; (3) Personal liberty. There is no imprisonment for debts, whether they be called costs, fees, taxes, fines, or by any other name. This provision does not include debts contracted for food for indigent relatives; (4) The right of "Habeas Corpus." With the exception of apprehension in the act of commission of crime, contravention of police rules, or military crimes, no one may be detained, arrested, or imprisoned except by order signed by an authority having jurisdiction, with a statement of the cause, which may not be other than one prescribed by law. The writ of "Habeas Corpus" shall be presented to the president of the council of the canton in which the petitioner is found, or whoever is acting in place of the said president. Having received the writ, and within the term provided therefor, the said authority shall order that the prisoner be brought immediately before him and that the order depriving him of his liberty be exhibited. If the prisoner is not brought before him or if the order is not exhibited or if the order does not contain the requisites above provided for, the president Ordinary Individual Guarantees The State guarantees the following to the inhabitants of
 of the council shall order the immediate release of the petitioner without further action. He who disobeys such order shall ipso facto be dismissed from his office or position by the said president of the council, who shall communicate the dismissal to the comptroller general and to the authority which must see to his replacement. The discharged employee may take an appeal from the judgment issued against him, to the president of the superior court of the corresponding district, within twenty-four hours of notification of his discharge; but, in order to avail himself of this appeal, he must first place the prisoner at liberty. To the latter, moreover, all the actions to which he is entitled are available; (5) Freedom to travel in the territory of the Republic, to change domicile, to leave Ecuador and to return thereto, and to take with one one's goods, without prejudice to the provisions of law with respect to art treasures forming a part of the national heritage and restrictions as to currency; (6) The inviolability of the home. No one may enter a home against the will of its proprietor unless an order signed by competent authority be presented; and without such an order, only in the cases expressly provided by the law; (7) The inviolability of correspondence by mail or otherwise. Consequently the interception, opening, or inspection of another's correspondence is prohibited, except in the cases provided by the law; (8) The right not to be obliged to testify, for any reason, on one's political convictions or religious beliefs, and not to be molested in the practice thereof; except in the cases provided in the Constitution and the laws; (9) The right not to be obliged to testify in criminal proceedings against one's spouse, ascendants, descendants, or collateral relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity; or to be compelled by oath or under duress to testify against oneself, in matters which may carry penal responsibility, or to be held incomunicado for more than twenty-four hours; (10) Freedom of labor, commerce and industry. Everyone enjoys the right to his discoveries, inventions, and scientific, literary, and artistic works on the terms provided by the laws. No one may be required to render services, either gratuitously or for pay, which are not required by the law, except in cases of extraordinary emergency or in case of the necessity of immediate aid. Except for these cases, no one shall be obliged to work except by contract and for corresponding pay; (11) Liberty to express one's thoughts by word of mouth, by the press, or by other means of expressing and publishing them, in so far as the same does not involve injury, calumny, personal insult, immorality, or run contrary to the national interests. Such acts shall be subject to the responsibilities and procedure established by the law. The law shall regulate the exercise of this immunity, taking into account that the principal object of the press is the defense of national interests and constitutes a social service entitled to the respect and aid of the State; (12) Freedom to make individual or collective petition in writing before any authority or governmental body with the right to obtain a corresponding decision; (13) Freedom to gather together and associate, without arms, for objects not prohibited by the law.

Section III Special Guarantees for Ecuadorians Art. 188. The following special guarantees are established with respect to Ecuadorians: (1) The right freely to elect and be elected to public office, in conformity with the law;
parade or other public pacific and unarmed manifestation, permission having been previously granted by the proper authority; (3) The right that the State distribute the means of subsistence to invalids who are in need of it, while they are incapacitated to obtain it by labor, and provided that there is no person legally obligated and able to provide it;(4) The right to take part in political parties and other political associations which are not opposed to the Constitution, with the purpose of entering into national politics; and (5) The penalty of banishment is prohibited and in no case shall an Ecuadorian be expatriated against his will. Ecuadorians do not need a passport to return to their country and no consul of the Republic may refuse one to an Ecuadorian who asks for one to return to Ecuador. In no case shall extradition be granted with respect to an Ecuadorian. PART I

(2) The right of oral and collective petition before the authorities, by

CONCERNING THE SUPREMACY OF THE CONSTITUTION, AMENDMENT THEREOF AND COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS Art. 189. The Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic. Therefore, any laws, decrees, regulations, ordinances, provisions, public pacts, or treaties which are in any way contradictory to it or which depart from its text have no validity. The Congress alone has the power to interpret the Constitution in a manner generally obligatory and to resolve doubts which may arise concerning the meaning of any one or more of its precepts. Thus, the Congress alone has jurisdiction to declare whether a law or legislative decree is, or is not, unconstitutional. Art. 190. The Congress in ordinary session may discuss any bill concerning constitutional amendment, following the procedure established for formulating laws. The bill, having been approved by both houses, shall be sent to the President of the Republic so that he may publish the same with his report. The next regular session of the Congress, after an election of deputies, shall approve the bill concerning constitutional amendment, without any modification, or shall disapprove it, in a single debate and by majority of all of its members. The President of the Republic may not reject the amendatory law and will be obliged to promulgate it. Art. 191. A permanent and autonomous character is guaranteed as to the agencies of social security, the central bank, and the banks of the system of development credit, all of which are institutions of private law for social or public ends. The employees of these institutions are governed, in matters concerning strikes, by the provisions contained in letter (i) of Article 185 for employees of businesses and institutions of public service. Art. 192. No public institutions are recognized other than the State, the provincial councils, the municipalities, and the establishments supported by the State.


Art. 193. Coercive jurisdiction is established only in favor of the State and the other institutions of public law and also the central bank of Ecuador and the banks of the system of development credit for the collection of their credits, as well as in favor of the departments of social security for the collection of capital and reserve funds. Art. 194. Monopolies are prohibited except the monopolies of the State, and these may not be ceded to any person or firm, national or foreign. Art. 195. This Constitution repeals all previous juristic precepts which are contrary to its provisions, whether issued by legitimate authorities or by de facto governments; with the result that any laws, decrees, regulations, decisions, orders or resolutions, issued before the Constitution be in effect, shall be in force only in so far as they are in conformity with it, and provided that they are not or have not been repealed or revoked; with the exception of rights validly acquired in accordance with such precepts. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS FIRST This Constitution having been promulgated, the Constituent National Assembly shall continue its functions as such up to the day of the close of its session and consequently may pass laws, decrees, and resolutions that it deems necessary and may exercise all its powers. SECOND The next regular session of the Congress shall be convened August 10, 1948. THIRD The deputies of the present Assembly shall remain as such until the supreme court of elections approves the credentials of the citizens elected as legislators for the regular session of the Congress of 1948. Should a special session of the Congress be necessary prior to the approval of these credentials, the present deputies shall constitute a unicameral Congress, presided over by the Vice-President of the Republic, provided that the disqualifications provided for by this Constitution have not occurred. A majority of the deputies of the present Assembly, as well as the President of the Republic, may convene this Congress. Laws may be passed by it after two debates had on separate days. FOURTH The President of the Republic designated by this Assembly shall exercise his mandate in accordance with this Constitution and shall complete his constitutional term the first day of September, 1948, the day upon which the new President shall take over. FIFTH The Constituent National Assembly shall elect a provisional VicePresident of the Republic by secret ballot and absolute majority of votes, who shall take office before the Assembly and complete his term the first day of September, 1948, the day upon which the new Vice-President, elected in the manner established by this Constitution, shall take office. In case of default of the Vice-President whom the Assembly elects, his place shall be taken by the president and vice-presidents of the latter in their order of precedence, who shall keep the right of succession until the first Congress elects its officers. SIXTH While the census of the population is being taken, the provinces shall elect the following number of deputies: Pichincha, Guayas, Azuay, Manabi, Chimborazo and Loja-five each; Tungurahua and Cotopaxi-four each; Carchi, Imbabura, Bolivar, Cafiar, Esmeraldas, Los Rios and El Orothree each; Napo-Pastaza and Santiago Zamora-two each, and One for the Archipelago of Galapagos. SEVENTH Until a law provides to the contrary, the conditions established in Article 39 do not cover senators or deputies of the eastern provinces. The latter must have resided in one of the provinces for at least six months at some time. This requisite is not necessary for the election of the representative of the Archipelago of Galapagos. EIGHTH For the time being, the Constituent National Assembly shall proceed to appoint, by secret ballot and absolute majority of votes, the officers who, in conformity with this Constitution, must be appointed by the Congress. They shall hold office until the regular session of the Congress of 1948 confirms the new election. Likewise, the Assembly shall appoint, in the manner designated, the judges of the Supreme Court and the superior courts, who shall carry out their duties for the term fixed in this Constitution, or until the regular sessions of the Congress of 1952 and 1950, respectively, proceed to hold an election for these offices. The new superior courts, in turn, shall, within a period of thirty days from their organization, appoint all the judges, officials, employees, and clerks for their respective districts. NINTH The National Constituent Assembly shall issue the budget for the fiscal year of 1947, voting it, chapter by chapter, in two sessions, based upon the pro forma budget issued by the Executive and the report of the internal commission of the budget, and after the latter has taken cognizance of the details of the items concerning expenditures. TENTH The budget for the fiscal year of 1948 shall be issued by the technical commission of the budget and approved by the council of state. FINAL ARTICLE The Constitution shall be in force from the date of its publication in the official register.

Approved at the National Palace, in Quito, Capital of the Republic of Ecuador, the thirty-first day of December, one thousand nine hundred and forty-six.


