CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
GISBERT H. FLANZ
Editor

Republic of ECUADOR Booklet 1
by INTER-UNIVERSITY ASSOCIATES, INC. Translation by REKA KOERNER

RELEASE 98-1
Issued February 1998

Oceana Publications, Inc Dobbs Ferry, New York

This work contains material © Copyright by Inter-University Associates, Inc., reproduced with permission. For copyright and permission statements in Constitutions of the Countries of the World, generally, please see Overall Table of Contents .
Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327

ISBN 0-379-00467-4 © Copyright 1998 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America on acid-free paper

NATIONAL CONGRESS CODIFICATION OF THE POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR PREAMBLE

The Republic of Ecuador, faithful to its historical origins and decided to progress in the realization of its destiny, in the name of its people, invokes the protection of God and organizes itself fundamentally by means of this Political Constitution.
PRELIMINARY TITLE Article 1. Ecuador is a sovereign, independent, democratic, unitary, decentralized,

multicultural and multiethnic State. Its government is republican, presidential, elective, representative, responsible and alternating. Sovereignty resides in the people, who exercise it through the organs of the public power. The official language and [the language] of intercultural relations is Spanish. Quechua and the other indigenous languages are recognized within their respective areas of use and form part of the national culture. The Flag, the Coat of Arms and the Anthem established by law are symbols of the Fatherland. The territory is inalienable and irreducible. It includes the territory of the Real Audiencia de Quito with modifications introduced by valid treaties, adjacent islands, the Archipelago of Colon or of Galapagos, the territorial ocean, the subsoil and the respective airspace
[supray cente].

The capital is Quito, Metropolitan District. Article 2. The primary function of the State is to strengthen national unity, ensure the application of the fundamental rights of men and to promote the economic, social and cultural progress of its inhabitants. Article 3. The Ecuadoran State proclaims peace and cooperation as a system of international coexistence and the juridical equality of the States, condemns the use or threat of force as a means of solving conflicts and repudiates violent overthrow [despojo belico] as a source of Law. It advocates the solution of international controversies by legal and peaceful methods and declares that International Law is the standard of behavior of States in their reciprocal relations. It also advocates the international community, as well as the stability and reinforcement of its organisms, and, within that [community], Iberoamerican integration as an efficient system to obtain development of the community of people united by solidarity bonds, born from a connection in origin and culture.

1

Ecuador may form, with one or more States, associations for the promotion and defense of international and community interests. Article 4. The Ecuadoran State condemns all forms of colonialism, neocolonialism, and racial discrimination or segregation. It recognizes the right of people to liberate themselves from these oppressive systems. FIRST PART TITLE I Of Ecuadorans and Foreigners Section I Of Nationality Article 5.	 Article 6.	 1. 2. Ecuadorans are such by birth or by naturalization. [The following] are Ecuadorans by birth:

Those born in the national territory; and, Those born in foreign territory: a) Whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth, [and who] is employed in the service of Ecuador or of an international organization, or is temporarily absent from the country for any reason, unless they express their will to the contrary; Whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth, who resides in Ecuador and expresses the will to be Ecuadoran; and, Whose father or mother is Ecuadoran by birth and expresses the will to be Ecuadoran between the ages of 18 and 21, although they reside in foreign territory. [The following] are Ecuadorans by naturalization:

b)

c)

Article 7.	 1.

Those who have obtained the Ecuadoran nationality for having rendered relevant services to the country; Those who have obtained a certificate of naturalization; Those who have been adopted as children by Ecuadorans while minors. They will retain their Ecuadoran nationality if they do not express a contrary desire when they come of age; and, Those who are born in the exterior to foreign parents who later are naturalized in Ecuador, while they are minors. Their Ecuadoran nationality will be retained if they do not expressly renounce it on becoming 18 years of age.

2. 3.

4.

2

Article 8.	

Neither marriage nor its dissolution affects the nationality of spouses.

Article 9. Those that acquire Ecuadoran nationality in conformance with the principle of reciprocity, treaties entered into [celebrado] [by Ecuador] and upon expressing the will to acquire it, may maintain their nationality of origin. Article 10.	 Those who possessed Ecuadoran nationality when this Constitution was issued shall continue to enjoy it. As regards Ecuadoran or foreign juridical persons, the Law shall be followed. Ecuadorans by birth that acquire a second nationality, shall maintain the Ecuadoran [nationality]. Article 11.	 1. 2. Ecuadoran nationality is lost:

By treason to the Fatherland, judicially declared; and, By cancellation of the certificate of naturalization.

Ecuadoran Nationality is recovered in accordance with the Law. Section II Of Citizenship Article 12.	 Article 13.	 1. Ecuadorans over eighteen years of age are citizens. The rights of citizenship are suspended:

By judicial interdiction, while this lasts, except in the case of an insolvency or a bankruptcy which has not been declared fraudulent; By a sentence that condemns [a person] to a deprivation of their liberty, while it lasts, except in cases of contravention; and In the other cases determined by the Law. Section III Of the Juridical Condition of Foreigners

2.

3.

Article 14.	 Foreigners generally enjoy the same rights as Ecuadorans, with the limitations established in the Constitution and in the Law. Foreigners are excluded from the exercise of political rights. Article 15.	 The State promotes and facilitates selective immigration.

3

	

It requires that foreigners dedicate themselves to activities for which they were given authorization. Article 16. The waiving of all rights to diplomatic recourse is implicit in contracts made by the Government or by the public entities with foreign natural or juridical persons. If such contracts are made in Ecuadoran territory, one cannot call upon submission to a foreign jurisdiction, except in the case of international treaties. Article 17.	 In accordance with the Law and with international agreements, the State recognizes the right of asylum for foreigners. Article 18. Foreign natural or juridical persons may not acquire or retain, either directly or indirectly, ownership of or other rights to lands, nor lease them, obtain the use of waters, establish industries, agricultural holdings [explotaciones] , nor enter into contracts for nonrenewable natural resources or, in general, for products of the subsoil and all minerals or substances which have a nature different from those of the soil, in the border zones and in the reserved areas established by competent organisms, except if in any of these cases special authorization provided by the law is obtained. TITLE II Of Rights, Duties and Guarantees Section I Of Personal Rights General Principles Article 19. The highest duty of the State consists of respecting and enforcing respect for the human rights guaranteed by this Constitution. All the inhabitants of the Republic have the duty to promote the common good, strengthen national unity, collaborate for the integral development [progreso] of Ecuador, conserve the natural and cultural patrimony of the Nation and respect the rights of others. Article 20. The State guarantees to all individuals, men and women that are subject to its jurisdiction, the free and efficient exercise and enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights enunciated in declarations, pacts, agreements and other international instruments in force. Article 21.	 The rights and guarantees consecrated in this Constitution are fully applicable and inviolable before any Judge, Tribunal or Public Authority. Article 22.	 Without prejudice to other rights necessary for a complete moral and material development that derives from the nature of the person, the State guarantees: 1.	 The inviolability of life and personal integrity. There is no death penalty. Torture and all inhuman or degrading procedures are prohibited;

4

2.

The right to live in an environment free of contamination. It is the duty of the State to be vigilant so that this right is not affected and to promote the protection of nature. The Law will establish restrictions to the exercise of certain rights or liberties so as to protect the environment; The right to possess goods and services of optimal quality, as well as to be informed of their content and characteristics. The Law will establish the mechanisms for the control of the quality of goods and services, the procedures for the defense of the consumer and the corresponding sanctions for the violation of these rights; The right to honor, good reputation and to personal and family intimacy. The Law shall protect the name, image and voice of the person; The right to freedom of opinion and to expression of thought by whatever means of social communication, without prejudice to the responsibilities foreseen in the Law. Any person who is affected by inaccurate statements or whose honor is injured by publications made by the press or other means of social communication, shall have the right to have these make the corresponding rectification free of charge, immediately and proportionally;

3.

4.

5.

6.

Equality before the law: All forms of discrimination for reasons of age, race, color, sex, language, religion, political affiliation or of any other nature, social origin or economic position or birth are forbidden. The juridical equality of the sexes is declared. Women have rights and opportunities equal to those of men in all parts of life, especially in economic, labor, civil, political, social and cultural [matters]. The State shall adopt the necessary mechanisms to make this right effective and eliminate all discrimination;

7.

Freedom of conscience and of religion, individually and collectively, in public and in private. Persons can freely practice the faith that they profess, with the only limitations being those prescribed by the Law to protect the security, public morality and fundamental rights of other persons; The inviolability of the home. No one may penetrate it or conduct a search or examination therein without the authorization of the person who lives in it or without a court order, in the instances and in the manner prescribed by Law; The inviolability and secrecy of correspondence. It may only be taken possession of, opened and examined in the cases prescribed by the Law. Secrets shall be respected in matters outside the subject of the examination. This same principal shall be observed with respect to telegraphic, cable, telephonic, electronic and other similar communications. Documents obtained in violation of this guarantee are not admissible in court and those responsible shall be sanctioned in conformity with the Law; 5

8.

9.

10. The right to travel freely through the national territory and to choose one's residence. Ecuadorans shall enjoy the liberty to enter and leave Ecuador. As regards foreigners, the provisions of the Law shall be followed; 11. The right to address complaints and petitions to the authorities, but in no case in the name of the people; and to receive the pertinent attention or replies in an adequate period, in accordance with the Law; 12. Freedom of work, business and industry, as subject to the Law. No person may be obligated to perform free or forced labor; 13. Freedom of contract subject to the Law; 14. The right of association and of free assembly for peaceful purposes; 15. The State guarantees the right to a standard of living that assures the necessary health, food, clothing, housing, medical assistance and social services. The State shall formulate the national health policy and determine its application to public as well as private health services. The Law shall ultimately determine the organ of control and supervision of businesses that are occupied in private health services. The national health system, with the participation of the public and private sectors, shall function according to the principles of universality, equality [equidad], solidarity and efficiency. It shall foment scientific research and technological development with ethical criteria; 16. The right to keep one's political and religious convictions secret. No one may be required to declare them, except in the cases prescribed by Law; 17. The right to participate in the cultural life of the community; 18. Likewise, authorship rights over intellectual, artistic, scientific and literary works are guaranteed, for the period and with the formalities indicated by the Law; and, 19. Personal freedom and security. Consequently: a. b. Slavery and all forms of servitude are prohibited; No one may be imprisoned for debts, costs, fees, taxes, fines or other obligations, except in instances of compulsory support; No one may be punished for an act or omission which, at the time of perpetration, was not classified nor punishable as a penal infraction, nor can punishment be applied if the Law does not provide for it. In the case of conflicting penal laws, the less severe shall be applied even if it takes effect after the violation. 6

c.

The Penal Law shall establish due proportionality between infractions and punishments. In case of doubt, the Penal Law which is more favorable to the offender shall be applied. The objective of the penal regime shall be the reeducation, rehabilitation and social reincorporation of convicts; d. No person may be taken from his competent judge, nor judged by tribunals of exception or special commissions set up for the purpose, regardless of their denomination; No one may be punished without a preceding trial nor deprived of the right of defense in any state or stage of the process. Every person accused of a penal infraction will have the right to a defense attorney, as well as to obtain the means to compel defense witnesses to appear; No one may be compelled in a criminal action to declare against a spouse or relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity, nor compelled to make a declaration against himself, in matters that may create criminal responsibility. Voluntary declarations of those who are victims of a crime or those of their relatives, independent of the degree of relationship, who could also establish and proceed with the corresponding penal action, are excepted. No person may be interrogated, not even for investigative ends, by a police authority, by the Public Ministry or any other [authority] of the State, without the assistance of a private or public defender, appointed by the State if the party concerned cannot designate his own defense attorney. Any judicial, pretrial or administrative proceeding that does not comply with this principle shall lack probative force; g. Every person is presumed innocent as long as his culpability has not been declared through a judgement that may not be appealed to a higher court
[sentencia ejecutoriada];

e.

f.

h.

No one may be deprived of his freedom without a written order from the competent authority, in the manner [rasos], for the time and with the formalities prescribed by the Law, except in instances of flagrante delicto, in which case he cannot be held for more than twenty-four hours without filing for a trial [formula de juicio]. In any of these cases, he may not be imprisoned without means of communication [incomunicado] for more than twenty-four hours; and, Every person must be immediately informed of the cause of their detention.

i.

7

Article 23. The State and other entities of the public sector are obligated to indemnify individuals for any damage caused to them as a consequence of public services or of the acts of functionaries and employees in the performance of their duties. In such cases, the forementioned entities shall have the right of recovery [repetición] and shall make effective the responsibility of the functionaries or employees who caused the damages either through judicially declared deception or gross negligence. The penal responsibility of such functionaries and employees shall be established by competent judges. Article 24. When a guilty sentence has been changed or reversed through the Recourse of Revision [Recurso de Revision], the person who suffered punishment as a result of that sentence will be rehabilitated and indemnified by the State in accordance with the Law. Article 25. The State shall be civilly responsible for all cases of judicial error that produce the imprisonment of an innocent or arbitrary detention, as well as presumptory violations of the norms established in Numeral 19 of Article 22. The Law shall establish the mechanisms to make this right effective. Article 26.	 In no case may extradition of an Ecuadoran be granted. Their judgment is subject to the Laws of Ecuador. Article 27.	 Ecuadorans persecuted for political crimes have the right of asylum, which they may exercise in accordance with the Law and international agreements. Section II Of the Guarantee of Rights Paragraph I Of Habeas Corpus Article 28. Every person who believes he is illegally deprived of his freedom may resort to the right of Habeas Corpus. This right may be exercised personally or through another person, without need for a written order, before the Mayor under whose jurisdiction he is located or before whomever replaces him. The municipal authority shall immediately order the appellant to be brought before it and to reveal the order of detention. Its order must be obeyed without observation or excuse by those in charge of the center of social rehabilitation or place of detention. Once informed of the case history [antecedentes], the Mayor shall, within forty-eight hours, order the immediate release of the appellant if he was not brought before him or if the order of detention was not exhibited, or if the latter did not comply with the legal requirements, or if procedural defects were committed, or finally, if the basis for the recourse was justifiable. The functionary or employee who does not comply with the order shall be immediately discharged from his position or employment without further steps by the Mayor, who shall report the dismissal to the Comptroller General of the State and to the Authority who must appoint a replacement.

8

The dismissed employee, after placing the detained in liberty, may make a claim before the competent organs of the Judicial Function, within eight days of being notified of his dismissal.
PARAGRAPH II Of the National Public Defender's Office [Defensoria del Pueblo] Article 29. There shall be a National Public Defender [Defensor del Pueblo], with

national jurisdiction, to promote and sponsor the recourses of Habeas Corpus and the Amparo for the people who require them, to defend and elicit observance of the fundamental rights guaranteed by this Constitution; and, to exercise the other functions assigned to him by the Law. He shall enjoy political, economic [and] administrative autonomy and immunity in the same manner as the deputies [legisladores] of the National Congress. The National Public Defender shall be elected by the National Congress in full assembly, with at least a two-thirds vote of its members. To perform this position one must meet the same requirements as those to be a Magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice.
PARAGRAPH HI Of Habeas Data

Article 30. Every person has the right of access to the documents, data bases and reports on his person or on his property on record with public or private entities, as well as to know what they are used for and their purpose. Equally, one may request updates, corrections, eliminations or a voiding of these before a competent judge or functionary if they are erroneous or illegitimately affect one's rights. Documents reserved for reasons of national security are excepted.
PARAGRAPH IV Of Amparo Article 31. Every person may appear before the organs of the Judicial Function

designated by the Law and require the adoption of urgent measures, destined to cease or avoid the commission, or immediately remedy the consequences of an illegitimate act of authority of the public administration that violates any of the constitutional rights and can cause an immediate harm, which is also grave and irreparable. To this effect, there shall not be a withdrawal of the judge that should take cognizance of the recourse, nor shall holidays stand in the way. The judge shall immediately convoke the parties to be heard in a public hearing within twenty-four hours and at the same time, if it is found to be well-founded, he shall order the

9

suspension of any actual or imminent [legal] action that could translate into a violation of a constitutional right. Within forty-eight hours after the judge pronounces his resolution, immediate compliance shall be given. The initial decision [providencia] of suspension shall be obligatorily consulted, for its confirmation or revocation, before the Constitutional Tribunal, the organ before which the recourse of appeal shall proceed for the denial of suspension, in both cases, the judge shall immediately remit the file to his superior. Section III Of the Family Article 32. The State protects the family as the fundamental cell [celula] of society by guaranteeing it the moral, cultural and economic conditions that favor the attainment of its ends. It also equally protects marriage, maternity and family property. Marriage is based on the free consent of the contracting parties and on the equality of rights, obligations and legal capacity of the spouses. Article 33. A stable and monogamous union of a man and a woman, free of matrimonial ties with another person, who form in fact a household for a period of time and under the conditions and circumstances prescribed by the Law, results in community property which is subject to the regulations for joint ownership by husband and wife [sociedad conyugal], insofar as they are applicable, unless some other economic regimen has been stipulated or family property has been established for the benefit of their common children. Article 34. Responsible paternity and appropriate education for the promotion of the family is advocated, as well as the guarantee of the right of parents to have the number of children that they can support and educate. Patrimony of the family is recognized as unattachable [inembargable] in the quantity and conditions established by the Law; and, with the foregoing limitations, the right to make a testament and to inherit are guaranteed. Article 35. The State protects progenitors in the exercise of paternal authority and oversees the fulfillment of the reciprocal obligations of parents and children. The latter have the same rights, without considering their derivation [filiacion]. In registering births, no statement shall be required regarding the nature of the parental relationship [filiacion]; and, in issuing documents of identity, no reference shall be made to that relationship, nor to the condition of adoption.

10

The child is protected from its conception. Amparo of the minor is guaranteed, for the purpose of ensuring that his growth and development is adequate for his moral, mental and physical integrity, as well as for his life in the home. Article 36. Minors have the right to the protection of their progenitors, of society and of the State to assure their life, physical and psychic integrity, health, education, identity, name and nationality. They shall be consulted in accordance with the Law, [and] protected especially from abandonment, physical or moral violence and labor exploitation. Their rights prevail over the rights of others. Article 37. The work of the spouse or co-occupant [conviviente] in the home shall be considered to equitatively compensate, in special situations, in which the [forementioned] is found at an economic disadvantage. Article 38. The State, society and the family shall join together for the protection and assistance of elderly [tercera edad] persons. Section IV Of Education and Culture Article 39. The State shall foment and promote culture, artistic creation and scientific research; and keep vigilance for the preservation of the cultural patrimony and the artistic and historical wealth of the Nation. Article 40. Education is a primordial duty of the State and society, a fundamental right of the person and right and duty of parents. Official education is secular and without cost in all its levels. Private education is guaranteed. Education from the pre-elementary level to the basic cycle of the intermediate level or its equivalent is compulsory. When imparted in official institutions, services of a social character will be provided, moreover, without cost. The right of parents to give their children the education that they consider proper is recognized. Education will be inspired by principles of nationality, democracy, social justice, peace, defense of human rights, and it will be open to all trends of universal thought. Education will have a moral, historic and social sense. It will stimulate development of the critical capacity of the student to fully understand the Ecuadoran reality, the promotion of an authentic national culture, human solidarity and social and community action. The State guarantees access to education for all inhabitants without any discrimination. Freedom of teaching and academic freedoms are guaranteed.

11

In the educational systems that develop in areas of predominantly indigenous population, Quechua or the language of the respective culture will be used as the principal language for education; and Spanish will be used as the language of intercultural relation. The State shall formulate and carry out plans to eliminate illiteracy. Educational plans will tend towards the integral development of the person and of society. The stability and fair remuneration of educators at all levels is guaranteed. The Law shall regulate their appointment, transfer, separation and their right to an official personnel register [escalafon] and promotion. The State shall provide assistance for free private education, without prejudice to the allowances established for such education[,] and for private universities. The provincial councils and the municipalities may collaborate toward the same ends. Duly qualified economic missionary [ fisco misional] and special education, under the terms and conditions indicated by the Law[,] may also receive the assistance of the State. Article 41.	 The polytechnic universities and schools, both official and private, are autonomous and are governed by the Law and their own statutes. The State guarantees equal access to a state university or polytechnic education. No one may be deprived of access to them for economic reasons. Admission or levelling [nivelación] policies shall be determined by the corresponding centers of higher education. To ensure the fulfillment of the goals, functions and autonomy of the universities and polytechnic schools, the State shall create and increase the patrimony of the universities and polytechnic [schools]. Maintaining the principle that they are non-profit organizations and without prejudice to the resources assigned to them in the Budget of the Central Government and the other income that corresponds to them by Law, the universities and polytechnic schools may create complementary income sources. Their premises are inviolable. They may not be broken into except in the cases and under the terms which the dwelling of a person may be broken into. Their surveillance and the maintenance of internal order are under the competence and the responsibility of their authorities. Neither the Chief Executive nor any of his organs, authorities or functionaries may close them or reorganize them, totally or partially, or deprive them of their income or budgetary allowances. The principal functions of the universities and polytechnic schools are the study and proposal of solutions to national problems; the creation and development of the national culture and its dissemination among population sectors; scientific research, professional and

12

technical training, and contribution to create a new and more just Ecuadoran society, by indicating methods and guidelines for that [purpose]. Section V Of Social Security and Social Promotion [Promoción Popular] Article 42.	 1. All Ecuadorans have the right to social security, which includes:

Social Security, the purpose of which is to protect the insured and his family in cases of sickness, maternity, unemployment, disability, old age, and death. It shall be financed by equal contributions from the State, employers, and insured persons. One shall strive to extend it to the entire population. Social security is the unrenounceable right of the workers. Social security shall be applied through an autonomous institution; the Public Force [Fuerza Publica] may have its own entities of social security; the State, employers and insured persons shall have equal representation in its managing entities. The funds and reserves of social security, which belong to it and are distinct from those of the National Treasury, cannot be allocated for purposes other than those for which it was established and functions. Services of the Social Security [provided] in cash are not subject to assignment, attachment or withholding, except in cases of support allowances owed by Law or obligations contracted in favor of the insuring institution, and they are exempt from national and municipal taxes. The State and Social Security shall adopt measures to facilitate voluntary affiliation and to realize the affiliation of the agricultural worker;

2.

Attention to the health of the population of urban and rural areas, through the socialization of medicine, the different agencies charged with putting it into effect, and the establishment of the corresponding infrastructure in accordance with the Law; Application of programs tending toward eliminating alcoholism and other drug addiction and to reduce infant mortality; and, Social assistance, established and regulated by the State, in accordance with the Law.

3.

Article 43. The State shall contribute to the organization and promotion of the diverse population sectors, above all, the rural peasants [campesinados] in moral, cultural, economic and social matters, to permit their effective participation in the development of the community. [It] shall promote housing programs of social interest.

13

[It] shall provide the means of subsistence to those who lack resources and who are not in a position to acquire them, and have no person or entity obligated by the Law to provide them. [It] shall promote the social and civil service of women and shall encourage the formation of women's groups for their integration in the active life and development of the country; and the training of rural peasant women and [women in] the marginal sectors. Section VI Of the Environment Article 44. The State shall protect the right of the population to live in a healthy and ecologically balanced environment, that guarantees sustainable development. It is declared of public interest and shall be regulated in conformance with the Law: a) The preservation of the environment, the conservation of ecosystems, biodiversity and the integrity of the genetic patrimony of the country; The prevention of environmental contamination, the sustainable exploitation of natural resources and the requirements that public or private activities that may affect the environment should meet; and, The establishment of a system of natural protected areas and the control of receptive and ecological tourism.

b)

c)

Article 45. The manufacturing, importation, possession and use of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, as well as the introduction of nuclear residues and toxic waste into the national territory is prohibited. Article 46. The Law shall typify [ tipificara] infractions and regulate procedures to establish the administrative, civil and penal responsibilities that correspond to natural and juridical, national or foreign persons, for actions or omissions against the norms for the protection of the environment. Article 47.	 The Ecuadoran State shall be responsible for environmental damage under the terms indicated by Article 23 of this Constitution. Article 48. Without prejudice to the rights of the victims and the aggrieved, any natural or juridical person may exercise the actions contemplated in the Law for the protection of the environment. Section VII Of Work Article 49. Work is a social right and duty. It enjoys the protection of the State, which assures to the worker respect for his dignity, a decent [decorosa] existence, and fair remuneration that covers his essential needs and those of his family. It is regulated by the following fundamental norms:

14

a.	 b. c.

Labor legislation and its application are subject to the principles of social law; The State shall promote the elimination of unemployment and underemployment; The State guarantees the intangibility of the recognized rights of workers and shall adopt measures to extend and improve them; The rights of the worker are unrenounceable. Any stipulation implying their renunciation, diminution or alteration is null and void. Actions taken to reclaim them are acquired by prescription in the time specified by the Law, measured from the termination of the work relationship; A transaction in labor matters shall be valid, provided it does not imply the renunciation of rights and it is made before an administrative authority or competent judge; In case of doubt about the scope of legal, regulatory or contractual provisions of labor matters, they will be applied in the manner most favorable to the workers;

d.

e.

f	

g. Payment for work is unattachable, except for the payment of support allowances [pensiones alimenticias]. All that is owed by the employer for work constitutes privileged first-class credit, with preference even over mortgage payments; h,	 Workers shall share in the net profits [utilitades liquidas] of the enterprise in accordance with the Law;

i. The right of organization of workers and employers and their free development without prior authorization, in conformance with the Law, is guaranteed. The labor sector shall be represented by one sole organization for all purposes of labor relations in the entities of the public sector. The relations of the organisms included in letters a. and b. of Article 72 and the juridical persons created by the Law for the exercise of State power with their servants shall be subject to the laws that regulate the public administration, except those that refer to the labor sector as specified in the Labor Code. When the public sector exercises activities that it cannot delegate to the other sectors of the economy, that not even these may assume [ni éstos puedan asumir], the relationship with their servants shall be regulated by the Law of Civil Service and the Administrative Career, with exception of the relationship with workers that are protected [amparados] by the Labor Code. For activities exercised by the Public Sector and that can be assumed by the other sectors of the economy through total or partial delegation, relations with their workers shall be regulated by the Labor Code; with exception of positions of leadership [direccion], management, representation, advisor, head of department or the equivalent, who shall be subject to the pertinent laws;

15

j.

The right of workers to strike in their respective businesses and the right of employers to shutdown, in accordance with the Law, is recognized and guaranteed; Without prejudice to the principal responsibility of the direct obligor and taking exception to the right of repetition, the person in whose benefit work is performed or services are provided is severally liable for compliance with the social laws, even if the labor contract has been made through an intermediary; Collective contracts are especially guaranteed; consequently, the collective pact legally formed, cannot be unilaterally modified, repudiated or impaired;
Collective labor disputes shall be submitted to reconciliation and arbitration tribunals,

k.

I
m.

composed of employers and workers, presided over by a labor functionary. These tribunals are the only ones competent to determine, process and settle labor disputes; and, n. For payment of indemnity to which a worker is entitled, remuneration is understood as everything the worker receives in currency, in services, or in kind, including that received for special and supplementary work, piece work, commissions, profit sharing [participación en beneficios], and any other normal payment in the industry or service. The legal percentage of profits, travel allowances or occasional subsidies, the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth renumerations, wage compensation, supplementary bonuses, and social service benefits are excepted. Article 50. The State shall improve the working conditions of women by respecting their labor rights, access to the systems of social security, especially in the case of pregnant women, women in the informal sectors, working women who lead households and widowed women. Section VIII Of Political Rights Article 51. Ecuadoran citizens have the right to elect and to be elected; to present bills to the National Congress; to be consulted in the situations provided for by the Constitution; to supervise the acts of the organs of Public Power; to revoke the mandate they confer to popularly elected dignitaries; and, to carry out positions and public duties. These rights shall be exercised in the instances and with the requirements determined by the Law. Article 52. The vote is universal, equal, direct and secret, compulsory for those who can read and write, and optional for illiterates. Ecuadorans who have reached their eighteenth birthday and are in possession of their political rights have the right to vote. Members of the Public Force [Fuerza Publica] in active service may not make use of this right.

16

Proportional representation of minorities in plural person [pluripersonales] elections is guaranteed in conformance with the Law. Article 53.	 In plural elections, citizens may select preferred candidates from one list Article 53-A.	 or from several lists.
Article 54. The right to found political parties and participate in them is guaranteed

under the conditions established by the Law. Political parties shall enjoy the protection of the State in their organization and operation. Legally recognized political parties may present or support candidates for Article 55. positions [dignidades] of popular election. Citizens neither affiliated nor supported by political parties may also present themselves as candidates. Citizens elected to fulfill functions of popular election, may be reelected without limitations. The President and Vice-President of the Republic may be reelected after one period has expired following the one for which they were elected. The Constitution and the Law shall indicate the requirements to take part as a candidate in all popular elections.
Article 56. For a political party to be legally recognized and to participate in the

public life of the State, the following requirements must be met: maintain individual doctrinary principles, and a program of political action in consonance with the democratic system, and have the [required] number of members, be organized on a national scale, and obtain in elections the necessary electoral quota, in conformance with the Law. A political party or organization that does not obtain a minimum of five percent of the valid votes in two successive national plural elections shall be eliminated from the electoral registry.
Article 56 -A.

The Law shall set limits for electoral expenditures.

Political parties, movements, organizations and independent candidates shall surrender information to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal on the amount, origin and destination of resources used in electoral campaigns. Electoral publicity may only be transmitted through the collective mass media during the forty-five days immediately before the date ending the electoral campaign. The Law shall sanction breach of this disposition.

17

Section IX Of Popular Referendum [Consulta Popular] Article 57.	 Popular referendum shall be established in the cases foreseen by this Constitution. Decisions adopted in this manner are compulsory. Article 58.	 The President of the Republic has the power to convoke a popular referendum in the following situations: a. When the National Congress has not taken cognizance of, approved or rejected a proposal for constitutional reforms presented by the President of the Republic, or if it is not approved or rejected within a period of one hundred and twenty days counted from the date of receipt by the National Congress. In the case of partial refusal [negativa pariah], the popular referendum shall be limited exclusively to the part refused. The President of the Republic may exercise the power [facultad] of convocation within an unextendible period of thirty days, counted from the day after he was notified of the refusal. The referendum shall be performed within sixty days after his convocation; and, b. When[, ] in his judgement, it is a matter of extreme importance to the State.

Article 59.	 The results of the popular referendum shall be published in the Official Register within fifteen days after they are proclaimed by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal. Title III Of the Economy Section I General Provision Article 60. The organization and functioning of the economy must correspond to principles of efficiency and social justice to assure a dignified existence to all inhabitants that will provide them, at the same time, with equal rights and opportunities to use the means of production and consumption. Development, within the economic market system, shall tend to increase production and to fundamentally obtain integral improvement and progress for all Ecuadorans. State action shall have as its objective the equitable distribution of the receipt of wealth within the community. All forms of abuse of economic power, including unions and business groups that tend to dominate the national markets, to eliminate competition or to arbitrarily increase profits, are prohibited, and shall be repressed by the Law.

18

Section II Of the Sectors of the Economy Article 61.	 1.	 The Ecuadoran economy shall functions through four basic sectors:

The public sector, encompassing enterprises owned exclusively by the State. The areas of economic exploitation reserved to the State are: a. Nonrenewable natural resources and, in general, the products of the subsoil and all the minerals and substances which have a nature distinct from that of the soil; Potable water, electric power and telecommunications services; and, Strategic businesses defined by the Law.

b. c.

The State shall exercise its activities in the branches of industry or economic activities that, because of their importance and size, may have decisive economic or political influence, which makes it necessary to direct them toward the social interest. The State may, by way of exception, delegate to private enterprises the exercise of any of the aforementioned economic activities, in the instances provided by the Law; 2.	 The mixed economy sector, composed of private enterprises in association with entities of the public sector. The State shall participate in mixed economy enterprises to promote investment in areas in which the private sector cannot [invest] without the assistance of the public sector; 3. The community or self-management sector, composed of cooperative, communal or other similar enterprises which are owned and managed by the community of persons who permanently work in them. The State shall decree [dictará] laws for the regulation and development of this sector; and, 4. The private sector, composed of enterprises owned by one or several natural or juridical persons of private law and, in general, by enterprises which are not included in the other sectors of the economy. Article 62. For reasons of social interest, determined by the Law, the public sector may, through the procedure and in the period indicated by procedural norms, expropriate, with prior just appraisal, payment and indemnification, the property that pertains to the other sectors. All forms of confiscation are prohibited.

19

Section III Of Property Article 63. Ownership of property, in whichever of its forms, is a right recognized and guaranteed by the State for the organization of its economy, while it fulfills its social function. This must be translated into an increase and redistribution of income, that will permit the entire population to share the benefits of wealth and development. Article 64. The State promotes property ownership and management by workers in enterprises by means of transferring shares or equity [participaciones] in their favor. The percentage of profits of enterprises that belong to workers shall be paid in cash or in shares or in equity, in accordance with the Law, which shall establish necessary protections to [assure] that they permanently benefit the worker and his family. Article 65. To make the right to housing and to the conservation of the environment effective, municipalities may expropriate, reserve and control areas for future development, in accordance with the Law. The State shall stimulate housing programs of social interest. Article 66. The State guarantees ownership of land that is in production and stimulates the agricultural enterprise. The public sector must create and maintain the necessary infrastructure for the growth of agriculture and livestock [agropecuaria] production. The objectives of State policy, in regard to agriculture and livestock activity and the structure of property in the rural sector, shall be economic development, elevation of the standard of living and the redistribution of wealth and income. The monopolization [acaparamiento] of land and the latifundio are proscribed. Community and cooperative production shall be encouraged through the integration of units of production. Directed and spontaneous colonization shall be regulated with the goal of improving the living conditions of the peasant, taking precautions [to protect] natural resources and the environment, [and] endeavoring to strengthen the country's living borders [fronteras vivas]. Section IV Of the Tax System Article 67. The tax system is governed by the basic principles of equality, proportionality and generality. Taxes, in addition to serving as the means of obtaining budgetary resources, are instruments of general economic policy. Tax laws stimulate investment, reinvestment, savings and their use in national development. They strive [to create] a just distribution of income and wealth among all the inhabitants of the country.

20

Article 68. They may only be established, changed or eliminated by a legislative act of the competent organ. Tax legislation may not be decreed to take retroactive effect to the detriment of taxpayers [contribuyentes]. Tax rates and special contributions shall be established and regulated in accordance with the Law. Section V Of the Monetary System Article 69.	 The monetary system shall guard the stability of the national currency and the financial solvency of the country. Article 70. The Monetary Board [Junta Monetaria], which exercises its functions within the norms established by the Law, is responsible for managing policy relating to the national currency. Article 71. The monetary unit is the Sucre. The President of the Republic shall fix and modify its international exchange relationship in accordance with the Law. The issuance of coins and bills, which have unlimited free [liberatorio] power, is an exclusive power of the Central Bank of Ecuador. SECOND PART Title I Section I Of the Public Sector Article 72.	 a. The public sector is composed of:

The Executive, Legislative, Judicial, Electoral and Control functions, and the different dependencies of the State; The entities that integrate the Subordinate Autonomous Regime [Regimen Sectional Autonomo]; and, The juridical persons created by the Law for the exercise of the state power; or for the provision of public services; or for economic activities assumed by the State, and those created by subordinate legislative acts for the provision of public services.

b.

c.

Article 73. Norms to establish penal, civil and fiscal responsibility for the handling and administration of funds, contributions or public resources, shall be applied to all the servants of the entities referred to in the foregoing article. Article 74. The exercise of positions [dignidades] and public functions constitutes a service to the collective. No dignitary, authority or public servant is exempt from responsibility for the exercise of his functions. Illicit enrichment of citizens elected by

21

popular election; of delegates or representatives of associated bodies of the public sector; and, of public servants in general shall be sanctioned in conformance with the Law. Those who participate in this type of crime, although they do not manifest the aforementioned characteristics, shall be sanctioned in the form determined by the Law. Every organ of public power is responsible and may not exercise powers other than those designated in this Constitution and the Law. Every public functionary, including representatives of popular election, shall present sworn declarations of property and income at the beginning and at the end of their terms, in accordance with the Law. Workers are protected by the Code of Work [Codigo del Trabajo]. Article 74-A.	 [The following people] may not be candidates for a post or position of popular election: a. Those who have received a non-appealable penal judgement [sentencia ejecutoriada] for crimes of peculation, extortion or bribery, even if the sentence has been completed or has been prescribed. Those who have been disqualified from the exercise of their post or position of popular election by the National Congress due to fraudulent infractions committed through the exercise of their functions or [those who have been] dismissed after a political trial for the same reason; Those who have been declared absent [cesantes] in the exercise of a post or position of popular election in instances of abandonment or physical or mental incapacity provided for by the Political Constitution of the Republic; and, Those against whom a judicial order of detention has been issued through a penal trial initiated against them for crimes of peculation, extortion or bribery or who have been called to the plenary for the same crimes through an executed decree.

b.

c.

d.

The incompetencies referred to in paragraphs b. and d. of this article shall cease upon the execution of a definitive decree staying the proceedings or an absolutory sentence. Article 75.	 The administrative career guarantees the rights and establishes the obligations of the public servants. Article 76. The entities indicated in letters b. and c. of Article 72 shall enjoy the autonomy established by their laws of origin for their organization and functioning. Autonomy is especially guaranteed to the provincial councils, municipal councils, the Ecuadoran Institute of Social Security, the Central Bank of Ecuador, the National Development Bank [Banco Nacional de Fomento], the Public Welfare Boards [Juntas de Beneficiencia 1, the National Finance Corporation [Corporación Financiera Nacional], the Ecuadoran Housing Bank, the Bank of the State, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the

22

General Procuracy of the State, the Public Ministry, the corporations of regional and provincial economic development, the organisms of control and the universities and polytechnic schools. Article 77. The Law guarantees the rights and establishes the obligations of public servants in the civil service and the administrative career. Renumeration shall be proportional to the functions and responsibilities of the public servants. The regimen of seniority and special or extraordinary concessions shall be valid when they are expressly confirmed by the Law and are subject to principles of responsibility and equity. Article 78. No person may hold two or more public offices, except for university professors, who, in addition to a public office, may teach, and telegraph and radio operators, who may exercise another public post. Nepotism is prohibited in the form indicated by the Law. Title II Of the Legislative Function Section I Of the National Congress Article 79. The Legislative Function is exercised by the National Congress, located in Quito, composed of twelve legislators elected by national vote; two legislators elected for each province; and, moreover, one legislator elected for each three hundred thousand inhabitants or fraction over two hundred thousand. The legislators are elected from among the candidates nominated from slates [Iistas] approved by the Electoral Function, in accordance with the Law. The election base of three hundred thousand or fraction thereof over two hundred thousand increases in proportion to the increase in the national population, according to the census. Exceptionally, the National Congress may meet in another city. Article 80. National legislators shall exercise their function for four years and they may be reelected. They must be Ecuadorans by birth; be in full enjoyment of their citizenship rights; and be at least thirty years of age at the time of election. The provincial legislators shall exercise their functions for two years and may be reelected. To be elected provincial deputy [diputado] one must be Ecuadoran by birth; be in full enjoyment of their rights of citizenship; be at least twenty-five years of age at the time of election; and be a native [oriundo] of the respective province or have continuously resided in it for at least three years immediately prior to the election. Article 81.	 [The following] may not be members of the National Congress:

23

a. b.

Magistrates or functionaries of the central or subordinate organs of the State. Public functionaries of the autonomous and dependant organisms and, in general, those who receive remunerations from the public treasury or those who received one within one hundred and twenty days prior to their election. Public servants enjoy unpaid leaves of absence [licencias] to participate as candidates in the electoral process and shall end their functions upon being elected; Those who exercise control or jurisdiction or who have exercised it within six months prior to the election;

c.

d: Presidents, managers and representatives of banks and other credit institutions established in Ecuador, as well as those of their branches or agencies; e. Those who personally or through representatives have contracts with the State, either as natural persons or as representatives of juridical persons; Military personnel in active service; Ministers of any religion [culto] and members of religious communities; The legal representatives and proxies of foreign companies; and, Those who are hindered by other legal provisions.

f. g. h. i.

The condition [dignidad] of legislator does not signify public function or post. Article 82. The National Congress meets in plenary session, without the need for convocation, in Quito from the 1st of August until the 9th of October of each year, to exclusively take cognizance of the following matters: a. To appoint from among its members the President and the Vice-President of the Congress, whose functions shall last for one year; To install the President and the Vice-President of the Republic who are proclaimed elected by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal; To interpret the Constitution and the laws; To expedite, reform, and abrogate the laws; To establish, modify or abolish taxes, fees or other public revenues; To oversee the acts of the Executive Function and other organs of public power and take cognizance of the reports presented by its officials; To initiate political trials while in exercise of their functions and up to one year after they have terminated, of the President and the Vice-President of the Republic, the

b.

c. d. e. f.

g.

24

Ministers of State [ministros secretarios de estado], the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and the members of the National Council of the Judicature, the members of the Constitutional Tribunal and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the Comptroller General of the State and the Procurator General [Procurador General] of the State, the General Fiscal Minister [Ministro Fiscal General], the Public Defender of the People and the Superintendents of Banks and Company Superintendents for violations committed while performing their posts, and to decide on their censure in the case of declared culpability, which will bring about his destitution and inability to fill public posts during that same period, in any case the inability may not be less than one year. If the accusation implicates the penal responsibility of the functionary, after judging his official conduct, [Congress] shall order him to appear before a competent judge or tribunal if support is found. The President and the Vice-President of the Republic may only be indicted for treason to the Fatherland [Patria], bribery or any other infraction that would severely affect the national honor; h. To take cognizance of and decide on the apologies [excusas] and renouncements of the President and Vice-President of the Republic and of the magistrates or members and functionaries of the courts, tribunals or organisms referred to in the preceding letter, with the exception of the Ministers of State; To approve or disapprove public treaties and other international conventions; To appoint the Procurator General of the State and the Fiscal Minister from the lists of candidates [ternas] presented to it by the President of the Republic and to remove them if needed. To appoint the General Comptroller of the State, the Superintendent of Banks, the Superintendent of Companies, and the Superintendent of Telecommunications, with the favorable vote of at least two-thirds of its members, and to remove them if needed. In all instances in which the National Congress must designate functionaries on the basis of lists of candidates, the [lists] should be presented during the twenty days following that of the vacancy. If these lists of candidates are not received within the indicated period, it shall proceed to make the appointments without them. The National Congress shall make appointments within forty days of having received the respective list of candidates; k. To grant amnesty for political crimes and pardons for common crimes, when justified by some important reason; and, To exercise the other functions indicated in the Constitution and in the laws.

i. j.

1.	

25

Article 83.	 The National Congress shall be governed by the Organic Law of the Legislative Function to perform its work and that of the Legislative Commissions. Article 84. The Members of the National Congress shall act for the national good. They may not hold any public office except that of university professor, nor exercise their profession while the National Congress or the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions are in session. Legislators are not responsible for the votes they emit nor for the opinions they formulate in the exercise of their functions. During the work of the legislature they enjoy parliamentary immunity, and implicitly cannot be deprived of their liberty, except in cases of flagrante delicto in accordance with the Law. Penal trials against legislators may not be initiated or continued, except when the National Congress authorizes them, because the processal antecedents or the evidence documented in proceedings, respectively, have sufficient merit. In any case, the period of immunity shall not be computed for purposes of prescription or the abandonment of trials for crimes committed before or during the work of the legislature. Legislators may not manage funds of the Budget of the State, except for those expressly assigned for the administrative development of the Legislative Function. Article 85. The National Congress may meet in extraordinary sessions convoked by its President, by the President of the Republic, or by two-thirds of its members, to take exclusive cognizance of the matters for which the session was called. Section II Of the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions Article 86.	 The National Congress shall establish five Legislative Commissions, each consisting of seven legislators. These commissions shall occupy themselves, respectively, with: a. b. c. d. e. Civil and Penal [matters]; Labor and Social [matters]; Tax, Fiscal, Banking and Budgetary [matters]; Economic, Agrarian, Industrial and Commercial [matters]; and, The Public Administration and the Subordinate Regimen.

26

The Committees shall take cognizance of related matters. They shall work full time during the entire year. The Plenary of the Legislative Commissions must be integrated in a manner proportional to the representation achieved by the different political parties and those not affiliated, in accordance with the Law. The Plenary of the Legislative Commissions has the exclusive power to approve, in a sole debate, bills for the codification of laws, elaborated by the respective Commission. It also has the power to approve, in two debates, public treaties and other international conventions, except for those that deal with national sovereignty, security and defense. Article 87. The Plenary of the Legislative Commissions shall function in the recess of the National Congress. It shall have its headquarters in the city of Quito and shall be integrated by the President of the National Congress, who shall preside, and the legislators elected to integrate the Legislative Commissions. The Legislative Commissions shall be partially renewed in the periods and in the manner indicated by the Law. Their members may be reelected. Section III Of the Initiative and Formation of Legislation

Of the Initiative Article 88.	 The initiative for the enactment of laws corresponds to the legislators, the President of the Republic, and the Supreme Court of Justice. Popular initiative to amend the Constitution and to amend and enact laws is recognized. The exercise of this right shall be regulated by the Law. If a bill is presented by the President of the Republic or the Supreme Court, they have the right to intervene in its debate, without vote, either personally or by delegation. If a bill dealing with an economic matter were to be presented by the President of the Republic and qualified by him as urgent, the National Congress, or during its recess, the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions, must approve, reform or refuse it within a period of no longer than fifteen days. If they did not do this, the President of the Republic may promulgate it as a Decree-Law in the Registro Oficial and it will enter into effect until it is reformed or abrogated by the National Congress. The reform will follow the same procedure as that provided for in Article 91 of this Constitution for the formation of the Law. The abrogation shall be completed in the same way, but the President of the Republic may not object. No more than one urgent bill may be presented while another is being considered, without prejudice to the powers established powers [facultades] in letter n. of Article 103.

27

The period for the consideration of a bill of Law presented by the President of the Republic on an economic matter qualified as urgent shall not expire if Congress is in session in an Extraordinary Period that does not include [the bill] on its agenda.

Of the Formation of the Laws Article 89. Bills shall be presented to the President of the National Congress with an explanation of motives, for their negotiation in Congress if it is in session, or, in its recess, by the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions. Article 90. The National Congress may take cognizance of, approve or reject bills. When in recess, this power corresponds to the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions, which shall make its resolutions by a majority that in no case may be less than fifteen conforming votes. Article 91. Approval of a bill demands its discussion in two debates. Once the bill is presented, the President of Congress shall remit it to the respective Legislative Commission and shall distribute it to all the legislators. The Commission shall prepare the report for the first debate. Observations on the bill may be presented during the first debate, after which it shall be returned to the same Commission to prepare a report for the second debate. In the second debate the bill shall be approved, rejected or modified with the majority of votes of those present at the session, without prejudice to the majority established in the preceding article. Within a period of ninety days, counted from the promulgation of a Law, and when established by it, the Executive shall decree directions for the execution of the Law, except in the instance foreseen in the second paragraph, letter c) of Article 103. The legislative acts that neither create nor extinguish rights, nor modify nor interpret the Law, shall have the nature of agreements or resolutions. Article 92. After approving a Law, the National Congress or, if the latter is not in session, the Plenary of the Legislative Committees, shall submit it to the cognizance of the President of the Republic for his approval or objection. If the President of the Republic approves the bill or does not present any objections within ten days of its receipt, it shall be promulgated. Article 93. The laws approved by the National Congress or by the Plenary of the Legislative Committees that are objected to by the President of the Republic may only be considered by the Congress after one year from the date of objection. Nevertheless the National Congress, with the declaration of two-thirds of its members, may request the President of the Republic to submit it to the voters by popular referendum.

28

If the objection relates to one part of the Law, the National Congress will rectify it, accepting the objection, or will ratify the bill in two debates, with the favorable vote of at least two-thirds of its members and, will then proceed to its promulgation. Article 94. After promulgation, the norms contained in treaties and other international agreements that are not contrary to the Constitution and the laws, form part of the juridical order [ordenamiento] of the Republic. Section IV Of the Budget of the State Article 95. The preparation of the preliminary draft of the budget corresponds to the Executive Function[, which shall present it to the National Congress before the first of September of each year. The respective Legislative Commission, with the technical advice of the Executive, shall consider the duly detailed preliminary draft, and approve it by sectors of expenditures. In case of a discrepancy, it shall report to the National Congress in Plenary, which will resolve it in a single debate before the thirty-first of December of each year. Article 96. The Budget shall be enacted annually. It shall contain all revenues and expenditures of the State[,] including those of the autonomous entities destined to attend to public services and to the execution of economic and social development programs[, with the exception of those indicated in letter b. of Article 149[1 as well as those created by sectional legislative act for the rendering of public services. The administrative expenditures of the Budget may not be covered by foreign government loans. At least thirty percent of the normal revenues of the central government shall be assigned in the Budget for education and the eradication of illiteracy. Article 97. The National Congress may not enact laws that increase public expenditures or that repeal or modify those which establish revenues included in the Budget of the State, unless, at the same time, it establishes financing sources, creates new taxes or increases those in existence. The establishment of new taxes for financing the Budget of the State shall be subject to that provided for in the Constitution and the Law.

29

Title III Of the Executive Function Section I Of the President of the Republic Article 98. The Executive Function is exercised by the President of the Republic, who represents the State. He serves four years in performing his functions and may be reelected, after one period following that for which he was elected. Article 99. To be President of the Republic it is required that one be Ecuadoran by birth; be in enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; be at least thirty-five years of age at the time of the election; and[, ] be elected by an absolute majority of the votes cast by direct, universal and secret ballot, in conformance with the Law. Article 100. 	 post vacant: a. b. c. d. e. The President of the Republic shall terminate his functions and leave his

for having completed the term for which he was elected; for death; for resignation accepted by the National Congress; for physical or mental incapacity declared by the National Congress; and, for dismissal or abandonment of his post declared by the National Congress.

Article 100-A. In case of the definitive absence of the President of the Republic he shall be substituted, in the following order, for the remainder of the corresponding constitutional period [by]: a. b. c. The Vice-President of the Republic; The President of the National Congress; and, The President of the Supreme Court of Justice.

Article 101.	 In case of the temporary absence [falta] of the President of the Republic[,] he shall be replaced, in the following order, by: a. b. c. The Vice-President of the Republic; The Minister of Government [Ministerio de Gobierno]; or, The Minister of State designated by the President of the Republic.

The President of the Republic is temporarily absent in the case of:

30

a.

A sickness or other circumstance when it temporarily prevents the exercise of his function; and, Leave of absence.

b.

Absence from the Country for matters inherent to the exercise of his functions is not considered a temporary absence, without prejudice to the former, the President may delegate specified powers to the Vice-President of the Republic. Article 102. Before he leaves the country, the President of the Republic shall communicate information concerning his journey to the National Congress or, during its recess, to the Plenary of the Legislative Committees. Upon his return, within a maximum period of fifteen days, he shall present a corresponding report. During the year immediately after the cessation of his functions, to leave the country, he shall first communicate about his journey to the National Congress or, during its recess, to the Plenary of the Legislative Committees. Article 103.	 a. [The following] are powers and duties of the President of the Republic:

Within the field of his legal authority, to comply with and enforce the Constitution, laws, decrees, and international conventions; To exclusively, except in the cases expressly foreseen in the Constitution, approve, promulgate, carry out and to object to the laws expedited by the National Congress or the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions; To issue, within a period of ninety days, regulations for the application of the laws, which may not interpret or alter them, without prejudice to the reforms which may be expedited afterwards. If the President of the Republic should consider that the period indicated in the previous paragraph is insufficient, he may address the National Congress or the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions with an exposition of reasons that will permit him to use up to ninety additional days for the completion of this disposition;

b.

c.

d.

To maintain order in the interior, guard the external security of the State, and determine the national security policy; To freely name and remove ministers, chiefs of diplomatic missions, governors and other public officials over whom he has authority [que le correspondiere], in accordance with the Law and the juridical and administrative statute pronounced by the President of the Republic; To determine foreign policy and direct international relations; to enter into treaties and other international agreements, in accordance with the Constitution and the laws; to ratify them after their approval by the National Congress; and to exchange or deposit, as the case may be, the respective letters of ratification;

e.

f.

31

g.

To contract and authorize the contracting of government loans, in accordance with the Law; To exercise the maximum authority of the Public Force [Fuerza Publica]; To confer military and police ranks and hierarchical promotions to officials of the Public Force, in accordance with the Law; To decree the mobilization, demobilization and requisitions that become necessary, in accordance with the Law; To avail himself of the use of the Public Force, through its corresponding organisms, whenever security and public service so require; To appoint and remove functionaries of the Public Force, in accordance with the Law; To assume political command of war; To approve, in accordance with the Law and in a secret manner[,] the structures [orgánicos] of the Public Force; in peacetime, and in case of emergency, to call all or part of the reserves to active service. n.Todeclarstfinemrgcyadsuthefolwingprs,me of them, in an instance of imminent external aggression, international warfare or a grave internal disturbance or catastrophe, and notify the National Congress, if in session, or the Constitutional Tribunal: 1. 2. To decree the advance collection of taxes and other contributions; In case of international conflict, imminent invasion or internal catastrophe, to invest[,] for the defense of the State or the settlement of the catastrophe[,] government funds designated [destinados] for other purposes, except those intended for health and social assistance; To transfer the seat of government to any place within the national territory; To close or open ports temporarily; To impose censorship in social communications media; To suspend or limit, if necessary, one or some of the rights established in Article 22 of the Constitution in numeral 5, 8, 9, 10, 14 and letter h. of numeral 19; but in no case may expatriation or confinement outside of the capital of the province or a region apart from that in which the affected person resides be arranged; and, To declare a security zone in all or in part of the national territory, in accordance with the Law.

h. i.

j.

k.

1.	 m. n.

3. 4. 5. 6.

7.

32

The National Congress or, in its in recess, the Constitutional Tribunal, may revoke the declaration if the circumstances warrant; o. To put an end to the declaration of the state of emergency when the reasons motivating it have disappeared, and to immediately notify the National Congress or the Constitutional Tribunal, as the case may be, of this action, without prejudice to the report that shall be rendered to the corresponding organism; To present to the National Congress an annual report on his work and on the general state of the Republic, that will be read every year on August 10; To set the general economic and social policies of the State, and approve the corresponding development plans; To set the population policy of the country, within the social and economic guidelines for the solution of national problems, in agreement with the principles of respect for sovereignty of the State and the self-determination of parents; and To exercise all other powers inherent in his high office conferred upon him by the Constitution and the laws. [The following persons] may not be elected President of the Republic:

p.

q.

r.

s.

Article 104.	 1. 2.

Those who have exercised a de facto government; The spouse or a relative of the actual President of the Republic, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity; Those who have held the office of Vice-President of the Republic[,] by appointment or by definitive substitution, for the term immediately prior to the election; Those who are Secretary Minister of State [Ministro Secretario de Estado] at the time of the election or were such six months prior thereto; Those who are active members of the Public Force or who were such within six months prior to the election; Those who are ministers of any religion or religious persons of any cult; Those who personally or as representatives of juridical persons have contracts with the State; and The legal representatives or assignees of foreign companies.

3.

4.

5.

6. 7.

8.

33

Section II Of the Vice-President of the Republic Article 105.	 There will be a Vice-President of the Republic elected simultaneously with the President, on the same ballot. Article 106. The same qualifications are required to be elected Vice-President as [to be elected] [P]resident of the Republic. The term shall be four years and he may be reelected, after one period following that for which he was elected. Article 107.	 The Vice-President shall exercise the functions assigned to him by the President of the Republic. Article 108. In case of the definitive absence of the Vice-President, the National Congress, will proceed to elect a Vice-President of the Republic from a list of candidates [terra] presented by the President of the Republic, with a vote in conformance with the majority of its members, for the period that remains to complete the corresponding presidential term established by the Constitution. Article 109.	 The incompatibilities established for the President of the Republic are the same for the Vice-President. Section III The Secretary Ministers of State [Ministros Secretarios de Estado] Article 110. The discharge of the affairs of State is the responsibility of the ministers, who are freely appointed and removed by the President of the Republic. They represent him in the matters relating to their Ministry and are responsible for the acts and contracts that they carry out in the exercise of that representation, in accordance with the Law. Article 111.	 The number and denomination of the Ministries shall be determined by the President of the Republic, in relation to the needs of the State. Article 112.	 To be a Minister one must be Ecuadoran by birth, be in full enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, and be at least thirty years of age. A Minister censured by the National Congress ceases in his functions and may not be designated for any public function within a year. Article 113. The ministers shall annually present a report of work completed and plans or programs that will be executed in their dependency before the President of the Republic[,] and for the cognizance of the country. These reports shall be sent to the National Congress.

34

Section IV Of the National Development Council Article 114. The National Development Council, with headquarters in Quito, shall set the general economic and social policies of the State and prepare corresponding development plans that shall be approved by the President of the Republic for their execution. Article 115. 	 members: The National Development Council shall consist of the following

A delegate of the President of the Republic, who will preside over it; Four [M]inisters of State, appointed by the President of the Republic; One delegate of the National Congress; One representative of the provincial mayors and prefects; One representative of the organized workers; One representative of the Chambers of Production; and One representative of the Polytechnic Universities and Schools. The last four representatives shall be elected in accordance with the Law. A tie in the vote shall be resolved by conforming to the vote of whomever presides over the session. Article 116. The policies determined by the National Development Council and the economic and social plans it prepares, once approved by the President of the Republic, shall be carried out and implemented in an obligatory manner by the respective ministers and by the entities of the public sector. Their Board of Directors [Directivos] shall be responsible for their application. When these policies and plans require modification, amendment or enactment of laws, the President of the Republic shall present the corresponding bills to the National Congress or the Plenary of the Legislative Committees. Title IV Of the Judicial Function Section I Basic Principles Article 117.	 The judicial process [sistemo procesal] is a means for the realization of justice. This shall not be sacrificed because of the mere omission of formalities. Article 118. In accordance with the principle of jurisdictional unity, the exercise of judicial power corresponds exclusively to the magistrates, judges and tribunals indicated in the Constitution, the laws and in international treaties.

35

Without prejudice to the unity of the Judicial Function, it shall act in a decentralized manner. The arbitration system, negotiation and other alternative procedures for the solution of controversies are recognized. Article 119.	 Processal laws shall procure the simplification, uniformity and efficacy of proceedings. They shall adopt, insofar as possible, the oral system. Unjustifiable delay in the administration of justice shall be suppressed [reprimido] by the Law and[, ] in case of repetition, shall constitute motive for the removal of the magistrate or judge, who[,] moreover[,] is responsible for damages and injuries sustained by the affected parties. Article 120. In criminal, labor, food, child, and matters of public order cases, the administration of justice is without cost. In other cases the National Council of the Judicature shall set the amount of the respective rates. Article 121.	 Trials are public, except in the cases indicated by the Law, but the courts may deliberate in secret. In no trial shall there be more than three instances. Article 122.	 The organisms of the Judicial Function are independent in the exercise of their functions. No authority may interfere in matters belonging to that function. Jurisdictional unity is established. Therefore, every administrative act generated by the central, provincial and municipal administration or any autonomous entity recognized by the Constitution and the laws, may be opposed before the corresponding organs of the Judicial Function, in the form determined by the Law. Article 123. 	 regulations. A judicial career is recognized, and the Law shall determine its

Magistrates and judges of the Judicial Function, with the exception of ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall be appointed subject to a competitive contest based on merits and opposition, in accordance with that established by the Law. Section II Of Organs of the Judicial Function Article 124.	 The organs of the Judicial Function are:

a. The Supreme Court of Justice, the District Tribunals of the District Attorney [Tribunales Distritales de lo Fiscal] and the District Contentious-Administrative [Contencioso Administrativo] Tribunals, the superior courts, and the other courts subordinate to them;

36

b.

The other tribunals and courts that the laws establish within the ambit of the Judicial Function; and, The National Council of the Judicature [Consejo Nacional de la Judicatura].

c.

Article 125. The National Council of the Judicature is the administrative and disciplinary organ of the Judicial Function. Its members shall be appointed by the plenary session [Tribunal en Pleno] of the Supreme Court of Justice, with the vote of at least twothirds of its members. Its functioning shall be regulated by the Law.
Section III Of Organization and Functioning

The Supreme Court of Justice has jurisdiction throughout the national Article 126.	 territory and has its seat in Quito. The Law shall determine the organization, specialization and functioning of the chambers of the Supreme Court, the District Tribunals of the District Attorney, the District Contentious-Administrative Tribunals, superior courts and other tribunals and subordinate courts. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the superior courts and other tribunals and courts are responsible for the prejudice caused to the parties by delay, denial of justice or violation of the Law. Article 127. 	 matters. The Supreme Court of Justice shall act as a Tribunal of Cassation on all

It shall furthermore exercise all the functions that the Constitution and Law specify. Article 128.	 a. b. c. d. e. To be a magistrate of the Supreme Court it is required:

To be Ecuadoran by birth; To be in full enjoyment of one's rights of citizenship; To be over forty-five years of age; To have a degree of Doctor of Jurisprudence; To have practiced with known integrity the profession of lawyer, of the judicature, or of university professor in Legal Sciences for a minimum of twenty years; and, To meet the other requirements of competence determined by the Law.

1	

Article 129. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall not be subject to a fixed term in the exercise of their posts. They shall cease in their functions for the reasons determined by the Political Constitution of the Republic and the Law.

37

If a vacancy is produced, whatever its cause, the plenary [session] of the Supreme Court of Justice shall designate the new magistrate with a favorable vote of at least two-thirds of its members, observing criteria of professionalism and the legal career in conformity with the Law. Article 130. In case of contradictory findings on a single point of law, the Supreme Court, in plenum, shall issue the reconciling norm, which shall be compulsory until the Law determines otherwise. For this purpose, the minister [ministros] justices shall be summoned immediately after the discrepancy has occurred, to issue the resolution within fifteen days of their meeting. Article 131.	 The Law shall determine the organization of the superior courts and the other tribunals and courts. Article 132. Magistrates, judges and government attorneys [fiscales] may not practice law nor fill other public or private posts, except teach at a university. Nor may they perform leadership functions in political parties or intervene in election contests. Article 133.. Within their respective territorial districts, the jurisdiction of civil, penal, labor, tenancy and other special judges in all judicial disputes stems from the castings of lots on at least a daily basis, pursuant to the regulations issued by the Supreme Court of Justice. The jurisdiction for judges of criminal proceedings is exempt from this provision. Article 134. Through its magistrates, the Supreme Court of Justice may meet with the National Congress or the Legislative Commissions to intervene, without the right to vote, in the discussion of bills. Article 135.	 The State shall establish public defenders for the protection of indigenous communities, communities of workers, and all persons who lack economic means. Article 136.	 The President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall report annually in writing to the National Congress on his work and programs. Title V Of the Organisms of the State Section I Of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal Article 137. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal, with its seat in Quito and jurisdiction throughout the national territory, the highest electoral organism, is a juridical person of public law, that has autonomy and administrative, economic and financial independence, for its organization as well as for the fulfillment of its specific function[,] which is to organize, direct, supervise and guarantee the electoral process, and to judge the records

38

surrendered by the political parties, movements and organizations and independent candidates, on the amount, origin and use of the resources used in electoral campaigns. Its organization, duties and powers are determined by the Law. It may arrange for the cooperation of the Public Force [Fuerza Publica] to guarantee liberty and purity of suffrage. It shall constitute itself through seven principle board members [vocales] and their respective substitutes, in representation of each of the seven lists that obtained the highest number of votes in the last plural [pluripersonales] elections at the national level. For this purpose, the legal representatives of political parties or independent movements shall present to the National Congress the lists from which the principal and substitute board members shall be selected for appointment. Board members shall remain in office for four years and may be reelected. Section II Of the General Procuracy of the State [Procuraduria General del Estado] Article 138. The General Procuracy of the State is an autonomous organism, directed and represented by the Procurator General of the State, who shall be elected by the National Congress from a list of candidates presented by the President of the Republic. Article 139. The Procurator General is the sole judicial representative of the State, and he may delegate said representation in accordance with the Law. He must meet the requirements demanded of a magistrate of the Supreme Court and he shall last four years in his functions. Article 140.	 The protection [patrocinio] of the State, legal advice, and other functions determined by the Law correspond to the Procurator General. Section III Of the Public Ministry Article 141. The Public Ministry is exercised by the General Fiscal Minister [Ministro Fiscal General], the district fiscal ministers, the fiscal agents and the other functionaries determined by the Law. Article 142. The General Fiscal Minister must possess the requirements dictated for Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice and shall last four years in his functions. His designation shall be made by the National Congress from a list of candidates presented by the President of the Republic. He shall have the attributions, powers [facultades] and duties determined by the Law. Within the accomplishment of its obligations, the Public Ministry shall attend to prior indignation [indagaciones] and criminal trial investigation with the support of the Judicial Police.

39

Section IV Of the Organisms of Control Article 143. The Office of the Comptroller General is an autonomous technical agency directed and represented by the Comptroller General; who shall meet the same requirements dictated for Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice. [The Comptroller] has power to control revenues, administration, custody, expenditures and investment of public resources and property, to dictate regulations for accomplishing control and giving advice on the subjects of his competence. The vigilance of the Comptroller shall extend to entities of private law with respect to property, revenues [rentas] and other subsidies of a public character in that relating to their correct use. Article 144. In conformity with the Law, and without prejudice to the corresponding right of defense, it shall have the power to determine the administrative responsibilities and presumptions of civil and penal responsibility. Article 145. The Office of the Superintendent of Banks [Superintendencia de Bancos] is the autonomous and technical organism that supervises and controls the organization, activities, functioning, dissolution and liquidation of banking, insurance, financial, investment and National Financial Corporación reciprocal credit institutions, and other natural and juridical persons determined by the Law. Article 146. The Office of the Superintendent of Companies is the autonomous and technical organism that supervises and exercises control over the organization, activities, functioning, dissolution and liquidation of companies, pursuant to the circumstances and conditions established by the Law. Article 146-A. The Superintendent of Telecommunications shall be the technical organism that supervises and controls the activities of the operators that exploit telecommunication services, the execution of concession contracts for the exploitation of telecommunication services and the other activities established by the Law. Article 147. The Comptroller General of the State, the Superintendent of Banks, the Superintendent of Companies and the Superintendent of Telecommunications shall serve for a term of four years. The Law shall determine the cases of removal or replacement
[subrogacion].

Title VI Of the Administrative and Subordinate [Seccional] Regime Section I General Rules Article 148.	 The territory of Ecuador is indivisible. For the administration of the State, provinces, cantons and parishes are established, meeting the requirements indicated by the

40

Law. The demarcation of provinces, cantons and parishes may neither cede nor take away territory. Article 149. The administrative decentralization of the State shall promote the harmonious development of all of its territory by encouraging the support of depressed areas, [and] the distribution of resources and services according to the needs of the respective territorial demarcations; for this purpose: a. The Central Government shall deconcentrate and decongest its management, conceding sufficient powers to the representatives of the Subordinate Administrative Regime; The provincial councils and the municipal councils constitute the organisms of the Subordinate Government with functional, administrative and economic autonomy in their respective territorial demarcations; the Constitution and the Law shall indicate their functions and the areas of exclusive competence; To make economic autonomy effective, without prejudice to other resources assigned to the autonomous subordinate governments, fifteen percent (15%) of the budget of the Central Government shall be assigned for the benefit of the provincial and municipal councils of the country, and shall be distributed in conformance with the Law, based on provincial and municipal plans of investment; and, Preference shall be given to the works and services of the less developed zones. To those of the border and of the Galapagos.

b.

c.

d.

Within the first 90 days of each year the Executive Function shall inform the National Congress, with documentation and detailed by province and sectors, of the budgetary liquidation of the immediately preceding fiscal year. Section II Of the Subordinate Administrative Regime [Regimen Sectional Dependiente] Article 150. Depending on the Executive Function, and without prejudice to other authorities with delegated powers, there shall be a Governor in the provinces, a Political Chief [Jefe Politico] in the districts [cantones], and a Political Lieutenant [Teniente Politico] in the rural parishes, whose manner of appointment, functions and obligations shall be fixed by the Law. Article 151. The Governor is the representative of the President of the Republic for the maintenance of public order and the execution of the general policies of the central administration. In addition, he must coordinate the activities of the administrative organs which depend on the Executive in each province and represent the different ministries that do not have a specific delegation.

41

Section III Of the Subordinate Autonomous Regime [Regimen Sectional Autonomo] Article 152.	 The subordinate autonomous governments shall be comprised of the provincial councils and the municipal councils. The Law shall determine the structure, membership [integracion] , duties and powers of the provincial councils and the municipal councils; providing for the effective application of the principle of autonomy, administrative and territorial deconcentration, [and] proposing the strengthening and development of provincial and district life. Distinct regimes may be established to attend to the population, economic resources and the importance of each demarcation. Article 153. The deliverance of resources to the organisms of the subordinate autonomous regime shall be direct, timely and automatic under the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance. Their income shall be increased annually in proportion to the budget of the Central Government. Only through the Law may duties and regulations be imposed on the provincial councils or the municipal councils. Article 154.	 The provincial councils and the municipal councils may work together to reach common objectives. The Law shall regulate the regime of the metropolitan districts. The province of Galapagos shall have a special regime; for its protection the right of choice of residence, property and commerce may be restricted. Article 155.	 The organisms to which this Section refers shall have the following powers [atribiciones]: a. To exercise the functions and provide the basic public services that correspond to them in accordance with the Law; To pronounce ordinances, in use of their legislative power; To establish special improvement taxes and contributions necessary for fulfilling their functions through ordinances; To participate in the national taxes in an equitable manner through transfers completed in the manner indicated in Article 153; To administrate and invest the resources that they generate and those assigned to them within the Budget of the Central Government; and The others assigned to them in the Constitution and in the Law.

b. c.

d.

e.

f.

42

Article 156. In each province there shall be a Provincial Council with a seat in its capital. Its members shall be elected by popular, direct and secret vote. The Provincial Prefect, elected in the same manner, shall be the executive authority who, with only a deciding vote in case of a tie [voto dirimente], shall preside over the Council. The Law shall determine the number of provincial advisors based on the population of each province. Article 157.	 a. In addition, it corresponds to each Provincial Council:

To coordinate the management of the different municipalities in each province and settle the controversies between them, in the cases indicated by the Law; To promote [propender] the progress of the province and ties with the central organisms; To promote and execute the provincial priorities; and, To promote and execute the works of interdistrict interest.

b.

c. d.

Article 158. Each district [canton] constitutes a municipality. Its government is the responsibility of a Municipal Council, whose members shall be elected by popular, direct and secret vote, in accordance with the Law. The Mayor elected in the same manner shall be the executive authority that presides over the Council with a tie-breaking vote; his powers [atribiciones] and duties shall be recorded [constarán] by the Law. Article 159.	 a. b. In addition it corresponds to the Municipal Council:

To plan the development of the districts; To possess [dotar] the infrastructure, equipment and basic services for rural and urban development; To exclusively determine the use of spaces; and the use and occupation of the areas of population settlement and organize their administration; To pronounce the necessary norms for the control, preservation and defense of the environment, indicating the areas of conservation and ecological reserves; To give incentive to community development through neighborhood organizations; To preserve cultural resources and promote their manifestation; and, To coordinate its activities with the Provincial Council.

c.

d.

e.

f. g.

43

Title VII Of the Public Force [Fuerza Pith&a] Article 160.	 The Armed Forces and the National Police shall constitute the Public Force. Their training, organization, mission and employment are regulated by the Law. Article 161. The Armed Forces have a duty to the Nation. The President of the Republic is their maximum authority and may delegate his authority in case of national emergency, in accordance with the Law. Article 162. The Public Force is appointed to preserve the national sovereignty, to defend the integrity and independence of the State, and to guarantee its legal order. Without lessening its fundamental mission, the Law shall determine to what extent the Public Force must lend its cooperation in the economic and social development of the country and in other matters concerning national security. Article 163.	 The Public Force is not deliberative. Only the authorities who issue orders shall be responsible for those which are contrary to the Constitution and the Laws. Article 164. The stability of members of the Public Force is guaranteed. Only the President of the Republic may grant or recognize military or police ranks, in accordance with the Law. Article 165. The members of the Public Force enjoy special jurisdiction. They may not be indicted nor stripped of their ranks, honors or pensions, except for the reasons and in the manner determined by the Law, with the exception of common infractions that will be judged by ordinary justice. Article 166.	 Military and police command and jurisdiction shall be exercised in accordance with the Law. Article 167.	 In addition to the permanent Armed Forces, reserve forces shall be organized according to national security requirements. Article 168. 	 by the Law. Military service is compulsory for Ecuadorans in the manner determined

Article 169.	 Ecuadorans and foreigners are obligated to cooperate in national security in accordance with the Law. Article 170. The fundamental mission of the National Police is to guarantee internal order and individual and collective security. It constitutes an auxiliary force of the Armed Forces.

44

	 THIRD PART Title I the Hierarchy and Control of the Judicial Order Section I Supremacy of the Constitution Article 171. The Constitution is the supreme law of the State. Secondary norms and others of lower hierarchy must maintain conformity with constitutional precepts. Laws, decrees, ordinances, dispositions, and international treaties or agreements that contradict the Constitution or modify its prescriptions in any way shall be void. Article 172. Any Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice, and other tribunals of last instance, in the trial of cases of which they take cognizance, without prejudice to the disputed issue, can declare inapplicable any legal principle contrary to the norms of the Constitution. This declaration has no compulsory power except for the case in which it is declared. The Tribunal or the Court Chamber shall present a report on the decision of unconstitutionality so that the Constitutional Tribunal may resolve it in a general manner. Article 173.	 In case of doubt on the scope of the norms contained in the Constitution, only the National Congress may interpret them in a generally binding manner. Section II Of the Constitutional Tribunal [Tribunal Constitucional] Article 174. The Constitutional Tribunal[,] with national jurisdiction[,] shall maintain its seat in Quito. It shall be integrated by nine members and their respective substitutes, who shall last four years in their functions and may be reelected. The Organic Law shall determine the norms for its organization, functioning and the procedures for its hearings. The members of the Constitutional Tribunal, who must satisfy the same requirements as the ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall be subject to the same prohibitions. The National Congress will designate its members in the following manner: Two from lists of candidates sent by the President of the Republic; Two from lists of candidates, from outside of its midst, sent by the Supreme Court of Justice; -	 Two elected by the Legislative Function, that do not exhibit the characteristics
[dignidades] of legislators;

Of

-	

One from the list of candidates presented by the Municipal Mayors and the [P]rovincial [P]refects;

45

One from the list of candidates presented by the legally registered national workers headquarters [centrales de trabajadores] and the national indigenous and peasant organizations; and, One from the list of candidates presented by the legally recognized Production Chambers [camaras de la Produccion] The Law shall regulate the manner and procedure for the integration of the lists of candidates referred to in the three preceding paragraphs. They shall not be responsible for the votes that they emit and for the opinions that they formulate in the exercise of the powers attributable to their post. The Constitutional Tribunal shall elect a President and a Vice-President from among its members, who shall last two years in their functions and may be reelected. Article 175.	 1. The Constitutional Tribunal is responsible [for the following]:

To take cognizance of and resolve the complaints that are presented regarding laws, decree-laws, decrees and ordinances, that are fundamentally or procedurally unconstitutional, and totally or partially suspend their effects; To take cognizance of and resolve the unconstitutionality of administrative acts of all public authorities. The declaration of unconstitutionality shall bring about the revocation of the act, without prejudice to the administrative organ that adopts the necessary measures to preserve respect for constitutional norms; To take cognizance of resolutions that deny the recourses guaranteed in Section II "Of the Guarantee of Rights" and of the cases of obligatory consultation or appeal foreseen in the Recourse of Amparo. To make a determination with respect to objections of unconstitutionality made by the President of the Republic, in the process of forming laws; To settle conflicts of competence or of powers [atribiciones] assigned by the Constitution; and, To exercise the other powers [atribiciones] conferred on it by the Constitution and the laws.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Article 176. The declaration of unconstitutionality shall cause a judgement to be issued [ejecutoria] and it shall be promulgated in the Registro Oficial, from which date it shall enter into effect, leaving without effect the disposition and the act declared unconstitutional. The declaration shall not have retroactive effect, nor shall there be any recourse from it. Article 177.	 a.	 The complaint of unconstitutionality may be presented by:

The President of the Republic, in the instances foreseen in numeral 1 of Article 175;

46

b.

The National Congress, after agreement of the majority of its members, in the instances foreseen in numerals 1, 2, and 3 of the same article; The Supreme Court of Justice, after an agreement of the Tribunal in [p]lenum; in the instances foreseen in numerals 1, 2 and 5 of the same article; The provincial councils or the municipal councils, in the instances foreseen in numerals 2 and 5 of the same article; The Public Defender in the instances foreseen in numeral 3 of the same article; and, In the instances foreseen in numerals 1 and 2 of the same article, at the petition of one thousand citizens; or, of any person, after a favorable report of the Public Defender on its propriety.

c.

d.

e. f.

Article 178.	 The Constitutional Tribunal shall report annually to the National Congress in writing regarding the performance of its functions. Title II Interpretation and Reform of the Constitution Section I Of Interpretation Article 179. In case of doubt regarding the reach of the norms contained in this Constitution, only Congress in plenum shall interpret them, in a manner generally obligatory, through the Special Interpretative Law, in two debates on different days, with the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total of its members. Once approved, its promulgation shall be ordered in the Registro Oficial. Section II Of Reform Article 180. Reforms of the Constitution may be proposed by the President of the Republic, legislators, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Constitutional Tribunal or by popular initiative. Article 181. The National Congress shall take cognizance of and discuss bills for constitutional reform, following the same procedure foreseen for the ratification of laws. It shall require the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total number of members in each debate. Once a reform proposal has been approved, Congress shall remit it to the President of the Republic for his sanction or objection. In case of partial objection of the President of the Republic the rectification shall be made through one debate and the ratification through two debates, with the declaration of the previously indicated majority.

47

If the rectification and ratification of the declarations included in the partial veto are not made because of a lack of a majority, it shall not stand in the way of the promulgation of the dispositions accepted by the President of the Republic and those accepted or ratified by Congress, provided that they do not require the promulgation of those not resolved for their applicability. If the National Congress totally or partially rejects the bill of constitutional reforms, that provided for in the Section on Popular Referendum shall be followed. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS FIRST. Without prcjudicc to the other lcgal reforms necessary for the application of the new constitutional text, the National Congress shall pronounce or reform the following laws as prioritary: the Organic Law of the Judicial Function, the Organic Law of the Legislative Function; the Organic Law of the Executive Function; the Organic Law of the Public Ministry; the Law of Elections and the Law of Procedure for the Guarantee of Constitutional Rights. SECOND. Until the reforms to the Organic Law of the Judicial Function are complete, the Supreme Court of Justice shall function with ten chambers of three judge ministers each: - Two chambers for criminal [matters]; - Three chambers for civil and mercantile [matters]; - Three chambers for labor and social [matters]; - One chamber for administrative contentious [matters]; and, - One chamber for tributary contentious [matters]; The Supreme Court of Justice shall reassign the magistrates in the respective chambers. The Supreme Court of Justice shall regulate all that related to the cassation and the unification of jurisprudence on the various specialized materials. THIRD. The cases that are currently before recourses of third instance in the Supreme Court of Justice shall be assigned randomly for their resolution, without distinguishing among the chambers created by this reform. FOURTH. Until the Constitutional Tribunal is integrated, the members of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees shall remain in their functions[, and the execution and the resolution of jurisdictional responsibilities [of the former] shall correspond to them, according to the procedure indicated in the reforms of the Constitution, in that which may be necessary.

48

The cases that are currently being tried in the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall continue to be tried until their conclusion in the Administrative Contentious Chamber [Sala de lo Contencioso Administrativo]. The trials for recourse of resolutions [recursos de resoluciones] in the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees shall receive the same treatment as the former until the Constitutional Tribunal is constituted. FIFTH. The Supreme Court of Justice shall remain empowered[,] in the most extensive manner[,] to pronounce the norms and procedures required for the random assignment or reassignment of the trials already underway, so that these constitutional reforms may have full effect and immediate execution. SIXTH. For this term, the Magistrates elected for the period 1992-1998 shall be partially renewed, randomly, by thirds on each occasion, during the ordinary periods of 1994 and 1996. The random selection shall be performed by the National Congress before each new election. The Organic Law of the Judicial Function shall establish the procedure which in the future shall be followed for the partial renewal of magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. SEVENTH.	 required: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. To be a minister of the superior courts, in the reorganization[,] it is

To be an Ecuadoran by birth; To be in full possession of their rights of citizenship; To be at least forty years old; To have the title of Phd in jurisprudence or of lawyer; To have exercised with notorious honesty the profession of lawyer, judge or university professor of Legal Sciences for a period of at least twelve years; and, To meet the other requirements established in the Constitution and the Law.

6.

These requirements shall be recorded in the Organic Law of the Judicial Function. EIGHTH. To take cognizance of financial matters there shall be the following [D]istrict [T]ribunals: No. 1, with its seat in Quito, integrated by three [*ambers; No. 2, with its seat in Guayaquil, integrated by one [c]hamber; No. 4, with its seat in Portoviejo, integrated by one [c]hamber. NINTH. To take cognizance of the contentious-administrative matters there shall be the following District Tribunals: No. 1, [conteisadmrvo] with its seat in Quito, integrated by two [*ambers; No. 2, with its seat in Guayaquil, integrated by one [c]hamber; No. 4, with its seat in Cuenca integrated by one [c]hamber; and, No. 4, with its seat in Portoviejo, integrated by one [*amber.

49

TENTH. The Organic Law of the Judicial Function shall establish the procedure that shall be followed for the creation or suppression of Financial or ContentiousAdministrative District Tribunals or their [c]hambers. ELEVENTH. In the elections of 1996, tribunals may not refuse the registration of

independent citizens as candidates to positions of popular election for failure to adapt the pertinent laws to the constitutional reforms.
TWELFTH. The Special Permanent Commission of Constitutional Matters of the

National Congress is authorized to prepare the proposed codification of the Political Constitution of the Republic, which must be approved by the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions.
THIRTEENTH. For this interval, the term of the person who exercises the

function of Vice-President of the Republic shall end on the same date on which that of the President of the Republic ends, February 11, 1997. The same shall occur with the terms of the Comptroller and Customary [Generales] Attorney Generals of the State, the General Fiscal Minister [Ministro Fiscal General], the Public Defender, the Superintendent of Banks, Companies and Telecommunications; and, the board members of the Constitutional and Supreme Electoral Tribunals appointed in 1997 who, nonetheless, occupy extended terms until the National Congress completes the corresponding appointments.
FOURTEENTH. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal, subjecting itself to the periods

established by the Law of Elections, shall convoke for the third Sunday in May of 1998 a direct election to elect the President and Vice-President of the Republic, provincial deputies [diputados] and the minority provincial councilors and municipal councilors.
FIFTEENTH. To make the immediate application of the principles approved by Popular

Vote on the 25th of May of 1997 possible, the terms for currently appointed magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall cease, who, nonetheless, shall remain in their posts until they are replaced in the manner determined by the following transitory [article]. SIXTEENTH. The National Congress shall appoint for this period the thirty-one magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, from a list integrated by no less than four nor more than ten candidates proposed by the following nominating entities of civil society: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. By the ex-Constitutional Presidents of the Republic; By the Ecuadoran Episcopal Conference; By the ex-Presidents of the Supreme Court of Justice; By the National Federation of Attorneys of Ecuador; By the associations of Human Rights;

50

6.

By the Deans of the Departments of Jurisprudence, Law and Legal Sciences and the members of the National Council of Universities and Polytechnic Schools (CONUEP); By the National Association of Directors of Newspapers, the Ecuadoran Association of Television Channels and the Ecuadoran Association of Radio Dissemination; By the magistrates of the Superior Courts of Justice and Fiscal and ContentiousAdministrative District Tribunals and the National Federation of Employees and Judicial Functionaries; By the main offices of unions, peasant and teacher and educator organizations organized by UNE and FENAPUPE;

7.

8.

9.

10. By the organizations of the indigenous and Afro-Ecuadoran peoples of Ecuador; 11. By the Consortium of Provincial Councils of Ecuador and the Association of Municipal Councils of Ecuador; and, 12. By the Chambers of Production and Artesanry. Any other person or organization of civil society may present its nominations before the Constitutional Commission of Judicial Matters. The persons and institutions to which this disposition refer shall remit to the National Congress a list of those nominated within a period of eight days from the publication of these [c]onstitutional reforms in the Registro Oficial. The candidates nominated in this manner shall possess the requirements demanded by Article 128 of the reformed Constitution. An Authorizing [Calificadora] Commission made up of three legislators appointed by the President of the National Congress and three representatives of civil society selected by the nominating entities shall be formed, which shall appoint a seventh member who is not a legislator, who shall preside. The Commission shall habilitate those who meet the requirements indicated in Article 128 of the reformed Constitution, and who also possess conditions of probity, competence [idoniedad], experience and ability. For this purpose, once it receives the list of postulants, it shall publish it on one occasion, in such a way as to permit natural or juridical persons to present[,] in a reserved and documented manner[,] objections to the habilitation of any postulant. In the period of ten days[,] counted from the date of the forementioned publication, it shall remit its report to the cognizance of the National Congress, which shall designate the thirty-one magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice in the following manner: a. Twenty-four from those presented by the twelve nominating bodies and qualified by the Commission; and,

51

b. Seven from among those presented by any other person or organization of civil society, habilitated by the Commission, with the same requirements demanded for the postulants. If any of the nominating persons or entities do not present candidacies within the period established by this transitory disposition, the National Congress shall appoint the magistrates from among the remaining the nominations. The magistrates appointed in this manner shall be installed in office before the President of the National Congress. Within a period of three days from the publication of these reforms in the Registro Oficial, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall convoke the nominating bodies integrated by the National Federation of Attorneys of Ecuador; the associations of Human Rights; the Deans of the Departments of Jurisprudence, Law and Legal Sciences and the members of the National Council of Universities and Polytechnic Schools (CONUEP); the National Association of Directors of Newspapers, the Ecuadoran Association of Television Channels and the Ecuadoran Association of Radio Dissemination; the magistrates of the Superior Courts of Justice and Fiscal and Contentious-Administrative District Tribunals and the National Federation of Employees and Judicial Functionaries; the main offices of unions, peasant and teacher and educator organizations organized in UNE and FENAPUPE; the organizations of the indigenous and Afro-Ecuadoran peoples of Ecuador; the Consortium of Provincial Councils of Ecuador and the Association of Municipal Councils of Ecuador; and, the Chambers of Production and Artesanry, to issue lists of nominees for the appointment of magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall organize, direct and guarantee said nomination process, for which it shall issue the necessary dispositions and shall remit the list of nominees to the National Congress. SEVENTEENTH. NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.- In the period of one hundred and two days counted from the meeting held by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal for the election of representatives to the National Assembly, it shall gather in an inaugural session in the city of Ambato, from ten o'clock a.m., without need for a convocatory, to solely and exclusively reform the current Political Constitution of Ecuador. The convocatory shall be effectuated by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal the day after these reforms are published in the Registro Oficial, in conformity with the Law of Elections, in all which does not conflict with the ratified constitutional reforms. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal is empowered to dictate the regulations necessary for the execution of the pre-electoral and electoral process, which shall permit the correct application of these reforms. The National Assembly shall govern itself by the following norms: 1. It shall be conformed by representatives elected by a direct[, popular, universal and secret vote, in conformity with the Political Constitution of the Republic, in other

52

words, citizens may select the candidates of their preference from a list or among the lists that are registered and qualified. Seventy representatives shall make up the National Assembly, elected according to the lists presented in each province; in equal number to that used to elect deputies from each province according to the Political Constitution of the Republic. 2. To be a candidate for representative to the National Assembly, one must meet the same requirements as provincial deputies and not have incurred the incompetencies established in Articles 74-A, 80 third paragraph[,] and 81 of the Political Constitution of the Republic. Functionaries of any entity of the public sector, may be candidates and for that purpose receive leave without pay [beginning] on the day of their inscription as candidate for representative to the National Assembly and to act in that [body] if elected. The Ministers and Subsecretaries of State and the representatives or delegates to the Executive Function, before the different entities of the public sector[,] as well as those who occupy posts or positions of popular election, may present their candidacy for representative before the National Assembly, but shall definitively cease their functions at the moment of registering their candidacies. 3. Once the National Assembly is constituted, no authority may suspend its labors. During the period of functioning of the Assembly, the National Congress may not pass reforms to the Political Constitution of the Republic. Neither the National Congress, nor the National Government may interfere, in any way in the work of the Assembly, nor the latter in that of the former [bodies]. 4. The sole power and exclusive purpose of the National Assembly is to reform the Political Constitution. It may not modify the term of the current President, VicePresident of the Republic, deputies, prefects, mayors, provincial councilors and municipal councilors. Once the National Assembly is installed, it shall elect its authorities and dictate its organic norms and procedures through resolutions adopted by a majority vote of half plus one of its members. These norms of the National Assembly shall be the legal basis for self-regulation and may be established by special majorities for the ratification of constitutional reforms. The norms contemplated in the preceding paragraphs are not required to be submitted to the cognizance of the President of the Republic for their sanction or objection. 6. One the constitutional reforms are approved, their full text shall be published in the
Registro Oficial, without need for submitting them to the cognizance of the President

5.

for their sanction or objection.

53

7. While carrying out their functions, the representatives to the National Assembly shall possess the inviolabilities and immunities that protect deputies of the National Congress.
EIGHTEENTH. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall convoke in a period of

three days counted from the publication of this reform in the Registro Oficial the twelve nominating entities from the civil society, so that they may together designate the three representatives who shall be members of the Authorizing Commission of the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. Each of the nominating entities shall have one vote. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall direct, organize and guarantee said process of nomination for which it shall dictate the necessary dispositions and procedures, after which it shall remit the list of those designated to the National Congress.
FINAL ARTICLE.

The present Codification shall enter in effect from its publication

in the Registro Oficial. Given in the city of San Francisco de Quito, Metropolitan District, in the Chamber of Sessions of the Plenary of the Legislative Commissions of the National Congress of Ecuador, on the sixteenth day of the month of January of one thousand nine hundred ninety-six. DR. FABIAN ALARCON RIVERA PRESIDENT DR. J. FABRIZZIO BRITO MORAN SECRETARY

54

