CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

EGYPT
by PETER B. HELLER

Issued May 1972

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1972 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

The English translation of the Constitution of September 11, 1971, of the Arab Republic of Egypt was specially prepared by Attia Abd El-Moneim Attia of St. John's University.

THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT MINISTRY OF INFORMATION THE PERMANENT CONSTITUTION OF THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT PART I The State Art. 1 - The Arab Republic of Egypt is a State whose system is democratic and socialist, based on the alliance of the working forces of the people. The Egyptian people are part of the Arab nation and strive to bring about its overall unity. Art. 2 - Islam is the religion of the State and Arabic its official language. The principles of Islamic Sharia are primary sources of legislation. Art. 3 - Sovereignty belongs to the people only who are the source of authority; they exercise this sovereignty and protect it, and safeguard national unity in the manner prescribed in the Constitution. Art. 4 - The economic foundation of the Arab Republic of Egypt is a socialist system based on sufficiency and justice to prevent exploitation and to abolish class distinctions. Art. 5 - The Arab Socialist Union is the political organisation which, by its formations based on democracy, represents the alliance of the working forces of the people--the farmers, workers, soldiers, the intelligentsia and national capital. It is the instrument of this alliance for deepening the values of democracy and socialism, in following up national action in its various fields, and in directing this national action towards its set goals. The Arab Socialist Union confirms the authority of the alliance of the working forces of the people through political action which its organizations exercise among the people and in the various organs assuming the responsibilities of national action.

The statutes of the Arab Socialist Union specify the conditions of membership of the ASU and its various organs and the guarantees for carrying out its activity in a democratic manner. The workers and farmers are represented in these organs by at least 50 per cent. Art. 6 - Egyptian nationality is regulated by the law. PART II BASIC CONSTITUENTS OF SOCIETY CHAPTER I THE SOCIAL AND MORAL FOUNDATIONS Art. 7 - Society is based on social solidarity. Art. 8 - The State guarantees equal opportunities for all citizens. Art. 9 - The family is the basis of society founded on religion, morality and patriotism. The State is dedicated to the preservation of the original character of the Egyptian family and its values and traditions emphasizing this character and developing it within Egyptian society. Art. 10 - The State guarantees maternal and child care, looks after the young and provides suitable conditions for the development of their faculties. Art. 11 - The State guarantees the coordination between the woman's duties to the family and her career in society, and equality with man in the fields of political, social, cultural and economic life without any violation of the rules of Islamic Sharia. Art. 12 - Society is bound to care for morality, to protect it and to observe the original Egyptian traditions. It has to pay attention to the high standard of religious education moral and national values and historical heritage of the people, scientific facts, socialist behavior and 2

public manners within the limits of the law. The State is bound to follow these principles and to secure them. Art. 13 - Work is a right, a duty and an honor guaranteed by the State. Workers who distinguish themselves are recognized by the State and society. No work may be imposed compulsorily on citizens except by a law and for public service and with fair compensation. Art. 14 - Public offices are a right for the citizen and a duty for those entrusted with them in the service of the people. The State guarantees their protection and their performance of their duties in the interest of the people. They may not be dismissed without disciplinary action, except in cases defined by the law. Art. 15 - Veterans, victims of war, the wives and the children of the war dead are given priority in opportunities of employment, in accordance with the law. Art. 16 - The State guarantees cultural, social and health services and seeks particularly to secure the extension of these services to the village promptly and regularly in order to raise its standard. Art. 17 - The State guarantees social and health insurance services, and pensions for disability, unemployment and the aging, for all citizens, in accordance with the law. Art. 18 - Education is a right guaranteed by the State. It is compulsory on the primary level and the State strives to extend the stage of compulsory education to other levels. The State supervises all education and guarantees the independence of the Universities and scientific research centers, in order to link education with the needs of society and production. Art. 19 - Religious education is a basic subject in the programmes of general education. Art. 20 - Education in the State educational institutions is free of charge in its various stages. 3

Art. 21 - Literacy is a national duty for which all the people's resources are mobilized. Art. 22 - The institution of civil titles are prohibited. CHAPTER II THE ECONOMIC FOUNDATIONS Art. 23 - The national economy is organised according to an overall development plan guaranteeing an increase in national income, fair distribution, raising the standard of living, eradicating unemployment, increasing the opportunities of employment, linking wages with production, and guaranteeing a minimum and a maximum wage limit to reduce the gap between incomes. Art. 24 - The people control all the means of production and direct its surplus according to the State development plan. Art. 25 - Each citizen has a share in the national output, defined by the law according to his work or his non-exploiting ownership. Art. 26 - The employees have a share in managing projects and in their profits. They are bound to develop production and to carry out the plan in their production units in accordance with the law. The maintenance of the means of production is a national duty. The workers are represented on the boards of directors of the public sector units within a 50 per cent of the number of directors. The law guarantees for small farmers and small craftsmen 80 per cent of the membership of the boards of directors of the agricultural cooperative societies and the industrial cooperative societies. The state will work to that end. Art. 27 - The beneficiaries take part in managing public utility projects and in supervising them in accordance with the law. Art. 28 - The State looks after cooperative establishments in all their forms and encourages 4

crafts in order to develop production and to increase income. The State works for the strengthening of the agricultural cooperative societies on a modern scientific basis. Art. 29 - Property is subject to the people's supervision and is protected by the State. It is of three kinds; Public property; cooperative property; private property. Art. 30 - Public ownership is ownership by the people. This is ensured by continuous state support for the public sector. The public sector leads progress in all spheres and assumes the main responsibility in the development plan. Art. 31 - Cooperative ownership is the property of the cooperative societies and the law guarantees its welfare and its autonomy. Art. 32 - Private ownership is defined as nonexploiting capital. The law regulates its social function in serving the national economy and within the development plan without deviation or exploitation. Private property may not be used in a manner incompatible with the general good of the people. Art. 33 - Public ownership is inviolable. Its protection and its strength is the duty of every citizen in accordance with the law, because it is a foundation for the support for the strength of the country, a basis for the socialist system and a source for the welfare of the people. Art. 34 - Private ownership is safeguarded. Sequestration may not be imposed on it except in the cases specified in the law and by a court judgment and shall not be expropriated except for public utility and for compensation in accordance with the law. The right of inheritance of private property is guaranteed. Art. 35 - Nationalization is inadmissible except for considerations of public interest, through a law, and with compensation. Art. 36 - Public confiscation of property is prohibited. Private confiscation is inadmissible 5

except by a court judgement. Art. 37 - The law prescribes the maximum limit of agricultural property in such a manner as to protect the farmer and the agricultural worker from exploitation and to assert the authority of the alliance of the working forces of the people in the village level. Art. 38 - Taxation is based on social justice. Art. 39 - Saving is a national duty which the State protects, encourages and regulates. PART III PUBLIC LIBERTIES, RIGHTS AND DUTIES Art. 40 - Citizens are equal before the law. They have equal public rights and duties without discrimination between them on the basis of sex, origin, language, religion or creed. Art. 41 - Personal liberty is a natural right and is safeguarded and inviolate. It is inadmissible to arrest a person, to search him, to imprison him, to restrict his freedom by any means, or to prevent his movements except in cases of flagrante delicto or by an order issued, when necessary, for purposes of investigation or for safeguarding the security of the society; such order to be issued by the judge concerned or by the Public Prosecution in a manner prescribed by Law. The duration of a period of preventive detention shall be determined by Law. Art. 42 - Any citizen who is arrested, imprisoned, or whose freedom has been restricted by any means, must be treated in such a manner that will preserve human dignity. It is inadmissible to cause physical or moral harm to him. It is inadmissible to detail or to imprison him in places other than those which are subject to the laws governing prisons. Any statement proved to be made by a citizen under the stress of any of the above mentioned or under the threat of such, is to be discarded as invalid. 6

Art. 43 - No medical or scientific experiment may be performed on any person without free consent. Art. 44 - Homes have their sanctity. They may not be entered or searched except by a judicial order in accordance with the rule of the law. Art. 45 - The private life of citizens had a sanctity that is protected by the law. Mail, telegrams, telephone conversations and other means of communication have a sanctity, and their secrecy is guaranteed. They may not be confiscated, read or censored except by a judicial order and for a definite period and in accordance with the rules of the law. Art. 46 - The State guarantees freedom of faith and exercise of religious rites. Art. 47 - Freedom of opinion is guaranteed and every person has the right to express his opinion verbally, in writing by illustration or other means within the limits of the law. Self criticism and constructive criticism are guarantees for the safety of the national structure. Art. 48 - Freedom of the press, printing, publication and, the information media is guaranteed. The censorship of newspapers is prohibited, and so are warnings, suspensions or stoppages through administrative channels. As an exception, in cases of emergency or war, limited censorship may be imposed on newspapers, publications and on the information media in matters affecting public safety or for purposes of national security, in conformity with the law. Art. 49 - The State ensures for citizens, freedom of scientific research, and of literary, artistic, and cultural pursuits. It provides the necessary incentives to this end. Art. 50 - No citizen may be forbidden freedom to choose his place of residence, nor shall he be obliged to reside at a certain place except in cases laid down by the law. Art. 51 - No citizen may be deported from the country, or prevented from returning to it. 7

Art. 52 - Citizens have the right to permanent or temporary emigration. The law regulates this right and the procedures and conditions of emigration and departure from the country. Art. 53 - The State grants the right of political asylum to every foreigner who has been persecuted because of activities in the defence of peoples' interests or human rights or of peace or justice. The extradition of political refugees is forbidden. Art. 54 - Citizens have the right to hold private peaceful meetings; without having to give prior notice, provided no arms, are borne. Security men may not attend these private meetings. Public meetings, processions and rallies are allowed within the limits of the law. Art. 55 - Citizens have the right to form societies as laid down in the law. It is forbidden to form societies whose activity is hostile to the social order, or secret or of a military character. Art. 56 - The establishment of trade unions and federations on a democratic basis is a right guaranteed by the law. These trade unions and federations shall have a legal basis. The law regulates the participation of trade unions and federations in the implementation of social plans and programmes, in increasing efficiency standards and in promoting socialist behavior among their members, and in the protection of their funds. They are bound to call upon their members to account for their behavior in their activities according to the codes of honor and of ethics, and to defend the rights and freedoms to which their members are legally entitled. Art. 57 - Any encroachment on the personal freedoms and privacy of citizens and on other rights and public freedoms which are guaranteed by the Constitution and the law constitute a crime, and there shall be no limit on criminal or civil procedures to deal with such a crime. The State guarantees just compensation for whoever has been the victim of such crime. 8

Art. 58 - The defence of the country and its land is a sacred duty and conscription is compulsory in accordance with the Law. Art. 59 - The protection, consolidation and preservation of socialist gains are national duties. Art. 60 - The preservation of national unity and safeguarding of the secrets of the State are the duties of every citizen. Art. 61 - Payment of taxes and the public imposts is a duty in accordance with the Law. Art. 62 - A citizen has the right to elect and to be nominated and to vote in plebiscites according to the provisions of the Law, and his contribution in public life is a national duty. Art. 63 - Every individual has the right to address the public authorities under his own name. Addressing the public authorities in the name of a a group is allowed only for regular bodies and legal persons. PART IV SOVEREIGNTY OF THE LAW Art. 64 - The sovereignty of the Law is the basis of government in the State. Art. 65 - The State is subject to the Law. The independence and immunity of the Judiciary are basic guarantees for the protection of rights and freedoms. Art. 66 - Penalty is personal. There can be no crime of punishment except in conformity with the provisions of the law nor shall a penalty be imposed without legal judgement, nor punishment inflicted except for acts committed subsequent to the promulgation of the law prescribing them. Art. 67 - An accused is presumed to be innocent until proved guilty at a legal trial at which he is assured of guarantees for self-defence. 9

Every person accused of a crime must be provided with counsel for his defense.

Art. 68 - Litigation is a right safeguarded and guaranteed for all, and every citizen has the right of recourse to the Judiciary. The State ensures the contiguity of the courts of justice to the litigants, as well as speedy decisions in lawsuits. It is forbidden to include in laws, any provisions, which excludes the supervision of the judiciary. Art. 69 - The right of defence in person or by proxy is guaranteed. The Law guarantees for those who are not financially able, means of recourse to the courts, and of defending their rights. Art. 70 - No criminal proceedings may be taken without a judicial order except where provided for by Law. Art. 71 - Anyone arrested or detained shall be informed immediately of the reasons for his arrest or detention, and he shall be entitled to communicate with such persons as he shall deem proper to advise him of what has happened or to call in any assistance as prescribed by Law. A person so arrested or detained shall be promptly notified of the charges against him, and he as well as third parties may protest in court against the measure that restricted his personal freedom. The Law regulates the right of protest in such a way as to ensure decisions being taken on protests within a specified period otherwise the person arrested or detained shall of necessity be released. Art. 72 - Court judgements shall be passed and carried out in the name of the people. Abstention from or delaying their execution on the part of the public officials concerned constitutes a crime punishable by law. The party in whose favor a judgement has been given shall in this case be entitled to institute criminal procedures directly before the relevant court.

10

PART V SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT CHAPTER I HEAD OF THE STATE Art. 73 - The Head of the State is the President of the Republic. His duty is to uphold the sovereignty of the people, the respect of the Constitution, the rule of law, and the protection of the national unity and the fostering of socialist gains. He also supervises the division between the authorities to ensure the proper fulfilment of their role in national action. Art. 74 - The President of the Republic in the event of a danger threatening national unity or the security of the homeland, or impeding the institutions of the State from fulfilling their constitutional role, may take speedy measures to face that danger, make an address to the people, and hold a referendum on the measures taken within sixty days from the date of their initiation. Art. 75 - A person to be elected President of the Republic must be Egyptian, born of two Egyptian parents, and enjoying his civil and political rights. He should not be less than 40 calendar years of age. Art. 76 - The People's Assembly shall nominate the President of the Republic, and the nomination shall be put to the people in a public referendum. The nomination in the People's Assembly for the office of President of the Republic shall be made upon the proposition of at least one third of its members. A nominee who secures a two-thirds majority of the Assembly members shall be referred to the people in the referendum, but in the absence of such a majority, a re-nomination shall be made within two days from the date of the result of the first vote in which case a nominee obtaining an absolute majority of the Assembly members shall be put to the people in a public referendum. A nominee shall be deemed to be President of the Republic who has obtained an absolute majority of the number of voters in such a referendum. In 11

case the nominee does not obtain this majority, the Assembly nominates another in accordance with the same procedures. Art. 77 - The term of the Presidency is six calendar years starting from the date on which the result of the referendum is announced. The President may be re-elected for a subsequent term. Art. 78 - Measures for the election of a new President of the Republic shall begin to be taken sixty days before the expiration of the term of the President, and he shall be chosen at least one week before such expiration. Should the term elapse without the choice of a new President for any reason, the previous President shall continue to exercise the presidential functions until his successor is selected. Art. 79 - The President before exercising the functions of his post shall take the following oath in the People's Assembly. "I swear by God Almighty to preserve faithfully the Republican system, to respect the Constitution and the Law, to look after the interests of the people fully and to safeguard the independence and territorial integrity of the homeland." Art. 80 - The salary of the President of the Republic is fixed by law. A change in the salary does not come into force during the Presidential term in which it is decided upon. The President of the Republic must not receive any other salary or remuneration. Art. 81 - The President of the Republic, during his term of Office must not pursue any private profession, or commercial, financial, or industrial occupations, or buy or take on lease any property of the State, or let or sell to or exchange with the State any of his own property. Art. 82 - If on account of any temporary obstacle the President of the Republic is unable to carry out his functions, he shall delegate his powers to a Vice President. Art. 83 - In the case of the President's resignation, he addresses his resignation to the 12

People's Assembly. Art. 84 - In the case of the vacancy of the office of the President of the Republic, or in the event of the President's permanent disability to work, the Presidency shall temporarily be assumed by the Speaker of the National Assembly. If the Assembly was dissolved, the Speaker shall be replaced by the President of the High Court provided that neither of them shall be nominated for the Presidency. The People's Assembly is the proper body to declare the vacancy of the post of the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall be chosen within a maximum period of sixty days from the day of the vacancy of the presidential office. Art. 85 - A charge of high treason or perpetration of a criminal act against the Republic of the Republic shall be made upon a proposal by at least one third of the members of the People's Assembly. An indictment may be passed only by a two-third majority vote. The President of the Republic shall be suspended from his duties immediately upon the passage of the indictment and the Vice-President shall temporarily assume the Presidency pending a decision on the indictment. The trial of the President of the Republic shall be held before a special tribunal. The composition of this court, and its procedures as well as the punishment will be specified by law. If found guilty, the President shall be relieved of his post without prejudice to other penalties. CHAPTER II THE LEGISLATURE PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY Art. 86 - The People's Assembly shall assume the authority of legislation and shall approve the general policy of the State, the general economic and social development plan, and the general budget of the State. It shall also exercise control over 13

the work of the executive authority as laid down in the Constitution. Art. 87 - The law shall determine the constituencies into which the State is divided, as well as the number of the elected members of the People's Assembly provided it be not less than 350--half of which, at least, must be workers, or farmers. These members shall be elected by direct public ballot. The terms worker and farmer shall be defined by Law. The President of the Republic may appoint a number of members not exceeding 10. Art. 88 - The law determines the conditions which must be met by the members of the People's Assembly, and defines the rules of election and referendum. Voting must take place under the supervision of members of a judicial body. Art. 89 - Civil servants of the government and the public sector may run for membership of the People's Assembly. With the exception of cases specified by the law, a People's Assembly member must be committed to full time membership in the Assembly, his post will be preserved for him in accordance with the provisions of the law. Art. 90 - The member of the People's Assembly shall take the following oath before the Assembly prior to assuming his duties: "I swear by God Almighty that I shall earnestly attend to the safety of the nation, uphold the Republican system, attend to the interest of the people and respect the constitution and the Law." Art. 91 - Members of the People's Assembly shall receive a remuneration determined by law. Art. 92 - The duration of the People's Assembly term is five calendar years from the date of its first meeting. Elections for renewal of the Assembly shall take place within the sixty days preceding the termination of its term. Art. 93 - The Assembly is competent to decide upon the validity of its members. The Supreme Court 14

is the competent authority to investigate contestations of membership presented to the Assembly, after they have been referred to it by the Speaker of the Assembly. The contestation must be referred to the Supreme Court within 15 days of the date of its submission to the Assembly. Investigation must be completed within ninety days of the date of reference to the Supreme Court. The verdict of the Court must be submitted to the Assembly to decide upon the case within 60 days of the date of submission of the result of the investigation to the Assembly. Membership shall not be deemed invalid, except by a decision taken by a majority of two-thirds of the Assembly members. Art. 94 - If the seat of a member becomes vacant before the end of his term of membership, a successor must be chosen or appointed within 60 days of the date of the communication to the Assembly of the occurrence of the vacancy. The term of the new member will only be to the end of that of his predecessor. Art. 95 - No member of the People's Assembly may, during the period of his mandate, purchase or rent any State property, lease, or sell to the State, or exchange with it any part of his property, or conclude a contract with the State in the capacity of a purveyor or a contractor. Art. 96 - No member of the Assembly can be deprived of his membership unless he loses the confidence of the Assembly or has been impeached or has lost any of the requirements of his membership, or has lost his status as a worker or farmer by virtue of which he was elected or if neglects his duties as a member. A decision deeming the membership invalid must be taken by a two-thirds majority. Art. 97 - The People's Assembly alone may accept the resignation of its members. Art. 98 - Members of the People's Assembly must not be censured for the opinions or thoughts expressed by them in the performance of their tasks in the Assembly, or in its committees. Art. 99 - No member of the People's Assembly may be subjected to criminal prosecution without the permission of the Assembly, except in the cases of 15

flagrante delicto. If the Assembly is not in session, the permission of the Speaker of the Assembly is necessary. The Assembly must be informed of the procedures taken when it holds its first session. Art. 100 - Cairo is the seat of the People's Assembly. In exceptional circumstances, it may be convoked to meet in another city at the request of the President of the Republic or the majority of the members of the Assembly. Any meeting of the Assembly in other than its designated seat is illegal and the resolutions passed by it are invalid. Art. 101 - The President of the Republic calls the People's Assembly into its ordinary annual session before the second Thursday of November. If it is not convoked, the Assembly shall meet, in accordance with the constitution on the said day. The ordinary session continues at least seven months. The President of the Republic closes its ordinary session and it may not be closed before approval of the State budget. Art. 102 - The President of the Republic may call the People's Assembly to an extraordinary meeting if the need arises, or on the presentation of a request signed by a majority of the People's Assembly members. The President of the Republic announces the dismissal of the extraordinary meeting. Art. 103 - The People's Assembly elects, at the first meeting of its ordinary annual session, a Speaker and two Deputy Speakers to serve until the end of the Assembly term. If the place of anyone of them becomes vacant, the Assembly elects a replacement to serve until the end of his term. Art. 104 - The People's Assembly establishes its own rules of procedure and the manner it will fulfil its tasks. Art. 105 - The People's Assembly alone is entitled to preserve order inside it. The Speaker of the Assembly is entrusted with this task. Art. 106 - The meetings of the People's Assembly are public. 16

However, a meeting in camera may be held at the request of the President of the Republic, or of the Government, or of its Speaker, or of twenty of its members. The Assembly shall then decide whether the debate on the question submitted to it shall take place in a public meeting, or in a closed meeting. Art. 107 - An Assembly session shall not be valid unless the majority of its members attend. The Assembly adopts its resolutions by an absolute majority of its members attending in cases other than those for which a specific majority is required. The draft laws are put to the vote, article by article. In case of a tie vote, the question on which the debate has taken place is considered rejected. Art. 108 - In case of necessity and in exceptional circumstances and upon authorization of a two-thirds majority of the People's Assembly members, the President of the Republic is entitled to issue decrees, which have the force of law. Authorization must be for a specific period and must specify the subjects of these decrees and their bases. These decrees must be referred to the People's Assembly at its first meeting after the expiration date of the authorization. If they are not referred, or referred but disapproved by the Assembly, their force of law is abolished. Art. 109 - The President of the Republic and every member of the People's Assembly is entitled to propose laws. Art. 110 - Every draft law must be referred to a committee of the People's Assembly for study and presentation of a report thereon. Draft laws proposed by the members of the People's Assembly are not referred to this committee unless they have first been studied by a special committee where a vote must be taken as to whether the Assembly should examine them. Art. 111 - Every draft law proposed by a member and rejected by the Assembly cannot be presented again in the course of the same session. Art. 112 - The President of the Republic is entitled to pass laws or veto them. 17

Art. 113 - If the President of the Republic objects to a draft law approved by the People's Assembly, he returns it to the Assembly within thirty days from the date on which it is sent to him by the Assembly. If the draft law is not returned within this date, it shall become a law and shall be promulgated. If it is returned to the Assembly within the said period and is approved once again by a two-thirds majority of its members, it shall become a law and shall be promulgated. Art. 114 - The People's Assembly approves the general plan for social and economic development. The law determines the manner in which the plan shall be drawn up and presented to the People's Assembly. Art. 115 - The draft general budget of the State shall be submitted to the People's Assembly a least two months before the beginning of the fiscal year. It will not come into force unless the Assembly ratifies it. The budget is ratified title by title and is enacted by a law. The People's Assembly is not entitled to introduce amendments to the draft budget without the approval of the Government. In the event of the new budget not being ratified before the fiscal year, the old budget shall be acted on pending such ratification. The law defines the manner of drawing up the budget and the fiscal year. Art. 116 - The approval of the People's Assembly is necessary for the transfer of any funds from one title of the budget to another title as well as for any expenditure not included in it or in excess of its estimates. It is enacted by a law. Art. 117 - The law defines the rules of the budgets of the public and organizations and their accounts. Art. 118 - The final account of the state budget is to be submitted to the People's Assembly within a period of no more than one year from the date of the expiration of the financial year. It is ratified title by title and enacted by a law. 18

The annual report and notes of the Central Accounts Authority shall be put before the People's Assembly. The Assembly is entitled to ask the Central Accounts Authority for any further details or reports. Art. 119 - The imposition, modification or abolition of general taxes cannot be effected except by the law. No one is exempted from payment of taxes except in the cases specified by the law. No one may be asked to pay other taxes or imposts except in cases specified by the law. Art. 120 - The law organizes the basic rules of collecting public funds and the procedures of their expenduture. Art. 121 - The executive authority may not contract a loan or bind itself to project entailing expenditure of funds from the Treasury of the State except with the approval of the Peoples Assembly. Art. 122 - The rules pertaining pensions, indemnities, subsidies and from the Treasury of the State shall by law. The law regulates the cases from these rules and the authorities their application. to salaries, gratifications be determined of exception charged with

Art. 123 - The law defines the rules and procedures for granting concessions relating to the exploitation of the sources of national wealth and public utilities. The law determines disposal-gratis or otherwise--of real estate properties belonging to the State, or moveable properties of the State, and the rules and procedures regulating this. Art. 124 - Every member of the People's Assembly is entitled to address questions to the Prime Minister, or to one of his Deputies or to one of the Ministers concerning matters within their jurisdiction. The Prime Minister or his Deputies, or the Ministers, or those whom he delegates, must answer the questions put to them by the members. The member may withdraw the question at any time, but may not turn it into an interpellation at the same meeting. 19

Art. 125 - Every member of the People's Assembly is entitled to address an interpellation to the Prime Minister, or to his Deputies, or to the Ministers or to their deputies concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Debate on an interpellation shall take place at least seven days after its presentation unless the Assembly deems the matter urgent and the government consents. Art. 126 - The Ministers are responsible before the People's Assembly for the general policy of the State. Every Minister is responsible for the work of his Ministry. The People's Assembly may decide to withdraw confidence from one of the Deputy Prime Ministers, or one of the Ministers, or one of their Deputies. A motion of no confidence may not be submitted except after an interpellation has been addressed, and upon a proposal by one-tenth of the Assembly members. The Assembly may not take a decision on such a motion until at least three days have passed from the date of its presentation. Withdrawal of confidence is pronounced by the majority of the members of the Assembly. Art. 127 - The People's Assembly is entitled to decide, at the request of one-tenth of its members, the responsibility of the Prime Minister. The decision is taken by the majority of the Assembly members. This decision may not be taken except after an interpellation addressed to the Government and after at least three days of the interpellation's presentation. In the event of such responsibility being defined, the Assembly must draw up a report to be submitted to the President of the Republic containing the elements of the issue, the conclusions drawn in this respect and the reasons for those conclusions. The President of the Republic may return the report to the Assembly within ten days. In the event of the Assembly approving it again, the President of the Republic may put the dispute between the Assembly and the Government to a public referendum. The referendum must take place within thirty days of the date of the last approval by the
20

Assembly. In this case, the Assembly meetings are suspended. If the result of the referendum supports the government, the Assembly will then be considered dissolved, otherwise the President of the Republic must accept the resignation of the Government. Art. 128 - If the People's Assembly decides to withdraw its confidence from one of the Deputy Prime Ministers, or one of the Ministers, or one of their Deputies, he must resign his office. The Prime Minister must submit his resignation to the President of the Republic, if the People's Assembly holds him responsible. Art. 129 - Any twenty members of the People's Assembly at least may ask for the discussion of a public question to clarify the government's policy regarding it. Art. 130 - The members of the People's Assembly are entitled to express to the Prime Minister, or to one of his Deputies, or to one of the Ministers, views concerning public issues. Art. 131 - The People's Assembly has the right to form special committees or detail any of its committees to examine the activities of any administrative department, public organization, executive or administrative body, or any public project for the purpose of fact-finding and to inform the Assembly of its findings relating to the financial, administrative or economic situation or to conduct investigation about matters connected with any of the above mentioned matters. While carrying out its role, the committee is entitled to gather the evidence it deems necessary and to request the evidence of any person. All executive and administrative authorities are bound to respond to the committee's request and to place at its disposal whatever documents and papers it may request for this purpose. Art. 132 - At the inaugural meeting of the ordinary session of the People's Assembly, the President of the Republic shall give a statement on the general policy of the State. He may also give any other statements before the Assembly. The People's Assembly shall discuss the President's statement. 21

Art. 133 - After the appointment of the Cabinet, the Prime Minister shall submit the Cabinet's programme at the inaugural meeting of the People's Assembly ordinary session. The People's Assembly shall discuss this programme. Art. 134 - The Prime Minister and his deputies as well as the Ministers and their deputies may be members of the People's Assembly. The Ministers and their deputies who are not members of the Assembly may attend its meetings and its committees. Art. 135 - The Prime Minister and the Ministers shall be heard in the People's Assembly and before its committees whenever they request to be heard. They may be assisted by such high-ranking officials as they may deem necessary. A Minister shall have no counted vote when votes are taken unless he is a member of the People's Assembly. Art. 136 - The President of the Republic shall not dissolve the People's Assembly except in cases of paramount necessity and after referring the matter to the people. He may issue a decree suspending the Assembly's meetings and conducting a public referendum within thirty days. If the absolute majority of the electors approves the dissolution, the President shall then issue a decree in this connection. The decree dissolving the People's Assembly must include an invitation to the electors to conduct new elections within a period not exceeding sixty days from the date of announcing the result of the referendum. The new Assembly shall convene within ten days following the elections. CHAPTER III THE EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY SECTION A THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Art. 137 - The President of the Republic shall assume the executive authority and shall exercise it in the manner prescribed by the Constitution. 22

Art. 138 - The President of the Republic, with the assistance of the Council of Ministers shall formulate the general policy of the State, and they shall supervise its implementation in the manner prescribed by the Constitution. Art. 139 - The President of the Republic may appoint one or more Vice-Presidents. He determines their jurisdiction and may relieve them of their posts. The laws governing the accountability of the President shall also apply to Vice-Presidents. Art. 140 - The Vice-President shall take the following oath before the President of the Republic and before entering upon his duties: "I swear by God Almighty to sincerely uphold the Republican system, to respect the Constitution and the law, to look after the interests of the people fully and to preserve the independence of the homeland and the safety of its territory." Art. 141 - The President of the Republic appoints the Prime Minister and his deputies, the Ministers and their deputies, and also relieves them of their posts. Art. 141 - The President of the Republic has the right to call a meeting of the Council of Ministers and to attend its meetings. He will also preside over the meetings he attends. He has the right to demand reports from the Ministers. Art. 143 - The President of the Republic appoints the civil officials and diplomatic representatives. He also may dismiss them in the manner prescribed by law. The President also accredits foreign diplomatic representatives. Art. 144 - The President of the Republic issues the regulations necessary for the enforcement of the laws in such a way as to ensure that these laws are not to be modified or suspended and also to ensure that there shall be no exemption in the enforcement of the laws. The President may authorize other persons to issue such regulations and the law may define the persons authorized to issue the regulations ensuring its own enforcement. 23

Art. 145 - The President of the Republic issues control regulations. Art. 146 - The President of the Republic issues the decrees necessary for the establishment and organization of public utilities and administrations. Art. 147 - If, during the recess between the sessions of the National Assembly, or during the period of its sessions, it has become necessary to take measures which cannot suffer delay, the President of the Republic may issue decisions in their respect, which shall have the force of law. These measures, however, shall have to be referred to the People's Assembly within fifteen days from their issue if the Assembly exits. In the case of the Assembly's dissolution or suspension, the measures have to be referred to the Assembly at its first meeting. If they are not so referred, they shall not be valid retroactively unless a decision is issued to this effect. Likewise, if they are referred to the Assembly and subsequently rejected, they will retroactively lose the power of law they had previously enjoyed unless the Assembly approves their validity for the previous period or settles their effect in some other way. Art. 148 - The President of the Republic may proclaim a state of emergency in the manner prescribed by the law. Such proclamation has to be submitted to the People's Assembly within the subsequent 15 days in order that the Assembly may take a decision thereon. In case of the dissolution of the People's Assembly, the question will be referred to the new Assembly at its first meeting. In all cases, the proclamation of the state of emergency must be for a fixed period that may not be extended except by the approval of the People's Assembly. Art. 149 - The President of the Republic has the right of amnesty or the reduction of a penalty. Nevertheless, general amnesty can only to effected by virtue of a law. Art. 150 - The President of the Republic is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. It is he who declares war after the approval of the People's Assembly. 24

Art. 151 - The President of the Republic concludes treaties and communicates them to the People's Assembly together with a suitable statement. The treaties will have the power of law after their conclusion Ratification and publication in accordance with the prescribed procedures. However, treaties relating to reconciliation, alliance, trade, navigation and all other treaties bringing about any alteration in the State's territories, relating to the rights of sovereignty or causing financial burdens not mentioned in the general budget of the state shall have to be approved by the People's Assembly. Art. 152 - The President of the Republic has the right to refer to the people in connection with important matters related to the country's higher interests. SECTION B THE GOVERNMENT Art. 153 - The Government is the supreme executive and administrative organ of the State. The Government is formed of the Prime Minister and his deputies, the Ministers and their deputies. The Prime Minister supervises the work of the Government. Art. 154 - Whoever is to be appointed a Minister or deputy Minister must be an Egyptian not under thirty-five calender years of age. He must enjoy full civil and political rights. Art. 155 - Members of the Council of Ministers shall, before exercising the functions of their posts, take the following oath before the President of the Republic: "I swear by God Almighty to sincerely uphold the Republican system, to respect the Constitution and the law, to look after the interests of the people fully and to preserve the independence of the homeland and the safety of its territory." Art. 156 - The Council of Ministers has within its purview: 25

a)

b)

c) d) e) f) g) h)

To assist the President of the Republic in drawing up the general policy of the State and to supervise its implementation in accordance with the Law and in accordance with Presidential decrees. directing, coordinating and following up the work of the Ministries and the bodies affiliated them as well as the work of the public with institutions and organizations. issuing the administrative and executive decisions in accordance with the laws and decrees, and supervising their implementation. preparing draft laws and decrees. preparing the draft of the general budget of the State. preparing the general plan of the State. contracting and granting loans in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. observing the implementation of laws and maintaining the security of the State as well as protecting the rights of citizens and the interests of the State.

Art. 157 - The Minister is the supreme administrative head of his Ministry. He draws up the policy of the Ministry within the framework of the general policy of the State. He also undertakes the implementation of this policy. Art. 158 - While assuming his office, a Minister has no right to practise any private profession or carry out any commercial, financial or industrial work. He has no right to lease any of the State's property or to let any of his own to the State. He has no right to sell to the State any of his personal property or to exchange it with the State. Art. 159 - The President of the Republic and the People's Assembly have the right to bring a Minister to trial for crimes committed by him in the performance of his duties. Any decision by the People's Assembly to charge a Minist e r must be adopted upon a proposal by at least one fifth of its members. No indictment is issued except with the approval of two thirds of the members of the Assembly. 26

Art. 160 - The indicted Minister shall cease to function until his case is decided. The termination of his services does not prevent legal action from being taken against him. The trial of a Minister and its procedures together with its guarantees and punishment shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the law. The same rules apply to deputy Ministers. SECTION C LOCAL ADMINISTRATION Art. 161 - The Arab Republic of Egypt is divided into administrative units having juridical personality. These include the Governorates, towns and villages. Other administrative units may be established also with juridical personality if public interest so requires. Art. 162 - Local popular councils are to be formed gradually at the administrative unit through direct elections. At least half the members of each local council must be workers and farmers. The law guarantees the gradual transfer of authority to these councils. Chairmen and deputy chairmen of such councils are to be chosen from among their members by election. Art. 163 - The law prescribes the manner in which local councils are to be formed as well as their jurisdiction, financial resources, immunities of its members, their reactions with the People's Council and the Government, and their role in the preparation and execution of the development plan and in controlling the various activities. SECTION D SPECIALIZED NATIONAL COUNCILS Art. 164 - Specialized National Councils shall be established on a national level to assist in drawing up general State policy in all spheres of national activity. Such councils shall pertain to 27

the President of the Republic. The composition and purview of each council shall be determined by Presidential decree. CHAPTER IV THE JUDICIARY Art. 165 - The judiciary is independent and its authority is assumed by courts of various kinds and levels. These pass their judgements in accordance with the law. Art. 166 - Judges are independent. In the administration of justice, they are subject to no other authority save that of the law. No authority whatever has the right to interfere in pending cases or in the affairs of justice. Art. 167 - The law regulates the judicial bodies and their jurisdiction. It also decides the manner in which they are formed and stipulates the conditions for the appointment and transfer of their members. Art. 168 - Judges cannot be dismissed. The law shall determine disciplinary accountability. Art. 169 - Court sessions are public unless a court decides to hold them in camera in conformity with public order and morality. In all cases judgements are to be announced in a public session. Art. 170 - The people shall contribute to the establishment of justice in the manner and to the extent prescribed by the law. Art. 171 - The law regulates the order of state security courts and prescribes their jurisdiction and the qualifications to be held by those who shall be appointed judges therein. Art. 172 - The State Council is an independent judicial body and is concerned with settling administrative disputes and disciplinary cases. The law defines its other functions. Art. 173 - A Higher Council, to be presided over by the President of the Republic, shall be charged 28

with supervising the affairs of the judiciary. The law defines the method of its formation, its functions, its work procedures. It should be consulted on the draft laws which regulates the affairs of the judiciary. CHAPTER V THE HIGHER CONSTITUTIONAL COURT Art. 174 - The Higher Constitutional Court is an independent judicial body and stands by itself in the Arab Republic of Egypt. Cairo is its seat. Art. 175 - The Higher Constitutional Court alone is vested with the judiciary control over the constitutionality of laws and regulations. It is entrusted with the interpretation of legislative provisions according to the law. The law defines the other prerogatives of the Court and regulates the procedures to be followed. Art. 176 - The law defines the method of the formation of the Higher Constitutional Court and prescribes qualifications of its members, their rights and immunities. Art. 177 - Members of the Higher Constitutional Court cannot be dismissed and are subject to no other authority save that of the law. Art. 178 - The judgments of the Higher Constitutional Court concerning constitutional claims and its interpretations of legislative provisions should be published in the Official Gazette. The law regulates the consequences involved in a ruling that a legislative provision is unconstitutional. CHAPTER VI THE SOCIALIST PROSECUTOR GENERAL Art. 179 - The Socialist Prosecutor General is charged with taking the necessary measures to safeguard the rights of the people, the security of the society and its political system, the preservation of socialist gains, and to ensure compliance with 29

socialist behavior. The law prescribes his other functions. He is subject to the control of the People's Assembly. All this is according to the provisions of the law. CHAPTER VII THE ARMED FORCES AND THE NATIONAL DEFENCE COUNCIL Art. 180 - The State alone establishes the Armed Forces. They belong to the people and are entrusted with the protection of the country, ensuring the security of its territories, and safeguarding the gains of the socialist people's struggle. No other organization, or group, is allowed to establish military or para-military formations. The law prescribes the conditions of service and promotion in the Armed Forces. Art. 181 - General mobilization is organized in accordance with the law. Art. 182 - A council named "The National Defence Council" shall be established. It shall be presided over by the President of the Republic. It shall undertake examination of matters pertaining to methods of ensuring the country's security. Its other prerogatives are defined by the law. Art. 183 - The military judiciary is regulated by the law which defines its functions within the principles stipulated by the constitution. CHAPTER VIII THE POLICE Art. 184 - The police is a disciplinary civil body. Its higher chief is the President of the Republic. It ensures for the citizens their security. It is vigilant for the safeguarding of order, public security and morality. It is charged with implementing whatever duties it may be designated to perform in accordance with the laws and regulations.

30

PART VI GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS Art. 185 - Cairo is the capital of the Arab Republic of Egypt. Art. 186 - The Egyptian flag and the provisions relating thereto shall be specified by the law. The emblem of the State and the provisions relating thereto shall also be specified by the law. Art. 187 - The provisions of the laws apply only from the date of their entry into force, and may have no retroactive effect. However, provisions to the contrary may be made, in other than criminal matters, with the approval of the majority of the members of the People's Assembly. Art. 188 - All the laws shall be published in the Official Gazette within two weeks of the date of their promulgation and shall be put into force after the lapse of one month of their publication unless a date for their enforcement is fixed. Art. 189 - The President of the Republic as well as the People's Assembly may request a revision of one, or more of the articles of the constitution. The request for revision must specify the articles to be revised and the reasons to justify such a revision. In the event of such a request emanating from the People's Assembly, it should bear the signature of at least one-third of its members. In all cases the Assembly shall discuss the revision in principle and a decision should be taken by a majority of the members. If the request is rejected, the revision of some articles cannot be requested once again before the lapse of one year from the date of rejection. If the People's Assembly approves the principle of revision, the articles to be revised shall be discussed by the Assembly two months after the date of the said approval. If the modification is approved by two-thirds of the members of the Assembly, it shall be referred to a public referendum. If it is approved by a public referendum, then it will come into force from the date the results of the referendum are announced. 31

Art. 190 - The term of office of the present president shall end six years from the date of his election as the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt. Art. 191 - All the provisions of the laws and regulations enacted prior to the proclamation of this constitution remain in force and valid. Nonetheless these provisions may be repealed or amended in accordance with the rules and procedures established in this constitution. Art. 192 - The Supreme Court shall exercise the functions which are prescribed by the law which set it up until the Higher Constitutional Court is formed. Art. 193 - The constitution shall enter into force as from the date of the people's approval through the referendum.

32

