CONSTITUTION of The 16th January, 1956.
PREAMBLE

Effective date 6th November, 1956. of Egypt. Cairo,

Republic

We, the people of Egypt, having wrested our rights to a life of freedom, after an uninterrupted struggle against enemy forces without, and the forces of exploitation within; We, the people of Egypt, now in control of our own destiny after the glorious victory achieved by the Revolution of 23rd July, 1952, a victory which has crowned our long protracted struggle; We, the people of Egypt, inspired by the lessons of the past, and armed with staunch determination to lay our future plans, freed from fear, freed from want, and freed from subjugation; able to muster all our potentialities for a positive contribution towards building a welfare society wherein will be assured: The eradication of all aspects of imperialism, The extinction of feudalism, The eradication of monopolies, and the control of capitalistic influence over the system of Government, The establishment of a strong national army, The establishment of social justice, The establishment of a sound democratic society; We, the Egyptian people, believing in the right of the individual to a decent living and a secure future, assured of freedom of thought and worship in an atmosphere where there are no dictates save those of conscience and reason;

We, the people of Egypt, with our sacred belief in equality, justice and dignity as fundamental roots of liberty and peace; We, the people of Egypt, realising that we form an organic part of a greater Arab entity, and aware of our responsibilities and obligations towards the common Arab struggle for the glory and prestige of the Arab Nation ; We, the people of Egypt, aware of our geographic position at the cross-roads of three continents, and of our historic mission in the development of civilisation ; and believing in humanity, the indivisibility of prosperity, and the indivisibility of peace; We, the people of Egypt, with our staunch belief in all the above principles which we are determined to uphold-are here laying the fundamental basis of the Constitution which will organise and safeguard our national struggle ; and we declare, today, that the principles underlying the present Constitution emanate from the essence of our struggle, from our past experiences, from the ideals proclaimed by the masses, the sacred values for which many a martyr has given his life, the aspirations for the realisation of which generation after generation have fought and struggled ; and, equally, from the joy inspired by victory, and the bitterness that follows defeat; We, the people of Egypt, by the grace of God and His guidance, dictate the present Constitution embodying our will, and our staunch determination to ensure its respect and the strict adherence to its principles. PART I-THE EGYPTIAN STATE
ARTICLE

1

Egypt is a sovereign independent Arab State; it is a
democratic republic; and the Egyptian people are an integral part of the Arab nation.

ARTICLE

2

Sovereignty is vested in the nation, and can only be exercised in the manner defined by this Constitution.
ARTICLE

3

Islam is the religion of the State, and Arabic its official

language.

PART I1-BASIC CONSTITUENTS OF THE EGYPTIAN COMMUNITY 4 Social solidarity constitutes the essence of the Egyptian society.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 5

The State guarantees liberty, security, safety and equality of opportunity for all Egyptians.
ARTICLE

6

The family is the fundamental unit in society, and its basic constituents are religion, morality and patriotism. 7 The national economy will be planned in accordance with the principles of social justice which aim at promoting national productivity and raising the standard of living.
ARTICLE ARTICLE

8

Private economic activity is free from state interference provided that it does not prejudice public interests, or endanger the people's security, or infringe upon their freedom and dignity.
ARTICLE 9

Capital will be at the service of the national economy; its utilisation shall not interfere with public welfare.

 905 


906

EGYPT

ARTICLE 10

The co-ordination of public and private economic planning is guaranteed by law in a manner which ensures social justice and public welfare.
ARTICLE 11

The right of private ownership is guaranteed, and its social function is regulated by law. Property may not be expropriated except for the purposes of public utility; and in such cases, adequate compensation shall be provided for by law.
ARTICLE 12

Ownership of agricultural land is limited to a maximum acreage fixed by law in a manner that will eliminate the emergence of feudalism ; such law shall have no retroactive effect. Non-Egyptians are not allowed to own agricultural property except in cases determined by law.
ARTICLE 13

Means for protection of small agricultural holdings are to be defined by law.
ARTICLE 14

The law regulates contractual relations between landlords and tenants.
ARTICLE 15

The State encourages private savings, supervises the regulation of credit, and promotes opportunities for the profitable utilisation of popular savings.
ARTICLE 16

The State encourages co-operative activity, and aids cooperative enterprise in all its forms. Regulations for the
functioning of co-operative societies are to be defined by law.
ARTICLE 17

The State endeavours to secure a decent living-standard for
every citizen, with the aim of providing food, housing, health, cultural and social services for all.

ARTICLE 18 Law provides for the preservation of family life, the protection of motherhood, and infant welfare.
ARTICLE 19

The State secures for the female citizens opportunities for
reconciling family duties with public responsibilities. 20 The State safeguards youth against exploitation, neglect, moral, physical and spiritual indignity.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 21 Egyptians are entitled to State aid in cases of old age, sickness and inability to work. To secure this right the State institutes social insurance, social aid and public health services, and will ensure their gradual development. ARTICLE 22 Social justice is the basic principle underlying taxation and

other obligations.
23 Egyptians are collectively responsible for the liabilities incurred by unforeseen disasters of a general nature.
ARTICLE

ARTICLE 24

The State guarantees, in accordance with the law, compensation for those injured through war.
25 The State guarantees, in accordance with the law, compensation for those injured while on active service.
ARTICLE ARTICLE

26

Natural resources, whether subterranean or in territorial waters, are the property of the State which it administers
taking into account the exigencies of national defence and the national economy.

ARTICLE

27

Public property is inviolable and its protection is the duty of every citizen. ARTICLE 28 Government appointments carry with them a special commission. All civil servants are under an obligation to serve the interests of the people.
ARTICLE

29

The institution of civil titles is prohibited. PART III-RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
ARTICLE

30

The law defines Egyptian nationality. In no way can a citizen be deprived of his nationality or be permitted to change it; nor can nationality be withdrawn from a citizen who had
previously acquired it except within the limits prescribed by law.
ARTICLE

31
They

The equality of all Egyptians is established by law.

are equal in respect of rights and obligations without discrimination as to race, origin, language, religion or creed.
ARTICLE

32

There is no crime or punishment unless explicitly defined by law. Punishment for misdeeds is only inflicted after the enactment of the law providing for it.
ARTICLE

33 34

The punishment inflicted is confined to the person in question.
ARTICLE

No person may be arrested or imprisoned except in conformity with the law.
ARTICLE

35

The right of defence before the law courts, whether by personal appearance or by proxy, is guaranteed by law.

36 Any individual accused of having committed a crime must be provided with appropriate means of defence.
EGYPT ARTICLE

37 No physical or moral injury shall be inflicted on the accused person.
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

38

No Egyptian may be expatriated or denied repatriation to Egypt.
ARTICLE 39 No Egyptian may be refused residence in a certain place, or be put under forced residence except in cases defined by law.
ARTICLE

40

Political refugees may not be handed over to other countries. 41 Private residences are inviolable. These cannot be put under surveillance, or forcibly entered except in cases defined by law, and in accordance with the procedure prescribed thereby.
ARTICLE

42 The freedom and sanctity of correspondence are maintained within the limits defined by law.
ARTICLE

43 Freedom of worship is unrestricted. The State guarantees free religious practice in accordance with the established usage in Egypt, providing this does not conflict with public order or morality.
ARTICLE

44 Freedom of opinion and scientific research are safeguarded. Every person has the right to freedom of expression whether it be verbal or written, illustrated or otherwise within the limits defined by law.
ARTICLE

ARTICLE

45

Freedom of the press, of publication and copyright are safeguarded in the interest of public welfare within the limits prescribed by law.
ARTICLE

46

Egyptians have the right to orderly association without previous notification providing they are unarmed. No police force may attend such meetings. Public meetings, processions
and groupings are permissible within the limits defined by

law, providing the conduct and aim of the meeting is pacific and conforming with public morality. 47 Egyptians have the right to set up associations subject to the
ARTICLE

provisions prescribed by law.
ARTICLE

48

Education is free within the limits defined by law, public order and morality. ARTICLE 49 All Egyptians have the right to education sponsored by the State in various schools, and in cultural and educational establishments undergoing gradual development. The State attaches special importance to physical and mental training for youth. 50 State control over public education is regulated by law. Throughout its different stages, education in State schools is given free of charge within the limits defined by law.
ARTICLE ARTICLE

51

Elementary education is compulsory, and freely provided in
State schools. 52 Egyptians have the right to work, which right the State will attempt to secure.
ARTICLE

 910 


EGYPT

911

ARTICLE 53 fair treatment for citizens according to guarantees State The

the work they perform.

State regulations include limitation

of working hours, determination of wage scales, insurance against work injuries, and arrangements concerning holidays and leisure hours.
ARTICLE 54 The law regulates the relationship between workers and employers on an economic basis taking into consideration the rules of social justice.

55 The right to the institution of trade unions is guaranteed; unions have a recognised personality in the manner prescribed by law.
ARTICLE ARTICLE

56

All Egyptians are entitled to medical care-a right sponsored by the State and secured through the establishment of different hospitals and health centres, and by their gradual development. 57 General confiscation of property is prohibited and no punishment by confiscation is permitted except as the result of a legal verdict.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 58 National defence is a sacred obligation ; military service is

an honour conferred on Egyptians, and conscription is compulsory in accordance with law.
ARTICLE

59

Taxes and other dues are levied by law. Exemption from taxation in the case of lower income groups is regulated by law with a view to the maintenance of a minimum decent standard of living.
ARTICLE 60 Observance of public order and respect for established

social morality constitute an obligation binding on all Egyptians.


ARTICLE 61 Egyptians have the right to elections in the manner prescribed by law, and their participation in public life is a patriotic duty. ARTICLE 62 A citizen may address public authorities in writing bearing his signature. Authorities may not be addressed by collective organisations except in the case of associations and recognised bodies.
ARTICLE

63

Egyptians have the right to appeal to State authorities against legal infringements by government officials, or against neglect in the performance of their duties. PART JV-AUTHORITIES
CHAPTER I

Head of the State
ARTICLE

64

The President of the Republic is the head of the State; he exercises his powers in the manner prescribed by this Constitution.
CHAPTER II

The Legislature 65 The National Assembly is the body concerned with the exercise of legislative power.
ARTICLE

ARTICLE

66

The National Assembly exercises executive powers in the manner prescribed by the Constitution.
ARTICLE

67

The National Assembly is composed of members elected by secret ballot. The law defines the number of members, the qualification for membership, and procedure of elections.


ARTICLE 68 A member of the Assembly must not be less than thirty years

of age.
ARTICLE

69

The duration of the Assembly's session is five years beginning with its first meeting. Elections for the new Assembly must be carried out within sixty days prior to the termination of its session.
ARTICLE 70

Where a vacancy

occurs before an Assembly member

terminates his period of service, a succeeding member should be elected in the manner prescribed by the Constitution, and within sixty days of the notification of the vacancy to the Assembly. The new member will serve in place of his predecessor for the remaining period of the latter's term of service.
ARTICLE 71

Where, owing to exceptional circumstances, it may not be possible to hold elections at their appointed time, a special act is required to prolong the session of the standing Assembly until new elections are held.
ARTICLE 72

The President of the Republic calls the Assembly into meeting, and declares the closure of its session.
ARTICLE 73

The National Assembly meets in Cairo unless otherwise determined by the President of the Republic in case of exceptional circumstances. It is illegal to hold Assembly sessions elsewhere, and decisions taken under such circumstances are null and void.
ARTICLE 74

The Assembly begins its ordinary yearly session before the second Thursday in November. In case it is not convened it meets on that day by law. The session continues for seven months at least, and in no circumstance can the session be terminated before approving the national budget.

ARTICLE 75 Outside its ordinary session, the Assembly cannot meet unless formally convened, otherwise the meetings and decisions reached therein shall be considered null and void according to law.
ARTICLE 76

The President of the Republic calls the Assembly to an extraordinary session in case of necessity, or upon a written request signed by the majority of members of the Assembly. The President declares the termination of this extraordinary session.
ARTICLE 77

At the opening of the ordinary session, the President of the Republic delivers the inaugural speech outlining the general policy of the Government and the projects proposed. Further statements may be made on matters with which it may be deemed necessary to acquaint the Assembly.
ARTICLE 78

The following oath is to be taken by the Assembly members during an open hearing and before office can be assumed. "I hereby give a solemn oath sincerely to maintain the Republican system of Government, to regard the interests of the people and safety of the nation, and to respect the Constitution and the law ".
ARTICLE 79

At its first meeting of the ordinary session, the Assembly elects its President, and two vice-presidents who discharge their duties till the beginning of the subsequent session. In case any of these positions becomes vacant, the Assembly elects someone to fill the vacancy for the remaining period of the session.
ARTICLE 80

Meetings of the Assembly are held in open session. Debates may be conducted in camera following a demand presented by the Government, or by the President of the Assembly or ten of its members. The Assembly decides whether debates relating to the question under the discussion shall be conducted in camera or in open session.

ARTICLE 81 No resolution can be reached by the Assembly except in the presence of the majority of the members. In cases where no special majority is necessary, resolutions are reached by a simple majority of the members present. Where no majority can be reached, the motion under discussion is deemed rejected.
ARTICLE 82 Every proposal presented to the Assembly must be referred

to one of the committees for investigation and the presentation of a report thereon.
ARTICLE 83 Every bill proposed by one or more members must be referred to a committee to examine and decide whether it is amenable to consideration by the Assembly. In case the Assembly decides to consider it, the procedure followed is that prescribed in the previous Article. ARTICLE 84 No law can be enacted unless it be approved by the Assembly. No draft law can pass unless a vote is taken on each Article separately.

85 A draft law proposed by a member and rejected by the Assembly, cannot be presented again during the same session.
ARTICLE ARTICLE

86

The Assembly lays down its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its affairs.
ARTICLE

87

The Assembly is responsible for the maintenance of order within its walls, which order is the special concern of its President. No armed forces may be admitted to the Assembly or be stationed near to it except by order of the President.
ARTICLE 88

Ministers will be given a hearing in the National Assembly whenever they so request. They may invoke the assistance of any high officials, or may delegate these to represent them.

The Assembly is empowered to demand the presence of Ministers at its meetings if it so wishes. A Minister will not be qualified to vote in the Assembly unless he is a member thereof.
ARTICLE 89

The National Assembly is authorised to rule on the validity of its membership. Upon commission by the President of the Assembly to do so, a higher court, to be prescribed by law. will be authorised to investigate such objections submitted to the Assembly. The result of investigation will be submitted to the National Assembly for decision. Membership will not be invalidated except by a resolution passed by a majority of two-thirds of the members of the Assembly. Such objections must be ruled within sixty days from the date of submitting the result of the investigation to the Assembly.
ARTICLE 90

Every member of the National Assembly is entitled to address questions or interpellations to the Ministers. Interpellations will be discussed after at least seven days from the date of their presentation, except in the case of urgency, and subject to approval by the Minister concerned.
ARTICLE 91

Any ten members of the National Assembly are entitled to ask for discussion of a question of public interest with a view to ascertaining the Government's policy and exchanging views thereon.
ARTICLE 92

The National Assembly is qualified to express wishes and make proposals to the Government regarding public affairs.
ARTICLE 93

No member of the National Assembly is permitted to interfere with the actions which lay within the competence of either the executive or the judicial authorities.
ARTICLE 94

Taxes may not be imposed, modified or abolished except by law. No individual shall be exempted from the payment of taxes except in cases specified by law; no taxes or other dues should be imposed except within the limits defined by law.

ARTICLE 95

The law defines the rules to be observed in the collection of public revenues and the procedure regarding public expenditure. ARTICLE 96 The Government shall not contract any loans, nor undertake a project involving expenditure from the State Treasury over future years, except with the approval of the National Assembly. ARTICLE 97 The law will prescribe for the regulation of salaries, pensions, indemnities, subsidies and compensations from the State Treasury ; as it will also regulate exceptions to the applicable rules, and the authorities in charge of executing such exceptions.
ARTICLE 98 The regulations and procedure regarding the grant of concessions connected with the exploitation of natural resources and public utilities will be prescribed by law. Free disposal of State property, and surrender of movable State assets, as well as the rules and procedures for dealing therewith, will also be prescribed by law.

ARTICLE 99

No monopoly concessions will be granted except by decree and for a limited duration only.
ARTICLE 100

The preparation of the budget, its submission to the National Assembly, and the duration of the fiscal year will be prescribed by law.
ARTICLE 101

The draft national budget shall be submitted to the National Assembly at least three months before the end of the fiscal year for its examination and approval. Each section of the budget will be voted separately. The National Assembly is not authorised to make any amendments to the draft budget except with the approval of the Government. ARTICLE 102 If the new budget is not approved before the beginning of the fiscal year, the previous budget will remain in force until the new budget is approved.

 
ARTICLE 103

Approval of the National Assembly is required before the transfer of any allocation from one section of the budget to another. Such approval is likewise required for any expenditure not included in the budget or exceeding its allocation.
ARTICLE

104

The National Assembly approves the final accounts of the national budget.
ARTICLE

105

Independent and supplementary budgets and their respective final accounts are subject to the same regulations as the national budget and the final accounts thereof.
ARTICLE

106

The rules regarding the budgets of other public institutions and their relative final accounts will be prescribed by law.
ARTICLE

107

No procedure under the criminal code shall be taken against a member of the National Assembly while in session except with the explicit permission of the Assembly (unless a case of criminal flagrante delicto is established). In cases where such action is taken during the Assembly's recess, the Assembly should be informed.
ARTICLE 108 Members of the Assembly will not be admonished for ideas or opinion expressed in the course of fulfilment of their functions in the Assembly or its committees.

ARTICLE 109

No member of the National Assembly shall be deprived of

his membership except by a resolution of the Assembly passed by majority of two thirds, and upon a proposal made by ten members. Such procedure may be effected when the member loses the confidence of the House, or is discredited, or in cases where he fails to discharge his duties, or when he neglects to attend the meetings of the Assembly or its committees.
ARTICLE 110

Resignations of the members of the National Assembly may only be accepted by the Assembly.

ARTICLE 111

The President of the Republic has the right to dissolve the National Assembly; whenever the Assembly is dissolved on a certain issue the succeeding Assembly cannot again be dissolved on the same issue. 112 The decree dissolving the National Assembly must announce the holding of new elections within sixty days, and shall provide a fixed date for the meeting of the new Assembly within the first ten days following the termination of the elections.
ARTICLE

113 When a Minister loses the confidence of the National Assembly, the said Minister shall resign. Withdrawal of confidence in a Minister may not be voted on until after an interpellation has been addressed to him. This request for withdrawal of confidence shall be made by one tenth of the total members of the Assembly ; the resolution may not be passed before at least three days following the presentation of the request. Withdrawal of confidence from a Minister must be passed by a majority of the members of the Assembly.
ARTICLE

114 Simultaneous cumulation of membership of the National Assembly and posts in public service is impermissible. Law will prescribe other cases of non-cumulation.
ARTICLE

115 No member of the National Assembly may be appointed to the board of any company during the period of his membership in the National Assembly except in cases prescribed by law.
ARTICLE

ARTICLE 116

Members of the National Assembly shall not receive decorations or orders (except in cases of members who hold public office not incompatible with membership of the National Assembly).

 
ARTICLE

117 No member of the National Assembly is allowed during the period of his membership to purchase or hire any State property, nor to sell or rent or barter to the State any of his property.
ARTICLE

118

Members of the National Assembly will be entitled to remuneration to be fixed by law.
CHAPTER I

The Executive
ARTICLE 119

The President of the Republic exercises the executive power in accordance with the Constitution.
SECTION I.---,THE
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

ARTICLE

120

The candidate to be elected President of the Republic shall be an Egyptian, born of two Egyptian parents who are descendants of two Egyptian parents. He must be in possession of full civil as well as political rights, not less than thirty five years of age, and may not be related to the former royal dynasty.
ARTICLE

121

The National Assembly proposes by a simple majority vote the candidate for the Presidency. This proposal is referred to a popular plebiscite. If the Assembly's candidate wins a simple majority in the plebiscite, he becomes President of the Republic. If the proposed candidate does not obtain a majority, the Assembly proposes another candidate, and the above-mentioned procedure of referring the choice to a popular plebiscite is followed. ARTICLE 122

The President's term of office is six years beginning the day
the result of the plebiscite is made public.

 920 


EGYPT ARTICLE 123

The President of the Republic takes the following oath before he assumes his duties as President: "I swear in the name of Almighty God, to preserve with unwavering loyalty the republican regime, to respect the Constitution and the laws of the country, zealously to safeguard the interests of the people, and vigilantly to watch over the independence of the country and the security of its land".
ARTICLE 124 The law fixes the salary of the President of the Republic. Changes in this salary may not be effected during his term of office. The President may not draw any other salary or bonus.

125 The President of the Republic may not, during his term of office, practice any profession or engage in any commercial, financial or industrial business. He may not buy or rent anything that belongs to the State, nor may he let or sell any of his property to the State. He may not barter anything he possesses for any State property. ARTICLE 126 Sixty days before the expiry of a President's term of office, steps for electing his successor will be taken. The new President will be elected at least seven days before his predecessor's term of office expires. If, however, this term of office expires without a new President being elected, the previous President remains in office until his successor is elected.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 127 If for any reason, the President of the Republic is temporarily unable to carry out his duties, he may delegate one of the Ministers in his place. His choice will be submitted to the National Assembly for approval. ARTICLE 12a In the case of the President's resignation, or in cases of permanent disability or death, the National Assembly decides by a two-third majority vote that the office of President has become vacant. The President of the Assembly takes over temporarily the duties of the President of the Republic, and
the Assembly is then presided over by one of its two vice-presidents at the Assembly's discretion. The election of a new President shall be completed within sixty days from the date on which the Presidential post becomes vacant.
ARTICLE

129

Whenever the President wishes to resign, his letter of resignation shall be addressed to the National Assembly.
ARTICLE

130

Indictment of the President of the Republic for high treason or disloyalty to the republican regime must be proposed by at least one-third of the total number of National Assembly members. A resolution indicting the President cannot be issued by less than a two-thirds majority vote. Immediately such a resolution is voted, the President ceases to exercise his powers, and the President of the National Assembly takes over. The President of the Republic is tried by a special court prescribed by law. If he is found guilty, he is relieved of his post, and is liable to other punitive measures determined by law.
ARTICLE

131

The President of the Republic, in collaboration with his ministers, lays down the general policy of his Government in economic, political, social as well as administrative fields, and is responsible for supervising the execution of this policy.
ARTICLE

132

The President of the Republic has the right to propose, sanction or veto legislative measures.
ARTICLE

133

If the President of the Republic vetoes a bill, he sends it back to the Assembly within thirty days of the communication of such a bill to him. If, however, the bill is not returned to the Assembly within this period, it automatically becomes law and is issued as such. ARTICLE 134 If such a bill is returned to the Assembly within the prescribed time and is then voted by a two-third majority, it becomes law and is issued as such.

ARTICLE 135 If during the Assembly's recess or during its dissolution, urgent measures have to be promptly adopted, the President may enact the appropriate ordinance which will have the force of law. Such ordinances should, however, be submitted to the Assembly within fifteen days of their promulgation if the Assembly is in session. If the Assembly has been dissolved, the ordinance will be submitted at its first session. If such ordinances are not submitted to the Assembly they become retroactively null and void. If such ordinances are submitted and are not ratified by the Assembly, they again become retroactively null and void unless the Assembly decides to accept whatever consequences may have resulted from the application of such ordinances during a preceding period. ARTICLE 136 In exceptional cases, and by virtue of express delegation by the Assembly, the President of the Republic may issue ordinances which will have the force of law. This delegation shall be for a fixed period, and the objects and basis of such ordinances shall be precisely defined. ARTICLE 137 The President of the Republic issues the necessary regulations organising public services and he has the right to supervise their implementation. ARTICLE 13& The President of the Republic issues police regulations and all regulations required for the execution of laws. He may delegate this authority to others. Regulations are proposed by the competent Minister and issued by the President. The law defines the authority competent to issue the orders required for the execution of such proposals. ARTICLE 139 The President of the Republic is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces.
ARTICLE

140

The President of the Republic appoints and dismisses military and civil personnel, as well as diplomatic representatives, within the framework of law. He also accredits diplomatic representatives of foreign States.
ARTICLE

141

The President of the Republic has the right of pardon or reducing punishment. General amnesty can only be granted by law.
ARTICLE

142

War may be declared by the President of the Republic with the approval of the National Assembly.
ARTICLE

143

The President of the Republic concludes treaties and presents them to the National Assembly with appropriate explanations. These treaties will have the force of law after their conclusion, ratification and publication according to existing practice. However, peace treaties, alliances, commercial and navigational agreements, and all other treaties involving territorial changes or having a bearing on the rights of sovereignty, or those involving extraordinary expenditure from the Treasury cannot become effective except after ratification by the National Assembly.
ARTICLE

144

The President of the Republic may declare a state of emergency in accordance with law. Such a declaration shall be submitted to the National Assembly within fifteen days of its announcement, and the Assembly takes whatever decision it deems necessary thereon. If the National Assembly is dissolved, such a declaration shall be placed before the new Assembly when it meets for its first sitting.
,ARTICLE

145

The President of the Republic may, after consulting the National Assembly, hold a plebiscite on major issues that have a bearing on the country's national interests. The procedure for such a plebiscite is prescribed by law.

 
SECTION II.-MINISTERS

925

ARTICLE

146

The President of the Republic appoints the Ministers and relieves them of their posts. If, for any reason, the President's term of office comes to an end, the Ministers carry on with their work until a successor is elected.
ARTICLE

147

The President of the Republic meets with the ministers and together they constitute a Council of Ministers for exchange of views on State affairs as well as for the direction thereof.
ARTICLE 148 Each Minister controls the affairs of his Ministry, and carries out the general policy of the Government therein. Ministers of State may be appointed when necessary. ARTICLE 149 Ministers appointed shall be of Egyptian nationality, not less than thirty years of age, and enjoying their full civil and political rights. ARTICLE 150

Before they can assume office, Ministers take the following oath before the President of the Republic: "I swear by Almighty God strictly to maintain the Republican system of Government, to respect the Constitution and the law, and to safeguard fully the interests of the people ".
,ARTICLE 151

A Minister is not allowed during his tenure of office to have a private business, or to engage in commercial, financial or industrial activities; nor may he buy or hire any property belonging to the State, or sell, let, or barter any of his own property with the State.
ARTICLE

152

The President of the Republic and the National Assembly have the right to bring to trial any Minister for crimes which he may have committed in ihe course of his duties. Thle indictment of such a Minister must be proposed by five members at least of the National Assembly. The Assembly's resolution to indict a Minister must be passed by a two-thirds majority of the Assembly.
ARTICLE 153 A Minister who has been indicted shall be suspended from his duties until a decision is reached in his regard. The termination of the services of a Minister does not prcvent his prosecution or the continuation of his trial. Regulations concerning the indictment and prosecution of Ministers will be prescribed by law, which will also specify the competent court for such trials.

ARTICLE 154

Deputy Ministers may be appointed where necessary. Measures applicable to ministers are equally applicable to deputy ministers. ARTICLE 155 Ministers and deputy ministers may be members in the National Assembly. ARTICLE 156 Members of the National Assembly may be appointed undersecretaries to the Ministers for the affairs of the National Assembly. Regulations affecting such appointments will be determined by law.
SECTION III.-LOCAL ADMINISTRATION ARTICLE 157 The Egyptian Republic is divided into administrative units some of which may have a juridical personality according to law. The boundaries of such units are fixed by law which will also prescribe the organs representing the units. ARTICLE 158 An administrative unit with a juridical personality, is represented by a council, the members of which will be elected. However, certain council members may be appointed in accordance with regulations prescribed by law. ARTICLE 159 Councils representing administrative units are responsible for the discharge of functions connected with matters of interest in their respective units. They are empowered to establish institutions capable of co-ordinating social, economic, cultural and health activities within their unit in the manner prescribed by law.

ARTICLE 160 Administrative unit councils should hold their meetings in open session. Secret sessions may only be held within the limits prescribed by law. ARTICLE 161 Revenues pertaining to administrative units with a juridical personality include local taxes and dues-whether main or supplementary-according to the limits prescribed by law. ARTICLE 162 The State guarantees the technical, administrative and financial needs of the administrative units having a juridical personality, according to the terms prescribed by law.

163 The law regulates co-operation between the different administrative units in matters of common interest, as it will also prescribe means for co-operation between those units and the Government departments.
ARTICLE

ARTICLE 164

The law determines the duties of administrative unit councils, as well as matters where councils' decisions will be final, or those requiring the sanction of the responsible Minister. ARTICLE 165 Control over the activities of administrative unit councils is regulated by law. ARTICLE 166 Administrative unit councils may be dissolved by a decision of the President of the Republic. The law prescribes the procedure for setting up an interim body to replace the council during its dissolution.
SECTION IV.-NATIONAL DEFENCE

A.-National Defence Council
ARTICLE 167 A National Defence Council presided over by the President of the Republic will be set up.

ARTICLE 168 The National Defence Council is responsible for all matters concerned with the security and safety of the country. Other responsibilities of the Council will be prescribed by law.

B.-Armed Forces 169 The armed forces of the Egyptian Republic belong to the people, and their duty is to protect the country's sovereignty, and to ensure the security and safety of its territory.
ARTICLE

170 The State alone is responsible for the armed forces, and no other organisation or body may form military or quasi-military groups.
ARTICLE

171 The Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces may be appointed Minister of War, and may hold both offices.
ARTICLE

172 The State is responsible according to the law for the military training of the nation's youth, and for the organisation of the National Guard.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 173 General mobilisation will be carried out in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.

174 The terms of service, promotion, trial and discharge of officers of the armed forces will be regulated by law.
ARTICLE

CHAPTER IV

The Judicature

175 Judges are independent, and no authority shall be exercised over them except that of the law. No power may interfere in law suits or in judicial affairs.
ARTICLE


ARTICLE 176 The law defines the various judicial bodies and the responsibilities assigned to them. ARTICLE 177 Courts hold their sessions in public, unless a decision is taken by a court to hold a session in camera in the interests of public order and morality.

178 Court sentences are passed and enforced in the name of the nation. ARTICLE 179 As is prescribed by law, judges are not subject to dismissal.
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

180

Terms of appointment, transfer and disciplinary measures applicable to judges are prescribed by law. ARTICLE 181 The functions and responsibilities of the parquet, and its relation with the judicature, are regulated according to the terms prescribed by law. 182 Appointments, disciplinary measures and dismissal of members of the general parquet shall be carried out in accordance with the terms prescribed by law.
ARTICLE

183 The procedure and responsibilities concerning military courts, as well as the qualifications needed for those who administer the law therein shall be regulated by law.
ARTICLE

PART V-GENERAL RULES ARTICLE 184 Cairo is the capital of the Egyptian Republic.
ARTICLE

185

The law defines the national flag and regulates matters connected with it, as it will also prescribe the rules and regulations concerning the national emblem.

ARTICLE 186 Laws are applicable from their date of issue, and shall have no retroactive effect. In matters outside the criminal code the contrary may be stipulated provided approval by a majority of the National Assembly is secured. ARTICLE 187 Laws are published in the Official Journal within two weeks from the date of issue, and shall come into force ten days thereafter. This time limit may be varied by an explicit rule of law. ARTICLE 188

Laws referred to in Articles 67, 89, 98, 100, 114, 130, 144, 145 and 153 shall only be valid after their approval by a two-third majority of the National Assembly.
ARTICLE 189

The President of the Republic, and the National Assembly can propose an amendment of one or more Articles of the present Constitution. The request for amendment must specify the Articles concerned and the reasons calling for their amendment. If the request is submitted by the National Assembly, it should bear the signatures of at least one-third of its members. In all cases the Assembly discusses the proposed amendment in principle, and the vote taken at this stage is by simple majority. If the proposal is defeated, the Article concerned cannot again be submitted for amendment within twelve months. If the National Assembly approves the amendment in principle, it proceeds to discussion of the relevant Article after a period of six months from the date of its approval. If twothirds of the members of the Assembly approve the amendment introduced, it shall then be put to a national plebiscite. If the nation approves the amendment, it shall be considered effective from the date announcing the result of the plebiscite.
ARTICLE 190

All rules prescribed by laws, decrees, ordinances, regulations and decisions in force prior to the issuing of the present Constitution shall remain valid. They may, however, be abrogated or amended in accordance with the principles and procedures established in the present Constitution.

ARTICLE 191

All resolutions taken by the Revolution Command Council, all laws and resolutions that are related to them, or that were issued as complementary to them or to ensure their execution, and all resolutions, regulations procedures, deeds and actions taken or done by institutions formed by order of the Revolution Command Council for the sake of protecting the Revolution and the system of Government, cannot be annulled or their validity questioned ; nor can compensations thereof be demanded under any circumstances, or through any channels whatsoever. PART VI-TRANSITORY AND FINAL RULES
ARTICLE 192 Political parties shall remain suspended until the enactment of a law regulating them. Such a law shall be proposed by the Government and approved by two-thirds of the members of the National Assembly. Until such measures are approved, a national union will be established by the people to work for the realisation of the aims of the Revolution, and to rally all efforts towards building up a nation politically, socially and economically sound. The National Union will, during the said period, nominate candidates for membership of the National Assembly. The procedure by which the said Union shall be formed will be laid down by the President of the Republic. ARTICLE 193 A plebiscite for the approval of a Presidency of the Republic will take place on 7th July, 1956. The term of office for the Presidency will begin from the date announcing the result of the plebiscite. ARTICLE 194 This Constitution will be submitted to a plebiscite on Saturday, 23rd June, 1956. ARTICLE 195 The declaration on the Constitution of 10th February, 1953, will remain in force until the coming into effect of the present Constitution. ARTICLE 196 The present Constitution will come into effect as from the day following its approval by public plebiscite. 

