
CONSTITUTION

of the Republic of Salvador. San Salvador, August 13, 1886.



IN the name of the Salvadorean people, the National Constituent Congress decrees, sanctions, and proclaims the following Constitution :  - 

TITLE I.  Of the Nation and the Form of Government. 
ART. 1. The Salvadorean nation is sovereign and independent, and shall never become the patrimony of any family or person. This sovereignty is inalienable and imprescriptible, and is limited by the honesty, justice, and convenience of society. It resides essentially in the Salvadorean people as a whole, and no combination of towns or individuals shall attribute it to itself.



2. All public authority emanates from the people. The functionaries of State are its delegates, and hold no faculties greater than those expressed by law. By that law they legislate, administer, and judge; by it also they are entitled to obedience and respect; and in conformity with it they must give an account of their actions. 3. The territory of Salvador is bounded, on the east, by the Gulf of Fonseca; on the north, by the Republics of Guatemala and Honduras; on the west, by the River Paz; and on the south, by the Pacific Ocean. The special demarcation of these limits shall be the object of a Law. 4. The Government of the Salvadorean nation is Republican, democratic, representative, and alternative. It is composed of three distinct and independent powers, which are denominated, the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial.
TITLE

II. Rights and Guarantees.

5. In the Republic neither hereditary offices nor privileges will be recognized. All property is transmissible in the form determined by law, and, consequently, all manner of entail is prohibited. 6. Contributions shall not be levied except by virtue of a Law, and for the public service. 7. Any person who holds any public office is directly and immediately responsible for his acts performed in the exercise of his functions. The law shall determine the manner in which such responsibility shall be made effectual. 8. Salvador recognizes rights and obligations anterior and superior to the actual laws, and hold as principles liberty, equality, and fraternity; and as fundamental bases, family ties, labour, property, and public order. 9. Every inhabitant of Salvador holds the incontestable right to preserve and defend his life, liberty, and property, and to freely dispose of his belongings in conformity with law. 10. Every man in the Republic is free. He who enters its territory shall not be a slave, nor shall he be a citizen who traffics in slaves. 11. The Republic is a sacred asylum for the foreigner who wishes to reside in its territory, except for such as are guilty of ordinary offences and who may be claimed by other nations in virtue of existing Treaties containing stipulations for extradition. The stipulations for extradition shall in no case have reference to natives or to foreigners accused of political offences, unless the latter should have resulted in or been accompanied by ordinary misdemeanours.

 
12. The free exercise of all religions is guaranteed, with no restrictions other than those prescribed by morality and public order. No religious act shall serve to establish the civil status of any person. 13. Every person shall have the right to remain permanently in the locality that may suit his convenience, and to remove, emigrate, and return without passport. An exception shall be made in the case of the execution of a sentence, without prejudice to the dispositions of Article 28 of this Constitution. 14. The inhabitants of Salvador shall equally be at liberty to meet and associate together peaceably and without arms, and with any lawful object. 15. No person shall be liable to forced labour or personal service without fair remuneration, or without his full consent, except for reasons of necessity or public utility, as established by law. The law may not authorize any act or contract which shall have for its object the loss or irrevocable sacrifice of the liberty of the individual, whether it be of the nature of work, education, or religion. Neither shall the law authorize any proceeding by which any person shall become liable to proscription or exile. 16. Every person has the right to put forward petitions 'to the lawfully constituted authorities, provided they be made in a proper manner; and such authorities shall settle the petitions laid before them, and make known their opinion. 17. No person having the free administration of his property may be deprived of his right to determine the civil actions in which he may engage, either by arrangement or arbitration. As regards those who have not such free administration, the proceedings which may be applicable shall be determined by law. 18. Confiscation and similar punishments, whatever may be their nature, are prohibited. The authorities who contravene this disposition shall be liable at all times, in their persons and property, to make reparation, and the property confiscated shall be imprescriptible. 19. The penalty of death shall not be enforced, except for the very gravest offences, purely military and committed in the field, and which shall be determined by the Military Code. Also for the crimes of parricide and assassination, and robbery and incendiarism, if followed by death. Perpetual punishments are also prohibited, as well as the punishment of flogging and all manner of torture. 20. No person may be deprived of his life, liberty, or his property, without having been previously heard and sentenced on trial, in accordance with the laws; nor shall he be tried, civilly or criminally, twice for the same offence.



21. The search or examination of the person shall not be practised except for the purpose of preventing or investigating crimes or offences. The domicile is inviolable, and shall not be entered under search warrant, unless for the investigation of a crime or the pursuit of the criminal, in such manner as shall be determined by law. 22. No person shall be tried in a jurisdiction other than that in which he shall have committed the offence, except in the cases determined by law, and those in which the same law empowers the Court of Justice to designate another jurisdiction. 23. All men are equal before the law. 24. The laws shall have no retroactive effect, except in penal matters when the new law may be favourable to the delinquent. 25. No one shall be tried except under the laws passed previous to the committal of the offence, and before the Tribunals which may have been previously established by law. 26. The same Judge shall not have the power to try cases in different instances. 27. No power or authority may remove pending suits from an inferior to a superior Court, nor reopen concluded cases. 28. Neither the Executive nor Judicial Power, nor any other authority, may make an order for detention in prison except in conformity with the law. The order should in all cases be written, except in criminal offences where the delinquent is taken in flagrante delicto, when he may be detained by any person, but shall be immediately brought before the proper authority. The detention before inquiry shall not exceed 48 hours, and the examining Judge shall be obliged, within the said term, to order the person to be set free or provisionally arrested. 29. Every man may freely express, write, print, and publish his opinions, without previous examination, censorship, or caution; but he shall be bound to answer before a jury for any offence he may commit. 30. Letters and telegraphic correspondence are inviolable. Correspondence which may be intercepted may not be brought forward as evidence in any kind of action. 31. Property of all kind is inviolable. No person may be deprived of his goods except for public purposes, legally proved, and upon fair and previous compensation. In cases of expropriation demanded by the necessities of war, compensation need not be settled beforehand. 32. No permanent civil or ecclesiastical corporation, whatever may be its character, denomination, or objects, shall have the legal capacity to hold in possession or administer landed property, with


the sole exception of such as may be immediately and directly destined to the service or objects of the institution. 33. Education is free, and primary instruction obligatory. Education provided in the establishments maintained at the expense of the State shall be secular and gratuitous, and subject to proper regulations. 34. All industry is free; but a monopoly in brandy, saltpetre, and gunpowder is reserved for the advantage of the nation, and shall be administered by the Executive. There shall be no monopoly or prohibition of any kind with the object of protection of industry. The coining of money, and the privileges which may be accorded by law for a limited time to inventors or promoters of an industry, are, however, excepted. 35. The right of association is guaranteed; but the establishment of conventual Societies and of any kind of monastic institution is prohibited. 36. The right of insurrection shall in no case involve the abrogation of the laws; but its effects shall be restricted to setting aside as far as is necessary the persona engaged in carrying on the Government, and in nominating in the interim those who shall fill their places. In the meantime an indictment shall be drawn up in the form established by the Constitution. 37. Every person shall have the right to solicit and obtain the assistance of the Supreme Court of Justice or the Court of Second Instance, when any authority or individual restrains the personal liberty or the exercise of any of the individual rights guaranteed by the present Constitution. A special law shall regulate the manner in which this right shall be made effective. 38. None of the constituted authorities shall have the power to conclude or approve Treaties or Conventions which may in any manner alter the form of the established government, or impair the integrity of the national territory or sovereignty. This shall be understood, nevertheless, as being without prejudice to the dispositions of Article 151 of this Constitution. 39. Neither the Legislative nor. Executive Power, nor any Tribunal, authority, or person shall be able to restrict, alter, or violate the constitutional guarantees, without being held subject to the responsibility established by law. The laws relating to a state of siege shall determine those guarantees which may be suspended, and the cases in which such suspension shall take place. 40. The rights and guarantees enumerated in this Constitution shall not be understood as denying other rights and guarantees not specified, but which originate in the principle of the sovereignty of the people and the Republican form of Government.

1322
TITLE III. Of Salvadoreans.

41. Salvadoreans are such by birth or naturalization. 42. Salvadoreans by birth are  (1.) Those born in the territory of Salvador, except the children of foreigners not naturalized; (2.) The legitimate children, born within the territory of Salvador, of a foreign father and a Salvadorean mother, who do not declare, during the year subsequent to the date on which they reach their majority, that they choose the nationality of the father; the legitimate children of a Salvadorean father and a foreign mother; and the illegitimate children, born in Salvador, of a Salvadorean mother and a foreign father; (3.) The legitimate children of a Salvadorean father and the illegitimate children of a Salvadorean mother, born in a foreign country and not naturalized there; (4.) The descendants of the children of foreigners, or of the children of a foreign father and Salvadorean mother, both children and descendants having been born in Salvador. 43. Salvadoreans by naturalization are  (1.) Spanish-Americans who obtain a letter of naturalization from the Governor of their department, who shall only grant it on proof of the good conduct of the petitioner; (2.) Foreigners who petition for and obtain letters of naturalization from the same authority, having proved their good conduct, and that they have resided two years in Salvador; (3.) Those who obtain a letter of naturalization from the Legislative Body; (4.) Those who have acquired naturalization in accordance with Article 48 of this Constitution. 44. Those Central-Americans who declare before the Governor their desire to become Salvadoreans are also deemed to be naturalized Salvadoreans.
TITLE

IV. -Of Foreigners,

45. Foreigners, from the moment they arrive in the territory of the Republic, shall be strictly bound to respect the authorities and observe the laws, and shall acquire the right to be protected by them. 46. Neither Salvadoreans nor foreigners shall in any case claim from the Government any indemnity for damages or Josses they may suffer in their persons or property by political disturbances; 

1323

their right to claim redress from culpable functionaries or private individuals remains intact. 47. Foreigners may acquire every kind of property, the said property not being exempt, however, from the ordinary or extraordinary charges which the laws establish as regards the property of Salvadoreans. 48. By the fact of a foreigner accepting a public appointment with salary, except in the avocation of professor, or in the militia, ' he renounces his nationality and becomes naturalized in Salvador. 49. No international agreement shall modify, in any respect, the provisions contained in this Title. 50. Foreigners shall become subject to a special law.

TITLE

V. Of Citizenship.

51. All Salvadoreans are citizens who have reached 18 years of age; also those who are married or who have taken a literary degree, even if they have not arrived at that age. 52. The exercise of citizenship is suspended  (1.) By committal to prison on a criminal charge, when bail is not admitted; (2.) For notoriously vicious conduct; (3.) For mental alienation; (4.) By judicial interdiction; (5.) For refusing to undertake, without sufficient cause, a duty imposed by popular election. The suspension in this case will last so long as the duty remains undischarged; (6.) By judicial sentence which orders such suspension. 53. The rights of citizenship are lost  (1.) On condemnation to a punishment which carries with it such loss of citizenship; (2.) On condemnation for a serious offence j (3.) On becoming naturalized in a foreign country; (4.) On accepting office from another nation, although residing in the Republic, without the permission of the Executive; (5.) For selling a vote at an election j (6.) For subscribing to acts or Proclamations, or for employing other direct means for promoting or furthering the re-election of the President of the Republic; (7.) By officials who, in the exercise of public authority in civil or military matters, interfere with the liberty of suffrage. 1324
TITLE

VI. Of the Legislative Power.

54. The Legislative Power shall be exercised by a National Assembly of Deputies. 55. The Legislative Body will ordinarily meet in the capital of the Republic, without its being necessary to convoke it, from the 1st to the 15th- February of each year; and extraordinarily whenever it may be convoked by the Executive with the advice of the Council of Ministers. The Assembly may be moved to any other place to celebrate its Session when such transfer may be agreed to. 56. The Lumber of the ordinary sittings shall not exceed 40; but those which may be extraordinary shall be as many as may be necessary to settle the matters within its competence that may be submitted to it by the Executive. 57. Three Representatives assembled in preparatory meeting shall have the faculty to take immediately all measures that may be agreed to, in order to obtain the agreement of the others in full assembly. 58. A majority of the members of the Assembly will be sufficient to deliberate, but when less than two-thirds of the Representatives are present the agreement of two-thirds of those present shall be necessary for every Resolution. 59. The members of the Assembly shall be renewed every year; but members may be re-elected. 60. To be elected a Deputy it is necessary to be above 25 years of age, to be a Salvadorean citizen of well-known honour and capability, without having lost the rights of citizenship during the live years preceding the election, and to be a native of the department or its vicinity for which election is sought. 61. Those persons shall not be elected Deputies who may be contractors for public works or services of any kind paid for from State funds, nor those who have claims pending in their own interest resulting from such contracts. Neither shall those persona be eligible who may be appointed to employment by the Executive and in enjoyment of pay, unless six months shall have elapsed since their functions came to an end. 62. The substitute Deputies shall have the same qualities as those who are Deputies in their own right. 63. Deputies shall not accept employment during the period for which they have been elected, except the offices of Secretary of State, Diplomatic Representatives, and appointments carrying no pay64. The Representatives of the nation are inviolable. Consequently no Deputy shall be held responsible at any time for his opinions, whether expressed verbally or in writing.


1325

65. During the period from the day of the election to 15 days after the Legislative Body has adjourned, no civil action against any Representative may be commenced or pursued. As regards serious offences committed during the period above mentioned, the offender shall not be judged except by the Assembly, with the sole object of expelling the culprit and sending him before the ordinary Courts. As regards less serious offences and misdemeanours committed during the same period, the offender shall be tried by the competent Judge; but he shall not be liable to arrest or detention, nor shall he be summoned to appear until the recess. If a Representative should have committed a serious offence previous to his election, the Assembly, having investigated the fact, shall declare the election null, and shall send the offender before the competent Tribunal. If, during the Session, any Representative should be surprised in flagrante delicto, he may be detained by any person or authority and placed within 24 hours at the disposition of the Assembly. 66. The dispositions of the two preceding Articles are extended to the Constituent Congresses. 67. It shall belong to the National Assembly  (1.) To confirm the election of its members, approving or disapproving their credentials; (2.) To accept their resignations for reasons legally proved; (3.) To exact responsibility in the cases provided by this Constitution ; (4.) To summon the substitutes in case of the death, resignation, or inability to attend of ordinary members. 68. The attributes of the Legislative Power are  (1.) To open and close its Sessions, and to agree upon the terms in which the Message of the President of the Republic should be replied to; (2.) To open the papers which contain the votes for the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to scrutinize the votes by means of a Committee of its own members; (3.) To declare the election of the aforesaid functionaries in view of the judgment of the Committee of Scrutiny, which shall express itself, moreover, as to whether or not the individuals elected possess the qualifications required by law; (4.) To invest with authority the President and Vice-President of the Republic, receiving from them the oath (" protesta")of the Constitution, to accept their resignations, and to grant them leave of absence when they request it; (5.) To elect by public voting the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and the chief officers (" contadores ") of the Principal Court of Cassation, to receive from them the oath of the Constitution, and to accept their resignations; (6.) To receive the detailed account, supported by documents, which the Executive, through his Ministers, is required to present in accordance with section 25 of this Article ; (7.) To designate three persons who may exercise the Executive Power in the cases determined by this Constitution, taking care that such persons shall possess the same qualifications as are required in the case of the President of the Republic. This appointment may devolve upon members of Congress; (8.) To decide with regard to the doubts which may arise, or the complaints which may be made of the incapacity of the President or Vice-President of the Republic, and of other officers who may have been elected by the same Assembly; (9.) To decree, interpret, reform, and abrogate the secondary laws; (10.) To create jurisdictions, and to establish therein functionaries who, in the name of the Republic, shall take cognizance of, try, and pass sentence in all classes of suits or proceedings, civil or criminal; (11.) To designate the attributes and jurisdiction of the different functionaries; (12.) To impose taxes and contributions on all kinds of property and income in due proportion, as may be directed; and in the event of invasion or war legally declared, to decree forced loans, in the like proportion, whenever the ordinary public revenue is insufficient, or if it is not possible to obtain voluntary contributions; (13.) To empower the Executive to contract for voluntary loans, within or without the Republic, when demanded by serious and urgent necessity. The loans contracted in conformity with this Article must be submitted for the approval of the Legislative Power; (14.) To decree annually the Estimates of the expenses of the public administration, duly regulating the employment of the revenue in such a manner that preference may be given to public instruction, the administration of justice, and the police; (15.) To confer the grade of Lieutenant-Colonel inclusive upwards, in view of the proper record of services; (16.) To decree the arms and flag of the Republic; (17.) To fix the alloy, weight, and pattern of the coinage, and to regulate the weights and measures; (18.) To grant to persons or corporations, titles, honourable distinctions, and rewards, consistent with the established form of Government, for eminent services rendered to the country; (10.) To assign, augment, or reduce the emoluments of officials

and functionaries, and to create and suppress official posts. The decrees increasing the emoluments of the functionaries of the Supreme Legislative and Executive Powers shall not, however, take effect until the period following; (20.) To decree rewards and to grant temporary privileges to the authors of useful inventions, and to those who introduce or carry to perfection industries of general utility; (21.) To declare war in accordance with the grounds communicated by the Executive; (22.) To grant amnesties and pardons, the latter in view of favourable information and direction of the Supreme Court of Justice; (23.) To declare a state of siege in the cases and for the reasons which may be determined by a formal law; such state of siege being raised by the same law; (24.) To rehabilitate those persons who have lost the rights of citizenship; (25.) To approve or disapprove of the acts of the Executive; (26.) To decree laws for the recognition of the National Debt, and to create and designate the funds necessary for its payment; (27.) To grant or refuse to Salvadoreans who solicit it permission to accept employment under another nation, if consistent with the system of Government of Salvador; (28.) To grant or refuse letters of naturalization applied for by foreigners; (29.) To ratify, modify, or disapprove the Treaties or Agreements concluded by the Executive with other nations; in no case shall Treaties or Conventions be ratified which restrict or affect in any manner the exercise of the right of insurrection, or which violate any other constitutional principle; (30.) To permit or refuse the transit of troops of other countries through the territory of the Republic; (31.) To adjudge the responsibility of the superior officials in the manner described in Title XIII of this Constitution. 69. When the National Assembly is convoked extraordinarily it shall only deal with the matters, within its competence, submitted to its consideration by the Executive. 70. The powers of the National Assembly cannot be delegated, with the exception of that of the investment with authority of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and the Controllers (" Contadores "), The Decrees and Resolutions that may be passed in contravention of this Article, whatever may be the reasons upon which they may be founded, shall be declared null, without prejudice to the responsibility exacted by this Constitution from the persons so contravening. 71. The power of initiating laws shall be held exclusively by the Deputies, the President of the Republic through his Ministers, and the Supreme Court of Justice. 72. Every project of law, after being discussed and approved, shall be passed on to the Executive, who, if he shall have no objections to make to it, shall give to it his sanction and cause it to be published as law. The Executive shall have no power to make observations upon, or to refuse his sanction to, the Resolutions of the National Assembly passed in the exercise of the attributes contained in Article 67, and in sections 3, 5, 7, 8, 25, and 31 of Article 68 of this Constitution. 73. Should the Executive experience difficulty in sanctioning the projects of law passed on to him, he will return such Bills to the Assembly within a space of eight days, pointing out the reasons upon which he bases his rejection. If he should not return them within the aforesaid term they shall be held to be sanctioned, and shall be published as law. In the case of the Bill being returned, the Assembly shall reconsider it, and if it shall then be confirmed by the votes of two-thirds it shall be again passed on to the Executive, who shall thereupon consider it as law, and shall sanction and publish it. When the Assembly issues a law in the last days of its Session, and there does not remain sufficient time to permit of the Executive taking his full legal term for the return of the law with his observations thereon, he shall be obliged to give immediate notice to the Assembly in order that the Session shall continue until the full term has expired. If he fails to do so the law shall be held to be sanctioned. 74. When a Bill shall be rejected or not confirmed, it may not be brought forward again in the same Session, except in the Session of the following Legislature. 75. Every Bill approved shall be laid in triplicate, and the three copies signed by the President and Secretaries. One copy shall be kept in the archives, and the other two passed on to the Executive. 76. The two copies of the Bill having been received by the Executive, he shall sign them, if he should have no objections to raise, and return one to the Assembly, the other to be preserved in his archives. The Bill shall then be published as law within the term of eight days. 77. The same proceedings shall be observed in the interpretation, modification, or abrogation of a law as in its formation. 78. No law is obligatory except by virtue of its solemn promulgation.

A law of a permanent character shall not become obligatory until the expiration of at least 12 clays from its promulgation. This disposition shall not affect the nominations or elective declarations made by the Assembly. 79. All projects of law which do not proceed from the initiation of the Court of Justice, but which have for their object any reform or abrogation of the dispositions contained in the Codes of the Republic, shall not be discussed until the opinion of that Supreme Power has been heard. Such opinion shall be issued during the existing Session or in that of the year following, according to the importance, urgency, or extent of the project. This disposition shall not apply to laws of a political, economical, or administrative nature.
TITLE

VII.-  Of the Executive Power.

80. The Executive Power shall be exercised by a citizen who will receive the title of President of the Republic, with the respective Ministers. He shall be appointed by the Salvadorean people; but when no person is elected by an absolute majority of votes, the Assembly shall elect him by public voting from amongst the three citizens who have obtained the highest number of votes. 81. There shall be a Vice-President elected in the same manner and form as the President, and who shall take the place of the latter in the event of death, resignation, removal, or any other impediment. In default of the Vice-President, one of the " Designados," in the order of his appointment, shall enter upon the exercise of the Executive Power. Should the Legislative Power be assembled and the appointment of the " Designados " expired, provision shall be made by the former for filling the vacancy. 82. The duration of the Presidential period shall be four years, and the citizen who may have exercised the Presidency in his own person may not be re-elected, or elected as Vice-President, until a similar period of time has expired. Such period shall commence and terminate on the 1st March of the year of its renewal, and may not be extended one day beyond. The citizen who may have exercised the Presidency during the last six months of the term referred to in the preceding paragraph shall not be capable of election as President for the period following. 83. To be President or Vice-President of the Republic it is necessary to be a Salvadorean by birth, of a secular condition, above 80 years of age, in the exercise of the rights of citizenship without 


having lost them during the five years preceding the election, and of well-known honour and ability. 84. The citizen who exercises the Presidency of the Republic shall be Commander-in-chief of the army. 85. There shall be, at the most, four Ministers of State for the dispatch of public business, amongst whom the President of the Republic, as appears convenient to him, shall distribute the different branches of the Administration. 86. To be a Minister of State it is necessary to be a native of, and resident in, the Republic, above 25 years of age, of well-known morality and capability, not to have lost the rights of citizenship during the five years preceding his appointment, and to be neither a contractor for public works or services nor to have claims pending in his own interest. Nevertheless, citizens who are natives of the other Central American Republics may become Ministers, provided they unite the other qualities prescribed in the preceding paragraph with five years' residence in Salvador. The office of Minister is incompatible with any other employment. 87. The Decrees, Resolutions, orders, and measures of the President of the Republic must be authorized and communicated by the Ministers m their respective branches, and, failing them, by the Under-Secretaries of State, who shall be under the same conditions as the former. Without these necessary proceedings the Decrees shall not be obeyed. 88. The Ministers shall assemble whenever they are called before the Assembly, and shall answer to the questions put to them ; but they must withdraw before any vote is taken. 89. The President of the Republic and his Ministers or Under-Secretaries are primarily responsible for the acts authorized by them. The Ministers and Under-Secretaries shall not be exempted from responsibility, even though they have withheld their vote. 90. The duties of the Executive are  (1.) To maintain intact the sovereignty and independence of the Republic, and the integrity of its territory; (2.) To preserve internal peace and tranquillity; (3.) To publish the law and C M use it to be executed; (4.) To present, by means of his Ministers, to the Legislative Body, within the eight days following the opening of the ordinary Sessions, a circumstantial statement and vouched account of the public administration for the year just expired, and the Estimates of expenses for the coming year, indicating the means of providing for thorn. If within the required term this obligation is not complied with, the Minister at fault shall be suspended from his functions, which suspension shall be immediately notified to the
Executive, in order that in the eight days following he may present through the Minister named for the purpose the account and Estimates above mentioned. If that should not be done, the President of the Republic shall be suspended, and the Executive Power shall be assumed by such person as shall be designated according to this Constitution, and such person shall within 20 days fulfil the duty referred to. In this case the Legislative Power shall be able to prorogue its Sessions for the same term ; (5.) To furnish to the Assembly the information required by it, but if it should be respecting matters of reserve a statement shall be made to that effect. If, after that, an explanation shall be considered necessary, it shall then be given, but not if it refers to plans of war, or political negotiations where secrecy is indispensable. In cases, however, where information is necessary in order to exact responsibility it shall on no account be refused, nor may the Executive keep back any documents after having been impeached before the Assembly; (6.) To render to the public officials of the Judicial Power the assistance that may be necessary in order to give effect to their measures. 91. The faculties of the Executive are  (1.) To appoint and accept the resignations of the Ministers of State, Governors of departments, officers of the army, and tho officials in the various branches of the Administration, with the exception of those whose appointment is reserved to another authority, or those who may be elected by the popular vote; (2.) To organize the army of the Republic, and to confer military rank from Captain inclusive downwards; (3.) To direct foreign affairs; to appoint and remove Ministers, and any other class of Diplomatic and Consular Agents; and to receive the Ministers of other nations ; (4.) To convoke the Legislative Body extraordinarily, with the advice of the Council of Ministers, whenever great interests of the nation demand it; summoning in such case the substitutes in place of those Deputies who may have died or who may be otherwise legally hindered from appearing; (5.) To indicate, previous to the assembling of the Legislative Power, the place where it should meet, whenever that appointed by law may not possess sufficient security or liberty for deliberative purposes; (6.) To direct war and to make peace, submitting the Treaty concluded to that end without delay to the Legislative Power for ratification; (7.) To conclude Treaties and other diplomatic arrangements, submitting them to the Legislature for ratification ;

(8.) To call into service such force above the permanent establishment as may be necessary to repel invasion or subdue rebellion; (9.) To establish and close ports, to establish maritime and inland custom-houses, and nationalize and register ships; (10.) To commute punishments, in view of information from and the favourable decision of the Supreme Court of Justice; (11.) To return, with observations, the Bills passed on by the Legislative Power, in conformity with Article 72 of this Constitution ; (12.) To issue regulations, decrees, and orders for facilitating and assuring the execution of the laws, and to decree internal regulations; (13.) To promote public education in all branches of human knowledge, decreeing Statutes, and adopting adequate methods; (14.) To decree the opening and improvement of the means of communication j all contracts, however, which may be concluded for the construction of quays and railways, or for the cutting of canals, shall have no effect so long as they have not been approved by the Legislative Power; (15.) To rehabilitate, during the recess of the Legislative Power, those who may have lost the rights of citizenship; but in no case shall this apply to those officials appointed by the Executive who may have lost their rights of citizenship in consequence of an offence committed in the exercise of their functions; (16.) To decree, in Council of Ministers, a state of siege during the recess of the Legislative Power, giving an account at its next meeting of the motives which led to it and of the acts which may have been executed, use being made of the faculties conferred by the laws. The undue prolongation of a state of siege shall be held to constitute treason against the nation ; (17.) To make use of the attributes numbered 27 and 28 of the Legislative Power during its recess, with the obligation of rendering a special account of proceedings at its next meeting. 92. The President is prohibited from quitting the territory of the Republic without leave, unless the necessities of war should require it. In any case he shall give the supreme command to the person designated by law. 98. All the decrees, orders, and resolutions issued by the Executive in violation of the faculties established by this Constitution shall be null and void, and shall not be obeyed, even though they may have been reserved for submission to the Legislative Body for approval.


1333

TITLE VIII Of the Judicial Power.

94. The Judicial Power shall be exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, Chambers of Third and Second Instances, and by the inferior Tribunals and Courts established by this Constitution. 95. In the capital of the Republic there shall be a Chamber of Third Instance composed of three Judges, and two Chambers of Second Instance, each composed of two Judges. The Chamber of Third Instance shall be presided over by the Judge-President, and each of the others by the Judge who was earliest elected. These three Chambers united under the direction of the President shall form the Supreme Court of Justice. In this Tribunal the majority of votes of the Judges composing it shall be sufficient for passing resolutions, and, in case of an equal number of votes, the vote of the "President shall be decisive. The functions of the President of the Supreme Court of Justice are-  To preside over the sessions of that Tribunal; To call for substantiation of the matters within its competence; and To exercise the other attributes determined by the proper organic law. In default or impediment of the President, the Judges shall exercise their functions in the order of their appointment. The senior Judge, or in his default the second, shall call for substantiation of the matters dealt with in the Third Instance. 96. A Chamber of Second Instance, composed of two Judges, shall be established in the city of San Miguel, another in Santa Ana, and a third in Cojutepeque. The first Judge elected in each shall exercise the functions of President. When the Legislative Power shall consider it convenient, one of the Chambers of Second Instance shall be transferred from the capital to the Department oi San Vicente. 97. There shall be 10 Substitute Judges; four for the Courts in the capital, and two for each of the others. These shall enter upon the exercise of their functions without distinction when they may be summoned according to law. 98. To be a Judge or Substitute Judge it is necessary  (1.) To be a native of the Republic or a. Central-American ,j naturalized therein';  (2.) To be in the exercise of citizenship without having lost it during the five years preceding the election; (3.) To be above 30 years of age; (4.) To be a barrister of the Republic; (5.) To be of well-known capability and morality;

1334
 (6.) To have exercised in Salvador the profession of lawyer for the space of four years, or to have served for two years in a Court of first Instance in the Republic. Nevertheless, section (1) shall include foreigners naturalized in Salvador, who may be Judges provided they have followed the career of lawyer in the Republic, and possess the other conditions established by this Article. 99. Persons who are related, to one another in the fourth civil degree of consanguinity, legitimate or illegitimate, or according to legitimate affinity, shall not be capable of becoming Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice or of one of the Chambers. 100. Judges and Substitute Judges may be eligible for re-election after two years' exercise of their functions. 101. The Chamber of Third Instance shall take cognizance of all matters within its competence according to law, The Chambers of Second Instance shall take cognizance in appeal of all matters, civil or criminal, in which judgment has been passed by the Judges of First Instance, and of others which may be within its competence. Their jurisdiction shall be as follows:  The Western section, the Departments of Santa Ana, Sousonate, and Ahuachapáu; The First Central Section, the Departments of San Salvador and Chalatenango; The Second Central Section, the Departments of La Libertad and La Paz; The Third Central Section, the Departments of Cuscatlán, Cabañas, and San Vicente; and The Eastern Section, the Departments of San Miguel, Gotera, La Union, and Usulután. In the event of new departments or districts being established, the Legislative Power shall determine the jurisdictions to which they shall belong. 102. The attributes of the Supreme Court of Justice are  (1.) To settle its internal regulation and that of the Chambers of Second and Third Instance; (2.) To appoint the Judge of Finance, Judges of First Instance, Court Prosecutor ("Fiscal de la Corte"), Officers of the Jury (" Fiscales del Jurado "), attorneys (" Procuradores ") on behalf of the poor of the capital, and the lesser officials connected with the Court; to accept their resignations, and to grant the leave they may solicit; (3.) To inspect the Tribunals and lesser Courts by means of a Judge, in order to correct the abuses that may be detected in the administration of justice; (4.) To make use of the right of initiative, bringing directly

before the notice of the Legislative Power the inconvenience of, and defects in, the laws which may have been noted in their application, and to indicate the reforms of which they may be susceptible ; (5.) To exercise the attributes described in this Constitution under the title "Responsibility of Public Officials;" (6.) To attend to the admission of barristers, to suspend them, with knowledge of the cause, from the exercise of their profession, and to withdraw their titles for venality, bribery, fraud, or notoriously immoral professional or private conduct. The same faculty may be exercised with respect to public notaries so far as may be applicable; (7.) To appoint co-Judges ("conjueces ") in the eases determined by law; (8.) To take cognizance of prize cases, and of any others not reserved for other authority; (9.) To adjust the differences which may arise amongst the Tribunals and lesser Courts of whatever nature they may be; (10.) To watch vigilantly over the prompt and complete administration of justice; (11.) To decree and render effective the appeal for assistance established by Article 37 of this Constitution in the cases and manner provided by law; (12.) To receive itself, or by means of the functionaries designated by it, the constitutional oath ("protesta") from the Judges of First Instance and other officials in its nomination, with reference to the appointments held by them. The same shall apply to the co-Judges who may be appointed to form a Court in the cases established by law; (13.) To draw up and present to the Legislative Body the annual Estimates of the expenses of the administration of justice. The other attributes of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be determined by law, 103. The attributes mentioned in sections 9, 10, 11, and 12 of the preceding Article are common to the Courts of Second Instance which are not held in the capital. These shall besides have the faculty to appoint a Public Prosecutor ("Fiscal"), attorney on behalf of the poor, "medicos forenses," and the other officials in their employment. They shall further receive the charges and information laid against those functionaries (with regard to which the Supreme Court shall have the power of declaring whether there is ground for the formation of a case), with the sole object of drawing up the corresponding information and giving account of it to the Supreme Court. 104. The power of trying and carrying into effect the consequent sentences shall exclusively belong to the Supreme Court, the Chambers of Second and Third Instance, and the lesser Courts. 105. There shall be Judges of First Instance in their own right, and substitutes, in all the chief towns of a department, to hear and judge in civil and criminal cases. The Supreme Court, in agreement with the Executive, shall, moreover, have the power to establish them in the towns of any district, when their creation shall be in the interests of the good administration of justice. They shall be appointed for two years, and shall be eligible for re-election. 106. To be a Judge of First Instance it is necessary to be a citizen domiciled for two years in Salvador, to be a lawyer of the Republic, of more than 21 years of age, of well-known morality and education, and nob to have lost the rights of citizenship during the two years preceding the appointment. 107. The Supreme Court, in agreement with the Executive, may establish, wherever may be necessary in the chief towns of a department or district, Judges of First Instance, who shall take cognizance separately of civil and criminal actions. 108. There shall be juries established by authority wherever there may be Judges of First Instance for all kinds of offences within the competency of the latter. A secondary law shall regulate this institution. 109. There shall be Justices of the Peace in every town of the Republic. Their number, mode of election, qualifications, and attributes shall be determined by law. 110. The quality of Magistrate and of Judge of First Instance is incompatible with salaried employment in other branches of the Administration. This disposition does not apply to the substitutes when they may not be in the exercise of their functions; but if they accept any employment incompatible with such functions, their appointment as substitutes shall thereby be cancelled.
TITLE

IX. Departmental and Local Government.

111. For political administration the territory of the Republic shall be divided into departments, the number and limits of which shall be fixed by law. In each of them there shall be a Governor in his own right and a substitute, both to be appointed by the Executive. 112. To be a Governor or substitute Governor it is necessary to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights without having lost them during the two years preceding the appointment, to be more than 25 years of age, and of honourable conduct and competent education.

113. The local government of towns (" pueblos ") shall be in the charge of Municipalities, popularly and directly elected by the citizens domiciled in each locality. Each Municipality shall be composed of a Mayor ("Alcalde"), a Recorder ("Sindico"), and two or more Aldermen (" Regidores ") in proportion to the population, in conformity with that which the law determines. 114. The Municipal Councils shall administer the moneys provided by the community, rendering an "account of their administration to the Tribunal established by law. 115. The attributes of Municipalities, which shall be purely financial and administrative, shall be determined by law, as also the conditions relating to the election of their members. 116. Besides the attributes conferred by law upon Municipalities, the Municipality of the chief town of a district shall have the power to commute, in conformity with the law, the penalties imposed for offences. 117. Municipalities in the exercise of their functions are completely independent, but they shall be held responsible for their actions, whether in their judicial capacity or individually, according to circumstances. The lesser officials of the Municipality shall be appointed by the latter without the intervention of any other authority. 118. The appointment and removal of civil police agents for security and order shall belong to the Municipality. In the capital, however, this faculty shall be exercised by the Executive, who shall have supreme control of this branch of service. A secondary law shall regulate it.
TITLE. X. Of the Elections.

119. The President of the Republic, the Vice-President, and the Deputies shall be popularly elected. 120. In these elections every citizen shall possess a direct vote. 121. The right to elect cannot be renounced, and its exercise is obligatory. 122. The right of suffrage shall be exercised by all Salvadorean citizens, and shall be regulated by a law. 123. The basis of the electoral system is the population, and the administrative division of the Republic into departments, districts, and cantons, shall serve for present purposes, and until an exact census shall be taken. 124. Each department shall elect three Deputies in their own right and two substitutes; but when the census referred to in the preceding Article has been taken, a Deputy and a substitute shall be elected for every 15,000 inhabitants.

125. No minister of any religious denomination shall obtain office by popular election. 126. A special Law shall regulate the manner in which the elections shall be carried out.
TITLE

XL Of the National Treasure.

127. The public treasure of the nation consists of  (1.) All property, movable and real; (2.) All moneys owing; (3.) All dues, taxes, and contributions at present paid, or which may hereafter be paid, by Salvadoreans and foreigners. 128. For the administration of the public funds there shall be a General Treasury for the collection of revenue and the issue of payments, and a superior Tribunal or principal office for the audit of accounts, which shall explain all matters of interest in the administration of the public Exchequer. 129. The General Treasury shall publish each month the state of the funds administered by it, and the Audit Department each year shall publish a general account of the revenue. 130. No moneys may be withdrawn from the Treasury, paid away, or subscribed, except for the purpose previously designated by law. The law shall determine the receipts and expenditure of the nation. If any funds, whatever may be their nature, should be exacted or expended contrary to the express tenour of the law, he who shall have ordered such exaction or expenditure shall be held responsible, and, unless he can prove his inculpability, shall make good the sums exacted. 131. The Executive shall not have the power to conclude contracts which affect national funds without previous publication of the proposal in the public official journal. Those cases are excepted in which the object is to provide for the necessities of war, or which from their nature can only be concluded by persons properly appointed.
TITLE

XII. -Of the Armed Force.

132. The armed force is instituted for the maintenance of the integrity of the Salvadorean territory, for the preservation and defence of national independence, for compelling the fulfilment of the laws, for the maintenance of public order, and for the carrying out of constitutional guarantees. 133. The armed force is essentially obedient, and has not the power to deliberate respecting matters connected with the military service.

1339

134. In case of war all able-bodied Salvadoreans between the ages of 18 and 50 years are soldiers. 135. The army of the Republic will be composed of the permanent force, the militia, and the national marine. Each town shall contribute to its formation in proportion to the number of its inhabitants. The selection of the individuals for the troops which shall compose the army shall be decided by lot. The permanent force in time of peace shall be fixed annually by the Legislature, and limited to such as may be strictly necessary for the protection of the ports, fortresses, and military storehouses. 136. Members of the army of the Republic who may be in actual service shall alone be subject to military jurisdiction for offences of a purely military character. The "fuero atractivo" remains abolished. In trials by courts-martial established by military law the selection of those with whom the decision shall rest shall in all cases be decided by lot from amongst the active officers, according to law. 137. The resolutions of the courts-martial shall admit of legal appeal to the Commandant-General of the Republic, or the proper expeditionary Chief in the field.
TITLE

XIII. Responsibility of Public Officials.

138. Every official, civil or military, on taking office shall promise, on his word of honour, to be faithful to the Republic, to fulfil the Constitution, and to cause it to be fulfilled, and to hold to its text, whatever laws, decrees, orders, or resolutions there may be to the contrary. He shall further promise to discharge the duties of his office with exactitude as far as he is able, and shall hold himself responsible in his person and property for any infraction. 139. The President of the Republic, or those persons who take his place, the Magistrates, the Ministers of State, or Under-Secretaries in charge of Departments of the Ministry, the Diplomatic Ministers, and the Governors of Departments, shall answer before the Assembly for express violation of the Constitution-, or any other offence committed in the exercise of their functions. The Assembly, having heard the prosecutor appointed by it, and the accused, if present, or some person specially appointed to defend him, shall declare whether or no there are grounds for action. If the first 

shall be the case, the matter shall be passed on to the Premier Chamber of Second Instance in the capital, in order that the corresponding sentence shall be pronounced; appeal from which shall be allowed to the Chamber of Third Instance. Any person shall have the right to lay information with reference to the- offences treated of in this Article, and shall be a party to the case if in possession of the qualities required by law. The Deputies shall be adjudged in similar cases by the Assembly, the same formalities being observed. 140. Common offences and misdemeanours committed by Representatives during the Sessions of the Legislative Body shall be adjudged in the manner established by Article 65 of this Constitution. If any other of the officials enumerated in the preceding Article should commit any common offence he shall be accused or denounced before the Assembly, which, observing the precedence laid down in that Article, shall declare whether or not there are grounds for action: and, if the first be the case, shall send the accused before the ordinary Tribunals. 141. The Comptrollers of the Audit Office, the Judge-General of Finance, Judges of First Instance, Justices of the Peace, and other functionaries determined by law, shall be judged by the Supreme Court of Justice for offences committed in the exercise of their functions. This trial shall be held with the object of sending the accused before the ordinary Tribunals in the event of there being grounds for action. For common offences and misdemeanours committed by the aforesaid officials, they shall be subject to the usual proceedings. 142. Whenever it may be declared by the Assembly or the Supreme Court that there are grounds for action, the accused shall be suspended from the exercise of his functions, and if from any motive whatsoever he should remain longer in his office he shall be guilty of the offence of usurpation, and no person shall obey him. If the definitive sentence results in his acquittal, he shall return to the exercise of his duties; in the contrary case, he shall remain deposed. 143. The decrees, acts, and sentences of the Assembly in these cases shall be fulfilled and executed without any need for confirmation or sanction. 144. When the Executive shall omit, in the accounts which he renders by his Ministers to the Legislature, any details, which should be included therein according to law, he shall be required by the Assembly to fulfil his duty in this respect. If he should not do so the dispositions of Article 90, section 4, of this Constitution shall be observed. 145. The prescription of official offences and misdemeanours

shall be reckoned from the time when the culpable functionary shall have ceased to exercise his functions. 146. The Representatives of the Constituent Assemblies shall, with regard to judgments, be on a. footing with the Deputies of the Legislature. The procedure in this case shall be decided by the. Constituent Assembly concerned, which shall appoint a Committee of its own members in order to draw up the corresponding information, and proceeding in all other respects in accordance with its internal regulations. 147. If on the closing of the Legislature it shall not have passed sentence in the cases before it, faculty shall be given to a Committee, composed of seven of its own members, with the object of settling such cases in conformity with the dispositions of this

Title.

TITLE

XIV. Reform of the Constitution and of constitutional Laws.

148. The reform of this Constitution shall only be agreed to by two-thirds of the votes of the Representatives elected to the Assembly, the Article or Articles to be reformed being specified. This resolution shall be published in the official journal, and shall be taken into consideration by the Legislature of the year following. If it then be ratified a Constituent Assembly shall be convoked, composed of three Representatives for each department, which shall then, if it considers right, decree the reforms. Nevertheless, it is established that in no case shall there be power to reform Articles 80, 81, and 82, which treat of the prohibition of the re-election of the President, Vice-President, and " Designados," and of the duration of the Presidential period. 149. The constitutional laws are those that relate to the press, the state of siege, the protective and the electoral system. These laws may be reformed by a Constituent Assembly, or even by the ordinary Legislature, by a vote of two-thirds of the members. In these cases, however, the reforms shall not have the force of law unless they receive the ratification of the ordinary Legislature of the year following by the same number of votes. 150. Any other method of reform differing from those established by the preceding Article is illegal and of no effect.
TITLE

XV. General Dispositions.

151. Salvador is considered a separate section of the Central American Republic, and reserves the right to come to an agreement with all or any of the States forming it for the organization of a


National Government when the circumstances are favourable and it is consistent with her interests, are also to form part of the great Latin-American Confederation. 152. The Constitution of the 6th December, 1883, is abrogated in every particular. To the Executive Power. Given in the National Palace at San Salvador, August 13, 1886.

National Palace, San Salvador, August 13,1886. Let it be published. FRANCISCO MENENDEZ, MANUEL DELGADO, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; Justice, and Religion. BALTASAR ESTTJPINIAN, Secretary of State for Home Department, Public Instruction, Works. ESTANISLAO P éREZ, Secretary of State for Finance, War, and Marine,

