CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

EQUATORIAL GUINEA
by ARIEL A. RODRIGUEZ, STEVEN A. HOLT and LINDA M. DOUGHERTY Translation by MAUREEN E. MUIRREAGUI

Issued April 1990

Oceana

Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4 © Copyright 1990 by Oceana Publications, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF EQUATORIAL GUINEA, conscious of our responsibility before God and History; Motivated by the will to safeguard our Total Independence, to guarantee and consolidate our national unity; Desirous of maintaining the authentic traditionally African spirit of family and communal organization, adapting it to the social and legal demands of modern life, Conscious that the charismatic authority of the traditional family is the basis of Equatoguinean society; By virtue of the free will of the people and founded firmly on the principles of social justice, solemnly reaffirmed by the rights and liberty of mankind defined in 1789 and hallowed by the Universal Declatation of the Rights of Man in 1948, WE ADOPT the following

FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF EQUATORIAL GUINEA
FIRST TITLE
BASIS OF THE INSTITUTIONALIZATION

ARTICLE 1 Equatorial Guinea is a sovereign, independent, democratic, unitary and reppublican State. Its Government is elective and accountable. Its sovereignty rests primarily and exclusively in the people, who exercise it through suffrage and from it emanates the public powers, that are exercised within the limits which this Fundamental Law and the others establish. No segment of the people or any individual can assume the exercise of the national sovereignty. ITS OFFICIAL NAME IS: REPUBLIC OF EQUATORIAL GUINEA The official language of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is Spanish. The aboriginal languages are recognized as integral to the national culture. The National Flag has green, white, and red horizontal stripes of equal width and a blue triangle on the end closest to the flag pole. The National Seal is emblazoned on the center of the flag. The National Seal is that which is established by Law.
THE MOTTO OF THE REPUBLIC IS: UNITY, PEACE AND JUSTICE.

The National Anthem is that which was sung by the People the day Independence was proclaimed on October 12, 1968.
ARTICLE 2 Supreme values of the Equatoguinean State are:

a) Respect for the human being, his dignity and liberty and his fundamental rights;
b) The protection of the family, basic building-block of Equatoguinean

society;

c) The protection of work, through which man develops his creative capacity to enrich the Nation-for social well-being; d) The promotion of the economic development of the Nation;

e) The promotion of the social and cultural development of the citizens who make up the population of Equatorial Guinea so that the ideals of Unity, Liberty and Justice may become a reality to them. ARTICLE 3 The primordial duties of the state are: to defend the sovereicnty of the Nation and to strengthen its unity; to insure the enforcement of the fundamental human rights and promote the economic, social, and cultural progress of the governed. ARTICLE 4 The Equatoguinean State reveres the principles of international law; proclaims the legal equality of the States, favors the peaceful resolution of controversies between nations and the fellowship of States with the aims of cooperation and the socio-economic integration of the peoples. ARTICLE 5 The Equatoguinean State reaffirms its adhesion to the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity, and the Movement of Non-Aligned Nations. ARTICLE 6 The Equatoguinean State condemns all forms of colonialism, neo-colonialism, and racial discrimination or segregation and recognizes the right of the Peoples to self-determination. ARTICLE 7 The Territory of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is made up of the continental zone called Rio Muni and the islands of Bioko, Annobon, Corisco, Elobey Grande, Elobey Chico, small adjacent islands, fluvial waters, territorial seas and continental shelf determined by the Law and air space which covers it. The State fully exercises its sovereignty over its territory and can explore and exploit, exclusively, all the resources and mineral wealth, minerals and hydrocarbons. The National Territory is inalienable and irreducible. The Law determines the extent of the territorial waters. ARTICLE 8 For administrative and economic purposes, the National Territory is divided into regions, provinces and municipalities.

12

SECOND TITLE NATIONALITY, CITIZENSHIP AND STATUS OF A FOREIGNER CHAPTER I - NATIONALITY ARTICLE 9 One Is Equatoguinean by birth or through naturalization. ARTICLE 10 Those who are Equatoguinean by birth are: a) Those born in the territory of Equatorial Guinea, with the exception of the children of foreigners who are in the service of their Government, and the children of resident aliens, all of whom, nevertheless, may opt for Equatoguinean citizenship. b) The children of an Equatoguinean father or mother, born abroad, any of these being themselves in the service of the Republic, who consider themselves, for all practical purposes, to have been born in the national territory. c) The children of an Equatoguinean father or mother born abroad.

ARTICLE 11 An Equatoguinean through naturalization is: a) The foreigner of legal age who has resided in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for at least ten consecutive years, who solicits and obtains naturalization papers and renounces his former nationality. b) Anyone who has been adopted by an Equatoguinean.

c) The child of an Equatoguinean woman married to a foreigner, who opts for Equatoguinean citizenship. d) Anyone who obtains the special favor of nationalization frum the Head of State. The Law regulates the procedures for the choice of the Equatoguinean nationality, non-issuance and revocation of naturalization papers and the formation of a registry for all these acts. ARTICLE 12 The foreign woman who marries an Equatoguinean man acquires her husband's nationality by the mere fact of the marriage, automatically losing her original nationality. ARTICLE 13 The Equatoguinean nationality is lost: a) b) Through the voluntary acquisition of another nationality. Through cancellation of the naturalization papers.

13

c) d)

By law revoking citizenship granted by favor. By other cases that the law examines.

Those who have lost Equatoguinean citizenship for any of the reasons decreed in this article, can only be reinstated by law. CHAPTER II - CITIZENSHIP ARTICLE 14 Equatoguinean citizenship is acquired at eighteen years of age. The status of citizenship grants the rights of active and passive suffrage and others which the Fundamental Law and other laws confer. ARTICLE 15 The rights of citizenship are suspended: a) Through civil interdiction;

b) By firm judicial sentence which imposes the punishment of privation of liberty and the corresponding loss of citizenship; c) In the other cases determined by law.

CHAPTER III - THE STATUS OF A FOREIGNER ARTICLE 16 In general, foreigners enjoy the same civil rights as Equatoguineans, with the limitations decreed in the Fundamental Law and other laws. Foreigners are excluded from exercising political rights. ARTICLE 17 It demands that foreigners The State foments and facilitates immigration. dedicate themselves to the activities which have been expressly authorized. ARTICLE 18 According to the law and International Agreements, the State guarantees the right of asylum to foreigners.

THIRD TITLE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE INDIVIDUAL CHAPTER I - RIGHTS OF THE INDIVIDUAL ARTICLE 19 The welfare of the individual is the supreme priority of the State. one is under the obligation to respect and protect it. Every-

14

ARTICLE 20 Each person enjoys the following rights: 1. Respect for life, personal integrity, and the right to full material and moral development. Torture is prohibited, as are all inhumane and degrading procedures. The death penalty may only be imposed on a crime determined by the law. The objective of the prison system is to achieve the reduction in number, rehabilitation and social re-incorporation of prisoners. The application of all judicial compulsion, as well as unlawful or arbitrary restriction of personal liberty, is prohibited. 2. To freely express thoughts, ideas and opinions by means of the written word and any other means of communication. To transmit or freely receive truthful information by any means of diffusion 3. To equality before the law.

All discrimination by reason of ethnic background, race, sex, language, religion, filiation, political or any other kind of views, social origin, economic position, or birth, is prohibited. A woman, whatever her marital status, has the same rights as a man in the civil, political, economic, social and cultural aspects of public, private, and family life. 4. To honor and a good reputation.

5. To freedom of conscience and religion, individual or collective, in public or private. People are free to practice their chosen religion. The only limitations are those prescribed by law to protect the national security, public order, morality, and fundamental human rights of the people. Religious practice has the obligation of respecting to the maximum, the good customs, the tradition and the culture of the African people of Equatorial Guinea. To the inviolability o' the home. No one can either enter or search it without the authorization of the person who lives in it or by judicial order, except in special cases, using methods established by law. 6. 7. To the inviolability and confidentiality of all oral and written communications, in whatever form, except those cases set forth in the law. 8. To the inviolability of private documents.

Notwithstanding, these may be examined exclusively for taxation reasons, or by court order when relevant within a process or in accordance with the law. 9. To travel freely throughout the national territory and to choose their residence.

15

The Equatoguineans enjoy the freedom to enter and leave Equatorial Guinea whenever they desire. With regard to foreigners, they are subject to that which is set forth by the law. 4 The law establishes the restrictions that are indispensable to protect national security. 10. To present complaints and petitions to the authorities, but under no circumstances in the name of the people, and to receive the appropriate attention or answers, consistent with the law. 11. The freedom to work, in every form, in accordance with the law.

No person can be compelled to perform unremunerated or forced labor, except in the cases set forth by the law. 12. To free association and assembly, without any limitations, except those established by the law. The associations or social organizations whose objectives or activities are contrary to the understanding and harmony of ethnic groups or that make any attempt against the spirit of national unity, are prohibited. 13. To a standard of living which insures health, nutrition, education, clothing, housing, medical care and necessary social services. 14. To participate in the cultural life of the community.

15. To not be deprived of one's liberty except by court order, the cases anticipated by the law and those of flagrant crimes. 16. To be informed about the cause or reasons for one's detention, as well as one's right for defense. 17. To be presumed innocent as long as guilt has not been legally proven.

18. To not be obligated to testify against oneself, one's spouse or relatives within the fourth degree of kinship or second by marriage, or compelled to testify under oath against oneself in matters which might cause one legal liability. 19. To not be tried or convicted twice for the same crime.

20. To not be convicted without prior trial nor deprived of the right of defense at any stage or level of the proceedings. 21. To not be punished for any act or mission, if, at the time of occurrence it were not categorized or punished as a penal violation, nor can a punishment not contemplated by the law be applied. In case of doubt, the penal statute is applied in the way which will be most favorable to the defendant. ARTICLE 21 To the extent that they are applicable, the fundamental rights also apply to companies.

16

ARTICLE 22 The enumeration of the fundamental rights recognized in this Chapter does not exclude the others which are guaranteed by the Fundamental Law, nor others of a similar nature and which are derived from the dignity of man, from the principle of the sovereignty of the people or of the social and democratic legal State and the republican form of government. CHAPTER II - POLITICAL RIGHTS ARTICLE 23 The Equatoguinean citizens enjoy the right to elect and be elected; to be consulted in the cases set forth in the Fundamental Law and of position and public functions under the conditions determined by the law. ARTICLE 24 Suffrage is universal, equal, direct, secret and compulsory for all Equatoguinean citizens. ARTICLE 25 A system of popular consultation is established in cases provided for in this Fundamental Law. The decision adopted in this matter is unobjectionable. ARTICLE 26 The performance of public office is a service to the Equatoguinean Nation. No authority remains exempt from responsibility in the discharge of his duties. The public officials are simple depositaries of the authority and can only carry. out those acts expressly authorized by the Juridiciary. ARTICLE 27 In no case is the extradition of an Equatoguinean permitted; his trial is subject to the laws of the Nation. ARTICLE 28 The reasons for the suspension of the exercise of political rights, just as the cases and form in which they can be regained, are established by law. CHAPTER III - DUTIES ARTICLE 29 All Equatoguineans have the obligation to honor the Fatherland, defend its sovereignty, the territorial integrity, the national unity, to contribute toward preserving the national security and the essential values of the Equatoguinean tradition and to safeguard and protect the national interests. ARTICLE 30 Military service is obligatory.

17

ARTICLE 31 Every Equatoguinean has the obligation to live peacefully, to respect the rights of others and to contribute to the formation of a just, fraternal, and unified society. ARTICLE 32 All the inhabitants of the Republic owe respect to Equatorial Guinea and its national standards, to the Head of State, Government and the rest of legally constituted institutions. ARTICLE 33 Any act which is an attempt against the security of the State, the territorial integrity or the national unity is severely penalized, according to the law. ARTICLE 34 Every citizen has the obligation to respect, obey and defend the Fundamental Law and the juridical edict of the Nation. ARTICLE 35 All the citizens cortribute to the general well-being and to their own personal fulfillment through their work as a personal and social duty. ARTICLE 36 Every citizen has the obligation to pay the corresponding taxes and to support the assessments levied by the law for the support of the public burden. ARTICLE 37 The duties stated in this Chapter do not exclude the rest which the Fundamental Law imposes nor others of a similar nature which are derived from the safeguarding of the common good. CHAPTER IV - THE CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES ARTICLE 38 The right of habeas corpus or of personal presence is recognized. Every aggrieved person or anyone acting on his behalf, has the right to further it when he finds himself illegally jailed, detained, restrained in any way in the enjoyment of his personal freedom or when during his arrest or lawful imprisonment he is subject to torments, tortures, oppression or any coercion, restriction, or unnecessary hardship for his personal safety or for the order of the detention center. The courts, while declaring the appeal process to be in motion, must order the restoration of liberty, that the oppression be stopped, or to end the coercion to which he has been subjected. ARTICLE 39 The right of asylum is recognized.

18

Every wronged person, or anyone acting on his behalf, has the right to resort to presenting a petition to the court so that the possession or use of the rights which this Fundamental Law establishes, be maintained and restored. In the same way, he can present a petition to have it declared that a resolution, action or deed of authority, does not obligate the petitioner, nor is it meant to violate, diminish, or tergiversate any of the constitutional rights. ARTICLE 40 The unconstitutionality of the laws, decree-laws, rules and regulations-can be declared because of defects in form or content, in accordance with this Fundamental Law. A law regulates the form and the requirements for the exercise of these recourses. The same law determines the appropriate agencies before which they can be presented.

FOURTH TITLE THE FAMILY - General Principles ARTICLE 41 The State protects the family as the fundamental building-block of society. It insures the moral, cultural, and economic Conditions which will favor the attainment of its objectives. It protects equally all kinds of marriages, celebrated in accordance with the law, motherhood and the family property. The not-attachable and inalienable family patrimony is recognized to the degree and under the conditions which the law establishes. ARTICLE 42 The State protects the child from its conception and helps the minor so that he can develop normally and with security for his moral, mental and physical integrity, just as in his home life. ARTICLE 43 The State favors responsible parenthood and the appropriate education for the betterment of the family.

FIFTH TITLE THE EDUCATION AND CULTURE - General Principles ARTICLE 44 Education is a primordial obligation of the State. The State guarantees the education of all the inhabitants of Equatorial Guinea, without any discrimination. ARTICLE 45 The State formulates and carries out plans to eradicate illiteracy.

19

ARTICLE 46 The general, basic state education, in all its forms, is compulsory and free. ARTICLE 47 The State acknowledges the parents' right to give their children the education that they can. ARTICLE 48 The State guarantees to every person, legally constituted private entity or religious community, the right to establish schools provided that they adhere to the official pedagogical plan. ARTICLE 49 The official education permits the free choice of programs of religious training, based on the freedom of conscience and religion which this Fundamental Law protects. ARTICLE 50 The officially accepted education cannot be oriented to propagate any partisan ideological tendency. ARTICLE 51 The State encourages and promotes culture, artistic creation, scientific and technological research and is vigilant in the conservation of the cultural patrimony and the artistic and historical wealth of the Nation.

SIXTH TITLE WORK, SOCIAL SECURITY AND BETTERMENT OF THE CITIZEN CHAPTER I - WORK ARTICLE 52 The State recognizes work as the principal source of abundance. Work is a right and a social obligation. It is up to the State to promote the economic and social conditions which will eliminate the poverty and misery and to insure equally to all the inhabitants of Equatorial Guinea the opportunity for a useful The occupation and to protect them against unemployment in any of its forms. law insures the worker respect for his dignity, a decent existence and a remuneration in accordance with the kind of work that is performed. ARTICLE 53 In all labor relations, any condition which will impede the exercise of the fundamental rights of the workers is prohibited. ARTICLE 54 Work, in its various forms. is an object of protection by the State, within a system of equality of treatment.

20

ARTICLE 55 The base wage is readjusted periodically by the State. The remuneration of the worker cannot be attached in its totality. ARTICLE 56 The State stimulates cultural progress, professional training and the technical improvement of the workers, to improve productivity, to impel the social well-being and to contribute to the development of the country, as well as to promote the creation of organizations socially oriented towards these ends. ARTICLE 57 In all cases, except those foreseen by the law, the payment of social benefits to the workers takes priority over any other obligation of the employer. ARTICLE 58

Public officials cannot declare a strike. Neither can the people who work in corporations or enterprises, whatever their nature, ends or function, which provide public utility services, the deprivation of which would cause serious damage to the health, the economy, provision of goods to the population, or to the national security. The labor and administrative conflicts are resolved consistent with the law.
CHAPTER II - SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE BETTERMENT OF THE CITIZEN ARTICLE 59 The State maintains and promotes a public system of social security for all the Equatoguineans, which guarantees the insured , person and his family the assistance and social loans in case of strike, illness, pregnancy, disability, old age or death. Social assistance is established and insured by the State, in accordance with the law. ARTICLE 60 The State recognizes the right to the protection of health. It is incumbent on the State to organize and to protect the public health, through the preventative measures of improvement of the environment of the cities and towns; to combat infant mortality; education about hygiene, physical and athletic; to apply programs intended to eliminate alcoholism and other toxicomanias; and to create the suitable infrastructures, mobilizing the different organizations in charge of carrying them out, in accordance with the law. ARTICLE 61 The State is vigilant over the production, quality, trade and consumption of food products. It controls the use of pharmaceutical and biological products. It likewise combats the illicit traffic of drugs and narcotic&. ARTICLE 62 The State insures the training and promotion of the woman for her integration into the active life and the development of the country.

21

ARTICLE 63 The State plans and programs the treatment, rehabilitation and integration of the physically and mentally handicapped. It gives them the specialized attention which they require and assists them in the use of the rights which this Fundamental Law grants to all the Equatoguinean citizens. ARTICLE 64 The labor and social security rights of all the Equatoguinean workers cannot be waived. SEVENTH TITLE THE ECONOMY AND PROPERTY CHAPTER I - THE ECONOMY

ARTICLE 65 The economic system of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is founded on the principle of the freedom of the market-place, enterprise, competition, and competence, with the intervention cf the State oriented toward the just distribution of the national wealth and revenue. The Liu promotes the economic system of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea. "ARTICLE 56 The State favors an economy of free trade, and acknowledges private and Through legal means, the State can reserve to the public sector public initiative. resources and essential services that because of their transcendency and magnitude can have economic and political effects, which make it necessary to orient them toward social interests. ARTICLE 67 The resources and services reserved for the public sector are: a) Minerals and hydrocarbons; 5) The services of the supplying of potable water and electricity to the cities and towns; c) d) e) The Services of

Mail

and Telecommunications; and

Radio Broadcasting and Television; Those which the law determines.

The State can delegate or associate itself with the private initiative for the development of any of the activities or services previously mentioned, in the manner and cases which the law decrees. ARTICLE 68 The State supports and encourages entrepreneurial activities. over, protects and controls the banking, exports and imports. It watches

22

ARTICLE 69 The State protects, guarantees and controls the investment of foreign capital which contributes to the development of the country ARTICLE 70 The State encourages the activities carried out in the priority sectors of the national economy by means of fiscal and credit policies, which, in each case. the law enacts. ARTICLE 71 The economy of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea functions through four basic sectors: 1. The public sector, made up of enterprises owned exclusively by the State, established principally for the exploitation of the resources and services enumerated in Article 67 of this Fundamental Law, just as for any other economic activity. 2. The sector of mixed economy, made up of enterprises of the public sector in association with private capital. The State prescribes for the regulation and development of this sector. 3. The cooperative sector, whose ownership and management belong to the community of persons who work there permanently. The State prescribes for the regulation and development of this sector. 4. The private sector, composed of enterprises whose ownership corresponds to one or various individuals or companies of private law and, in general, of enterprises which are not included in other sectors enumerated previously. ARTICLE 72 The State supports, guarantees, and stimulates the investment of national capital; encourages the private initiative of individuals or companies, nationals or foreigners, who establish businesses in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea. ARTICLE 73 The State promotes and organizes the programs of development of the population, above all agriculture and cattle and fishing, in the moral, cultural, economic and social. It also promotes the various sectors of development which contribute with their effective participation in said programs of the community. CHAPTER II - PROPERTY ARTICLE 74 The State recognizes ownership of a public and private nature. The right to private property or the ability of the private person to enjoy and to freely dispose of a thing or right without any limitation except those established by the law, is guaranteed and protected. The content of this right is delimited by its social function and in accordance with the laws.

23

The law determines the forms and manners of acquisition, use and loss of property. ARTICLE 75 Property is inviolable. Nobody can be deprived of his possessions and rights except for a justified reason of public utility or of social interest and after suitable compensation has been made. The law regulates the cases and ways of expropriation by force. ARTICLE 76 The State guarantees to the farmers the traditional ownership of the lands which they possess. ARTICLE 77 The State efficiently promotes the diverse forms of participation by the workers in the enterprises, through the acquisition of stocks on their behalf, in accordance with the law. ARTICLE 78 Property is governed exclusively by Equatoguinean laws. ARTICLE 79 The law, can for reasons of national interest, establish restrictions and special prohibitions for the acquisition, possession, development and transfer of determined property because of its nature, condition or location. ARTICLE 80 The State guarantees and protects copyright. The rights of authors and inventors to their respective works and creations, for the time and under the conditions which the law determines, are recognized. In the same way, it guarantees industrial and commercial names, brands, designs and models. The law regulates each of these rights. ARTICLE 31 The property of public domain, which everyone uses, private rights.

is

not the object of

The properties in the public domain are those which the law determines, and in all cases, the lands which are not found under the system of private property, the forestal woods, Oe mineral and hydrocarbon resources, the sources of energy, the fluvial waters, the territorial waters and the continental shelf, as well as the artistic, cultural, archaeological possessions of the Nation. The law regulates the juridical system of the properties under public domain, inspiring itself in the principles of non-transferability, imprescriptibility and non-attachability, as well as its separation.

24

CHAPTER III - THE TAXATION AND FISCAL SYSTEM ARTICLE 22 The State, through the Taxation Law, inspired by the basic principles of equality, community and progressiveness, establishes the taxes, obligations, and financial levies, and the special circumstances that agree in each tax figure for its settlement. All the individuals or companies, natives or foreigners, resident in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea have the obligation to pay the taxes imposed by the law. ARTICLE 23 Taxes and other charges can only be established, modified or exempted through legislative action of the appropriate agency in accordance with this Fundamental

The Taxation laws do not have retroactive effects. CHAPTER IV ARTICLE 24 All the earnings and expenditures of the State of each financial practice must be evaluated and recorded in the budget. It is incumbent on the Government to prepare the General Budget of the State in accordance with this Fundamental Law. The law regulates the management of the General Cudgets of the State. GENERAL BUDGET OF THC STATE

CHAPTER V - THE MONETARY SYSTEM ARTICLE 85 The State exercises the exclusive authority to issue bills and coins, through the Bank of Equatorial Guinea, executor of its monetary policy. ARTICLE 86 The monetary unit of Equatorial Guinea is the Epkuele.The method of establis h 14 the Government. -ingtsraeofxchng teiraonlmketisfxd The monetary policy of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is determined by the Government.

EIGHTH TITLE THE AGENCIES OF THE STATE - General Principles ARTICLE 87 the The State exercises its functions through the President of the Council of State, the Council of M inisters, the House of Representatives of the People, the Judiciary, the National Council for Economic and Social Development and other Agencies which are established, consistent with this Fundamental Law.

25

The regions, provinces, and municipalities are dependencies of the Central Administration to help in the fulfillment of the functions and the objectives of the State and they are governed by the agencies which the law determines. CHAPTER I - THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC ARTICLE C8 The President of the Republic is Head of State, Head of Government, embodies the national unity and represents the Nation. ARTICLE 89 The President of the Republic is elected by universal direct and secret suffrage, by a majority of more than one half of the validly cast votes. The Electoral Law establishes the conditions and circumstances cf the electoral process. ARTICLE 90 To be President of the Republic requires: a)
5)

To be of Equatoguinean origin; To enjoy the right- of citizenship; Not to be more than 75 years of age:
To know how to interpret the Fundamental Law;

c)
d)

e) f) mental Law.

To have lived in the Country for the preceeding ten years. To have been elected in conformance with Article 89 of this Funda-

ARTICLE 91 The President of the Republic is elected for a period of seven years. He can be re-elected. The presidential elections are convoked the seventh year of the mandate of the President of the Republic to a date fixed by decree, resolved in the Council of Ministers, heard in Council of State. The elections take place forty - five days before the expiration of the powers of the President in office or, at the latest within the sixty days following said date. ARTICLE 92 The President of the Republic determines and directs the general policy of the Nation and his authority extends to all the territory, in everything pertaining to the maintenance of domestic public order and to the security of the State abroad, consequently: a) To insure the strict application of this Fundamental Law, the normal functioning of the public powers and the continuity of the State.

26

b) He sanctions, promulgates, or vetoes the drafts of laws approved by the House of the Representatives of the People; to carry out the Laws and to have carried out; prescribes the rules and regulations for the best execution of the laws; to issue the decrees and orders that toward this end and to this extent obligates the Government and Administration of the State to be useful. c) He prescribes the decree-laws which

will

be necessary for the

ful-

fillment of the lofty objectives.

d) He is the Supreme Chief of the National Armed Forces and of the Security of the State. e) f) He declares war and makes peace. He designates and dismisses freely to the members of the Government.

g) He names and dismisses the civil and military officials of the State in accordance with the law. Thts jurisdiction can be discretionarily delegated to a Prime Minister. h) He represents Equatorial Guinea in international relations; receives and authorizes the Ambassadors and authorizes the Consuls in the performance of their duties. i) j) k) He negotiates and ratifies the international agreements and treaties. He confers the titles, honors and decorations of the State. He exercises the right of Mercy.

1) He convenes and presides over the Councils of Ministers. m) He exercises regulatory power

n) He is the Supreme Holder of the Executive Power. He creates, organizes, and directs the administrative services necessary for the fulfillment of his mission. o) Law. p) q) r) on him. ARTICLE 93 In case of imminent danger, the President of the Republic can suspend the rights and guarantees established in the Third Title of this Fundamental Law and take exceptional measures to safeguard the independence of the Nation, the territorial integrity, the national unity, the institutions of the Republic and the regular functioning of the public authorities, informing the Nation through a message. He convokes the referendum. He approves the national plans for development. He exercises the other duties and prerogatives which the laws confer He convokes the general elections provided for in this Fundamental

27

ARTICLE 94 The President of the Republic can, when the circumstances demand it, declare a state of siege, a state of alert, or a state of emergency, in all or parts of the national territory. ARTICLE 95 The President of the Republic ceases in his functions and leaves the office vacant by: a) b) c) d) Resignation accepted by the Council of State. Physical or mental incapacity, declared by the Council of State. Completion of the period for which he was elected. Death.

ARTICLE 96 In case of his temporary absence, the functions of the President of the Republic, excluding those foreseen in Articles 92-o, 92-p, 93, 94, 120, 121, and 126, are exercised provisionally by a Body made up of the Prime Minister, the President of the House of the Representatives of the People, the President of the Supreme Court of Justice, on Member of the Council of State and the Minister of National Defense. Said Body makes its decisions by a three-fourths majority vote. During the temporary absence to which this article refers, the form in which the Government is constituted cannot be modified.

ARTICLE 97 In case of accepted resignation, declared incapacity or death of the President of the Republic, the President of the Council of State substitutes for him provisionally. Within the maximun time of forty-five days, the acting President will convoke elections to cover the vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic if no more than four years have passed since the start of the mandate of the preceding President, in which case he continues to discharge the duties assumed provisionally until the expiration of the term. The President elected in accordance with that which is decreed in the preceding paragraph finishes his mandate on the date on which would have ended that of the substituted President.

ARTICLE 98 Within the maximum period of thirty days of the results of the elections having been proclaimed, the President-elect takes the oath of loyalty to the Fundamental Law and assumes office in the presence of a Court of Honor made up of the President of the Council of State, Members of the Council of State, The Executive Board of the House of the Representatives of the People and the Supreme Court of Justice in Full.

28

CHAPTER II - THE COUNCIL OF STATE ARTICLE 99
The Council of State is the maximum professional association of the State, which guarantees the sacred values of the Fatherland, the national sovereignty, the territorial integrity, the national unity, the peace, the justice and the exercise of the democratic liberties.

ARTICLE 100
The Council of State exercises the high discharge of fiscal duties for the democratic development of the political and social life of Equatorial Guinea and likewise maintains constant vigilance over the constitutionality of the laws.

ARTICLE 101
The Council of State is comprised of eleven members, whose mandate is for five years, and has as ex officio members the President of the House of the Representatives of the People, the President of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Minister of National Defense. The designation of the Vice-President as well as the rest of the members of the Council of State corresponds to the President of the Republic. ARTICLE 102 It is incumbent on the Council of State: a) To approve the candidacies for the general elections for the Presidency of the republic which this Fundamental Law establishes. It is also informed about the date on which these elections should take place. h) To declare the validity of the general elections and to proclaim the It likewise resolves any case of opposition concerning the result of the same. outcome of these elections; c) 'o accept or reject, depending on how the resignation of the President of the Republic, proceeds; d) To declare the physical and mental incapacity which contribute legal impediments to the discharge of the functions of the President of the Republic; e) To pass judgment on the constitutionality of the laws qualified as institutional, before their promulgation; f) To pass judgment of a binding nature on the constitutional legality of the regulatory development of the institutional laws; g) To report on the legality of the regulatory development of the other laws, giving the general and obligatory interpretation concerning the same, in case of necessity; h) To give legal advice to the Government with regard to matters submitted to it.

29

The Council of State can, in case of necessity, and in a purely advisory capacity, invite one or several international experts either from designated friendly countries, at their request, through the International Institutions which employ them or by their native countries, to assist it with its work. ARTICLE 103 In case of the absence of the President of the Council of State, for whatever reason, the Vice-President takes his place. An organic by-lax. determines the functioning and the internal organization of the Council of State. CHAPTER III - THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS ARTICLE 104 For the exercise of the political and administrative function, the President of the Republic is served by a Council of Ministers. The Ministers assembled under the presidency of the President of the Republic, form the Council of Ministers. ARTICLE 105 The Council of Ministers is the agency which determines the general policy of the Nation, insures the application of the laws, exercises the regulatory power and assists the President of the Republic on a permanent basis in political and administrative matters. The law determines the number of Ministers, their denominations and the capacities attributed to each one. ARTICLE 106 The direction, management and administration of the public services is entrusted to the Ministers in the matters which concern the Departments of their respective Divisions. ARTICLE 107 In addition to the cases clearly defined in the Fundamental Law and others which are determined by the other laws, the Council of Ministers has the following attributes: a) To direct the general policy of the Nation; organizing and carrying out the economic, cultural, scientific and social activities. b) To present the plans for economic-social development of the State and, once approved by the House of the Representatives of the People and authorized by the President of the Republic, to organize, direct, and control their execution. c) To prepare the plan for the Budgetary Law of the Nation, and once approved by the House of the Representatives of the People and authorized by the President of the Republic, to watch for its execution; d) To determine the monetary policy and to adopt measures to protect and strengthen the monetary and financial system of the Nation:

30

e) To make the drafts of the laws and submit them for the approval of the House of the Representatives of the People or to the judgment of the Council of State, according to how it proceeds; f) To grant territorial asylum;

g) To direct the administration of the State, coordinating and controlling the different Departments which comprise it; h) To carry out the laws, decree-laws, reso l utions and orders signed by the President of the Republic; i) To create the commissions necessary for the effective fulfillment of the attributes which are conferred on it. ARTICLE 108 The President of the Republic can appoint and freely dismiss a Prime Minister and Vice-Prime Ministers among the Ministers of Government. They are responsible before the President of the Republic for the duties which are delegated to them for the best fulfillment of the functions which are imputed to them by this Fundamental Law. ARTICLE 109 In his function as Head of Government, the President of the Republic is assisted by a Prime Minister, who independently from other duties which are delegated to him, engages in the administrative coordination, oversees the smooth functioning of the public services and insures the carrying out of the programs of the Government. He presides over the inter-ministerial commissions entrusted to advise on the matters to be submitted to the Council cf Ministers. He presents to the House of the Representatives of the People, the drafts of laws adopted by the Government. The Prime Minister is replaced, in case of absence, by the First VicePrime Minister. ARTICLE 110 With exceptional cause, and by virtue of a clear conferred power, the Prime Minister can substitute for the President of the Republic in presiding over the Council of Ministers, with a fixed order of the day. ARTICLE 111 The. President of the Republic, as Head of Government, can assume the direct responsibility of one or various Ministers or ministerial sectors. In this case, he can clearly delegate one or several members of the Government to replace him. ARTICLE 112 All members of the Government are personally responsible before the President of the Republic and before the law for the actions which they perform in the exercise of their duties.

31

The members of the Government, with the Head of Government, are: a) b) c) d) e) The Prime Minister, The Vice-Prime Ministers, The Ministers, The Vice Ministers and, The Secretaries of State.

ARTICLE 113 Before entering into the function, the Prime Minister and the other Members of the Government, give oaths of loyalty in the presence of the President of the Republic, to his person, and to this Fundamental Law. ARTICLE 114 The Council of Ministers in full or the Ministers separately, can attend with authority to speak, but without vote to the debates of the House of the Representatives of the People. They also attend when they are invited to advise.

CHAPTER IV - THE HOUSE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PEOPLE ARTICLE 115
The power to legislate dwells in the people, who delegate it, by means of suffrage, in the House of the Representatives of the People, which performs within the frame of the capacities which this Fundamental Law determines.

ARTICLE 116 The House of the Representatives of the People consists of a minimum of 45 and a maximum of 60 Representatives of the People who are elected for five years, through universal suffrage, direct and secret, in general elections which are held on only one day, and within the sixty days before the termination of the mandate. The Electoral Law determines the electoral conditions and the representativve proportionality, regulates the procedure for the holding of the elections and sets the date on which the elected candidates must assume their offices, just as the conditions of eligibility and the management of the inconsistencies. ARTICLE 117 The members of the House of the Representatives of the People are not bound by imperative mandate. ARTICLE 118 The Representatives of the People have a right to amendment and to the The vote is personal.

vote.

32

ARTICLE 119 The duties of the House or the Representatives of the People are the following: a) To choose from among its members the President, Vice-President and its Executive Board; h) To prescribe their own by-laws; c) To approve the revisions presented by the Government fo r the reform of the Fundamental Law; d) the State; e) To approve the taxation laws and to abolish the taxes and other assessments in suitable cases; f) To approve the regulations of weights and measures: To approve the 3udgets of revenues, expenditures or investments of

g) To specify the fundamentals of Civil Law, Commercial, Procedural, Administrative, Penal and Labor; h) To regulate the fundamental rights and the public freedoms;

i) To approve the International Treaties and submit them to ratification by the President of the Republic; j) To authorize the President of the Republic to prescribe decree-laws concerning matters of legal exception, becuase of urgent need; k) To summon the Ministers, on matters of their competency and make them appear before the House in order to give explanations about their general policy or about a specific matter placed under their responsibility; 1) To appoint in its innermost recess, commissions in order to investigate any matter in which the public interest may have been compromised. These commissions have free access to all the departments of the Administration, excepting the secrets of the State. ARTICLE 120 The President of the Republic, after consulting with the Government, with the Council of State and the Executive Board of the House of the Representatives of the People, can submit to popular consultation any matter which seems to require direct consultation with the people. The plan adopted in this manner is promulgated by the President of the Republic in the term which Article 137 of this Fundamental Law establishes. ARTICLE 121 The President of the Republic, in Council of Ministers, the Council of State heard, can order the dissolution of the House of the Representatives of the If the dissolution had People and order the call for extraordinary elections. been produced during the last year of the period for which they were elected, the election of the Representatives of the People takes place at the opportunity which corresponds to Article 116 of the Fundamental Law.

33

ARTICLE 122 The vacant positions which are produced in the House of the Representatives of the People are filled immediately when, as a consequence of those, the normal functioning of the same are not possible. The law regulates the procedure to fill said positions. ARTICLE 123 No Representative can be persecuted nor detained for the opinions expressed in the exercise of his duties in the House or concerned with this. To detain or indict a Representative of the People an essential requirement is the obtainment of the timely permission from the Executive Board of the House of the Representatives of the People, except in cases of flagrante delicto. ARTICLE 124 The House of the Representatives of the People meets in joint session as a matter of law, the first working day after 30 days have elapsed from the promulgation of the results of the general elections. The order of the day of the first session is devoted exclusively to the election of its President and its Executive Board excepting that the Government solicits the inclusion of urgent matters in the same. ARTICLE 125 The date of the opening of each period of sessions is determined by the Executive Board of the House, attended by the appearance of the President of the Republic. The opening and closure of each period of the sessions, the ordinary as well as the extraordinary, are decided by decree of the President of the Republic, in agreement with the Executive Board of the House of Representativ es of the People. ARTICLE 126 The sessions of the House of the Representatives of the People are public. During the period of sessions, an integral part of the debates is facilitated daily for its publication in the national media. ARTICLE 127 By request of the Government or of three-fourths of the Representatives of the People, the House can hold closed-door sessions for determinate reasons of confidentiality or of security, previously confirmed in some projects submitted for its study. ARTICLE 128 The House of the Representatives of the People meets two times a year, once in the month of March and another in the month of September, for a maximum time of two months period of sessions. Both periods of sessions open the second Monday of the respective month. This date may be extended to the following day, if the fixed one is a holiday.

34

ARTICLE 129 Presented by the Government in the course of the second period of sessions, the House of the Representatives of the People votes on the General Budget of the State. In case the General Budget has not been approved before the completion of the current fiscal year, the President of the Republic, is empowered to extend the life of the Budgetary Law of the previous year by twelve parts until the approval of the new law. By request of the Government, the House of the Representatives of the People, is convoked after ten days in extraordinary session for a new deliberation. In case of disagreement at the end of this last session, the Budgetary Law is definitively enacted by the President of the Republic, by decree-law. ARTICLE 130 The House of the Representatives of the People can meet in extraordinary sessions to discuss a specified agenda, by request of the President of the Republic or by petition of the three fourths of its members. To hold sessions requires the presence of half plus one of the Representatives of the People, and the resolutions are taken by simple majority of votes. ARTICLE 131 The legislative initiative corresponds to the President of the Republic in Council of Ministers and to the Representatives of the People, provided that his proposals be signed by three-fourths of the members of the House. The proposals of laws emanating from the Representatives of the People, are entrusted to the Executive Board of the House and previously transmitted to the Government for study. ARTICLE 132 Aside from the cases clearly foreseen in other articles of this Fundamental Law, the following are matters reserved from the Law: a) The regulation of the exercise of the rights and obligations of the governed; b) The fundamental principles of the general organization of the Armed Forces and of the Security of the State and the National Defense; c) The forced expropriation of property with a view to its public or private usefulness; d) The citizenship, the status and the capability of the persons; matrimonial rules and the offspring; the

e) The judicial organization; the creation of new agencies with jurisdiction and the statute of the magistrates; f) The organization of the functions of the public ministries; the the determination of the crimes just as the punishments which are applicable; of pardon; penal process; the penitentiary system; the amnesty and the g) h) The system of the associations; The system to issue and to mint the currency,

35

i) The general, administrative, and financial organization; J) The conditions of the participation of the State in the enterprises of mixed economy and its action in those companies; k) The management of public patrimony; 1) The system of freedom of the persons, of property, of the concessions, of the real rights and of the civil and commercial obligations; m) n) The loans and financial obligations of the State; The program of economic and social action;

o) The fundamental principles of education, of culture, of the right to work and of social security. ARTICLE 133 Before the promulgation of a law, the President of the Republic through his own initiative, can request that the texts of the laws be submitted to a second or third reading in the House of the Representatives of the People. ARTICLE 134 The Government, can, in case of necessity, ask the House of the Representatives of the People for authorization to decide by decree-law, during a limited period, on the matters of legal exception. These decree-laws go into effect starting from the moment of their publication and cannot be revoked except by law. A copy of each decree-law is sent to the House of the Representatives of the People for information. ARTICLE 135 The President of the Republic can officially address the House of the Representatives of the People or send it messages to be read. These communications cannot give rise to any debate in his presence, except if the session is dedicated especially to this end. ARTICLE 136 The order of the day of the House of the Representatives of the People is determined by its Executive Board. In case of conflict over the admissibility of a legislative text, the President of the Republic, who decides on it, is consulted. ARTICLE 137 The President of the Republic promulgates the laws approved by the House of the Representatives of the People in fifteen days' time, counting from its approval by the same.

CHAPTER V - THE POWER OF THE JUDICIARY AND OF THE GOVERNMENT ATTORNEY'S OFFICE ARTICLE 138 The Judiciary exercises the jurisdictional function of the State.

36

The justice emanates from the people and is administered in the name of the Head of State by the Judges and Magistrates making up the Judiciary and who determine the laws. The organic law of the Judiciary determines the organization and attributes of the Courts of Justice and Tribunals which are necessary for the prompt and thorough administration of justice. The same law regulates the requirements which the Judges and Magistrates must fulfill. ARTICLE 139 The following constitute sources of the law: a) b) The written norms The unwritten norms.

The unwritten norms serve to make up, delimit or interpret OP written norms and have rank of the norm which they delimit or interpret. When it tries to make up for the absence of a written norm, the unwritten norm has rank of law. a) Written sources of Law by their order are: First, the Fundamental Law, Second, the International Treaties, Third, the laws and the decree-laws, Fourth, the by-laws. b) Unwritten sources are: First, the customs or the traditional practices, Second, the general principles of law, and Third, the jurisprudence. ARTICLE 140 In the exercise of their duties, the members making up the Judiciary, are subjected only to the law. ARTICLE 141 The Head of State is the Prime Magistrate of the Nation and Covenant of the independence of the jurisdictional function. ARTICLE 142 The principle of jurisdictional unity is the basis of the organization and functioning of the tribunals. The law regulates the exercise of the military jurisdiction.

37

ARTICLE 143 The exercise of the jurisdictional power in all types of proceedings, judging, and having the judgments carried out, corresponds exclusively to the Courts of Justice and Tribunals determined by the laws.. ARTICLE 144 The trials are public, except the cases which the law indicates but deliberates in secret. ARTICLE 145 The Supreme Court of Justice is the jurisdictional body in all the orders, with jurisdiction in all the Republic, except that disposed of in matters of constitutional guarantees. It is made up of one President and twelve Members whose attributes come specified by the law. In addition to the jurisdictional attributes which are determined by the law, the Supreme Court of Justice likewise performs the advisory functions on juridicaladministrative matters which are submitted to it by the Government and the Council of State. ARTICLE 146 In the administration of justice any act of bias or discrimination, duly verified, for tribal, sectarian or racial reasons is punishable and punished by the law. ARTICLE 147 The President of the Supreme Court and its component members are freely appointed by the President of the Republic for a period of five years. They are revocable and accountable. The Judges and Magistrates belonging to the judicial career, just as the officials of the administration of justice in general, and not included in Article 149 of this Fundamental Law, are appointed in accordance with the law. ARTICLE 148 The General Government Attorney's Office of the Republic has as its principal mission, to watch over the strict fulfillment of the Fundamental Law, the laws and other legal provisions through all the agencies of the State, the regions, the provinces and the municipalities, as well as the citizens and the foreign , residents in the country. The General Government Attorney's Office carries out the duty of technical advisory agency of the Council of State. ARTICLE 149 The General Government Attorney's Office of the Republic and the General Adjunct District Attorneys are appointed and dismissed freely by the President of the Republic. The General Government Attorney's Office of the Republic is ruled by an organic statute.

38

CHAPTER VI - THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE 150 The National Council for the Economic and Social Development is the technical consultative agency on the economic and social plans and programs, as well as all legislative power or regulations and by-laws of a fiscal nature; it can likewise proceed on the basis of a market economy to analyze the problems of economic and social development of Equatorial Guinea. It gives its judgment and submits its conclusions concerning all the matters related to these subjects placed for their study by the President of the Republic, the Council of State, the House of the Representatives of the People and other organizations of the Administration of the State. It pursues the execution of the decisions of the Government relative to the economic and social organization. ARTICLE 151 The National Council for the Economic and Social Development is made up of technical experts, specialists, and those responsible in matters of eoonomic and social development. It is composed of thirty members who are designated by the President of the Republic for a period of five years. The internal organization and the means for the functioning of the National Council for Economic and Social Development are fixed by law.

NINTH TITLE THE ARMED FORCES AND THE SECURITY OF THE STATE AND THE NATIONAL DEFENSE CHAPTER I - THE ARMED FORCES AND THE STATE SECURITY ARM ARTICLE 152 The Armed Forces and the State Security arm constitute the national institution that has the paramount mission to maintain national independence and territorial integrity, to defend national soverignity, to preserve national unity, to safeguard the supreme values of the Nation, the security of the State, public order and the internal functioning of public powers in conformity with that established in this Fundamental Law. The Armed Forces and the Security of the State are directed by their own by-laws, approved by the laws. CHAPTER II - THE NATIONAL DEFENSE ARTICLE 153 The National Defense is the organization and co-partnership of all the existing Forces and moral and material resources of the Nation when the circumstances require it. An organic by-law determines the National Defense.

39

TENTH TITLE THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATION CHAPTER I - THE LOCAL CORPORATIONS ARTICLE 154 The Local Corporations are institutions with their own juridical status, representing the Government and the administration of the regions, provinces and municipalities. They promote the plans and programs for economic and social development of their respective territories in accordance with the law. The Local Corporations assist the realization of the functions and ends of the State which establishes the Fundamental Law, and they cannot be created, modified nor eliminated, other than by law . An ordinary law determines the competency, function, jurisdiction and composition of the Local Corporations. ARTICLE 155 The Town Councils are lesser administrative and economic entities intended to exercise the plans for the promotion and diversification of agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and programs concerned with the development of the rural sector within its territorial jurisdiction. The Town Councils exercise oversight with respect to matters peculiar to the special African culture of the people of Equatorial Guinea to the end of maintaining the authentic traditional spirit of family organization, adapting it to the new social and juridicial structures of modern life. The functioning, competency and composition of the Town Councils are defined by law.

ELEVENTH TITLE THE REFORM OF THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW ARTICLE 156 Following the preliminary favorable opinion of the Council of State and by an affirmative vote of three-fourths of its members, the House of the Representatives of the People can approve the partial amendments proposed by the Government for the reform of this Fundamental Law. ARTICLE 157 The republican and democratic system of the Sovereign State of Equatorial Guinea, the national unity and the territorial integrity cannot be the object of any reform. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS FIRST While the House of the Representatives of the People is not elected and has not entered into the exercise of its functions, the President of the Republic, assisted by the Council of Ministers, as a matter of law, will assume the legislative duties regulated in this Fundamental Law.

40

SECOND

While the officially certified Bodies of Career Judges and District Attorneys are formed, which the second paragraph of Article 147 oft his Fundamental Law refers to, the President of the Republic appoints and freely dismisses the officials who carry out said duties. While the condition of the preceding paragraph prevails, the Prime Magistrate of the Nation can solicit the revision of the jurisdictional decisions of the Supreme Court of Justice. THIRD The passage of powers of the Government of the Supreme Military Council to the Constitutional Government will be made in a solemn and public act. In the meantime, the outgoing Government will continue to insure the normal functioning of the Administration. ADDITIONAL PROVISION To put into practice all the instructions foreseen in this Fundamental Law just as to insure until the end the process for a total and orderly democracy, the President of the Republic is Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, author and executor of the feat of the glorious day August 3, 1979, which returned to the People their true liberty, and is the origin of the democratization of the country. Seven years have elapsed since the adoption of the (prior) Fundamental Law. That delineated in Article 89 of the same will still apply. REPEALING PROVISION All provisions contrary to those set forth in the present Fundamental Law (are repealed). FINAL PROVISION This Fundamental Law goes into effect starting from the date of its promulgation by the President of the Supreme Military Council, after having been approved by referendum. Akonibe, April-May of 1982 NATIONAL COMMISSION OF THE CONSTITUTION

41

