Preamble
	Following a tireless struggle against colonialism and all forms of colonialist exploitation and oppression, the people of Equatorial Guinea attained independence on 12 October 1968. Many patriots shed their blood in the cause of national liberation, and their memory will live on forever in the hearts of their brothers. 
	The colonialists imposed on the country a Constitution which did not meet its real needs, in order to protect their selfish interests and impede the progress of the State of Equatorial Guinea towards a true democratic people’s revolution, but the people rose up against them and, led by their great leader, President Francisco Macias Nguema Biyogo, they are making strenuous efforts to create a new economic and social structure for the country so as to extricate it from the lamentable state of backwardness into which it had been plunged by colonialism.

	The Revolution of Equatorial Guinea is striving relentlessly to remove all the obstacles in its path and is carrying out a vigorous policy aimed at establishing a national economy free from all outside interference. Its social policy has been designed to assist the working masses in the cities and the countryside to raise their living standards, to eradicate illiteracy, to promote national culture and to improve housing and health. It pursues a foreign policy of friendship and co-operation with all peoples of Africa and the world based on the principles of sovereign equality between States and the self-determination of peoples proclaimed in the Charters of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity.
	The peaceful struggle of the Revolution against colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism and imperialism and the provision of effective support to all peoples striving to attain their independence are also principles which are firmly rooted in the hearts of the people of Equatorial Guinea, which has experienced directly the most brutal exploitation and oppression.
	The safeguarding of the integrity of the national territory is a fundamental concern of the people of Equatorial Guinea, and it therefore categorically rejects the secessionist tendencies reflected in the Constitution imposed by the colonists in June 1968 against the wishes, interests and aspirations of the people.

	The fundamental rights which the Republic of Equatorial Guinea guarantees to all its citizens enables them to participate fully and effectively in the various tasks of nation-building; the harmonious development of the country is assured by Partido Unico Nacional de Trabajadores which, as a progressive organization, mobilizes and instructs the masses for the purpose of achieving the great objectives of the peaceful Revolution of Equatorial Guinea. Only this organization, run by the most conscientious and active men under the wise leadership of our great comrade, Francisco Macias Nguema Biyogo, is capable of demolishing the old economic structure and replacing it by an economic power exercised by the people and for the people.

	After five years of bitter experience, recent events have shown that the colonialist Constitution which refers hypocritically to the “safeguarding of the autonomy of the provinces” and is deliberately aimed at weakening the feelings of solidarity and fraternity in the hearts of the various groups of the population and fostering antagonism between brothers instead, should be repealed and replaced by a fundamental Law which accurately reflects national realities; acts as an appropriate framework for the normal development of the country and for the integration of the various elements of the nation, which are closely linked by the same history and traditions; and moulds political institutions to the aspirations of the nation of Equatorial Guinea, one and indivisible.

	Consequently, the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, in deference to the sovereign will of the people, as expressed through the Congress of the Partido Unico Nacional de Trabajadores, held from 9 to 13 July 1973, and the popular referendum which took place on 29 July 1973, agrees to adopt, affirm and promulgate the following:
Constitution
Title I
General Principles
Article 1 - Equatorial Guinea is a sovereign, independent and indivisible Democratic People’s Republic.
Its official name shall be Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
Its national symbol shall be the flag adopted on 12 October 1968 when independence was proclaimed.
The national anthem shall be that sung by the people on the day of the proclamation of independence.
The national coat of arms shall be that established by law.
TH motto shall be “Unity, Peace and Justice”
Article 2 - The objectives of the State shall be to:
a. Protect the productive work of the people and the resources of the Nation;
b. Plan, direct and promote the development of the national economy;
c. Ensure the technological and cultural progress of the country;
d. Strengthen the ideological principle proclaimed by the Partido Unico Nacional de Trabajadores (PUNT);
e. Guarantee the full freedom and dignity of the individual, the enjoyment of his rights, the performance and fulfilment of his duties and the development of his personality;
f. Promote social development with a view to eradicating forever the vestiges of the exploitation of man by man, the tragic legacy of colonialism.
Article 3 - In the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, all power shall rest with the people, who shall exercise it through the Party and the organs of the State, in the manner which shall be stablished by the Constitution and the law.
Article 4 - The Partido Unico Nacional de Trabajadores (PUNT) of Equatorial Guinea shall formulate the general policy of the nation, and shall co-ordinate and control it through the organs of the State. It shall guide the building of a single Guinean Nation, rallied under one flag around the President and the Government, towards a common historic destiny.
The Partido Unico Nacional de Trabajadores brings together all men and women, old and young, of Equatorial Guinea who are committed to eradicating the vestiges of colonialism, to strengthening independence and territorial integrity and building a strong, prosperous and happy nation, free from all the oppression, poverty, backwardness and vestiges of the past.
Article 5 - The Republic of Equatorial Guinea shall exercise its jurisdiction and sovereignty over the whole of the national territory, which comprises the continental area known as Rio Muni and the islands of Macias Nguema Biyoga, Pagalu, Corisco, Elobey Grande and Elobey Chico, and adjacent islands, the territorial sea and air space.
The limits of the territorial sea shall be established by law.
Article 6 - For administrative and economic purposes, the national territory shall be divided into provinces, regions and municipalities.
The boundaries and names of the provinces, regions and municipalities shall be determined by law.
Article 7 - Equatorial Guinea shall consider illegal and invalid conventions or treaties which infringe or diminish its jurisdiction or sovereignty over any portion whatsoever of the national territory, the territorial sea and air space.
Article 8 - The Republic of Equatorial Guinea shall be a de facto and de jure Member of the United Nations and of the Organization of African Unity and shall base its international relations with all States on the principles proclaimed in the Charters of the said Organization
Taking these principles into account, it shall:
a. Condemn colonialism, neo-colonialism and racism, together with imperialism, as the principal force of aggression and war and the worst enemy of peoples who aspire to live in peace, with independence and dignity;
b. Resolutely support the national liberation movements;
c. Condemn wars of aggression and conquest;
d. Base its foreign policy on the principles of equality of rights, national sovereignty and independence, non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States and mutual co-operation and benefit;
e. Advocate that all international disputes should be settled by peaceful means.
Title II
Economy and Ownership of Property
Article 9 - The State shall organize, direct and plan the national economy with a view to ensuring its steady development and growth in order to satisfy the material and spiritual needs of the people.
Article 10 - The land, forests, subsoil, mines, rivers and territorial waters as well as the air space, shall be the inalienable property of the State.
Article 11 - The State shall direct and control the Bank and export and import trade.
Article 12 - The State shall guarantee and control investment of foreign capital which contributes to the development of the country, provided that it is not tied to political conditions of any kind.
Article 13 - The State shall guarantee to farmers the ownership of the land which they hold as well as the other means of production required for its exploitation.
It shall be the duty of all estate owners to promote agricultural development. The State will actively help them to improve their methods of cultivation and increase production.
Article 14 - The State shall guarantee various forms of private property, subject to the limitations established by the Constitution and the law.
Article 15 - The State shall protect and guarantee the personal ownership of the income and savings derived from work, dwelling, household articles, consumer goods and amenities.
Article 16 - The rights of inheritance shall be regulated by law, in conformity with the customs and traditions of the country.
Article 17 - The nationalization and force expropriation of private and personal property may be decreed for reasons of national security or for scientific, cultural or economic reasons, subject to the payment of due compensation established by law.
Article 18 - The rights set out in this chapter are in conformity with the time-honoured African principles deeply rooted in the people of Equatorial Guinea.
Title III
Citizenship and aliens statutes
Article 19 - The Following are citizens of Equatorial Guinea by birth:
a. Those born in the territory of the Republic of a Guinean father or mother;
b. Those born abroad of a Guinean father or mother, subject to the conditions established by law;
c. Those born abroad of a Guinean father or mother in the service of the Republic.
Article 20 - Citizenship by naturalization shall be granted in accordance with the requirements established by law.
Article 21 - The grounds on which an individual may be deprived of his citizenship and the cases and manner in which it may be recovered shall be established by law.
Article 22 - Aliens residing in the territory of the Republic shall have the rights and duties established in the Constitution in respect of citizens, subject to the conditions and limitations established by law.
Title IV
Rights and Duties of Citizens
Article 23 - All citizens of Equatorial Guinea, irrespective of sex, shall have equal rights and the same duties.
Article 24 - Any form of discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, religion, sex, or social status is prohibited.
Article 25 - All citizens of Equatorial Guinea 18 years of age or over shall have the right to vote.
Article 26 - The family, which is the fundamental unit of society, shall be under the protection of the State.
Parents have the duty to feed and protect their children and to ensure their education with a view to making them useful citizens prepared to contribute to the economic, social and cultural advancement of the country.
Article 27 - Work shall serve the purposes of production and of economic and cultural development in order to satisfy the material and spiritual needs of all the people. It is a right, a duty and a source of pride for every citizen.
Article 28 - All citizens of Equatorial Guinea have the obligation to work and to discharge fully and conscientiously the tasks assigned to them in their employment.
Article 29 - Every worker is entitled to appropriate remuneration for the work he performs, according to tis quantity and quality.
All those who work have the right to leisure under the conditions established by law.
The law guarantees a system of social security for workers who, by reason of age, accidents, disability or sickness, are unable to work.
Article 30 - All citizens have the right to education and culture. The State will take the necessary steps to ensure that all children have schools and teachers and that all adults, men and women, have access to the instruction they require.
Article 31 - No one may be arrested, imprisoned or sentenced except by the competent authority, in conformity with the laws in force before the offence was committed and with the process and guarantees established therein.
Article 32 - Anyone arrested or imprisoned except under the circumstances stated above or without the guarantees prescribed by law shall be released by means of the summary proceedings established by law.
The provisions of the foregoing paragraph shall not apply to persons accused of offences against the security of the State and of subversion, which are subject to the process established by law.
Article 33 - The state shall guarantee freedom of expression, of the press, of assembly, of demonstration and of association. The exercise of those rights shall be regulated by law.
Article 34 - The press, radio, television and other communications media shall be in the service of the people and under the direct control of the State.
Article 35 - There shall be freedom to exercise any form of religious worship, subject to the requirement of the law and public order.
It shall be unlawful and a punishable offence to oppose the principles and purpose of the State on grounds of religious faith or belief.
Article 36 - Correspondence shall be inviolable. It may be seized, opened and examined only in the circumstances established by law.
Pending the entry into force of the law governing this constitutional guarantee, the relevant Government provisions currently in force shall continue to apply.
Article 37 - The home shall be inviolable. No one shall enter another person’s house except the authorities in the circumstances established by law.
Article 38 - The defence of the Nation is the paramount duty of every citizen.
Compulsory military service is the duty of every citizen, subject only to the exceptions expressly provided by law.
Article 39 - It is the duty of every citizen to protect public and social property, to accept the discipline of work, to respect the rights of fellow citizens, to observe the rules of the community and to fulfil his social duties with integrity.
Article 40 - It shall be ineluctable duty of every citizen, every State or public institution every authority and every official to abide strictly by the Constitution and the law.
Title V
Chapter I
Organs of the State
Common Provisions
Article 41 - The state shall fulfil its functions through the President of the Republic and the Council of Ministers, the People’s National Assembly, the courts of justice and the other organs established by law in accordance with the Constitution.
The provinces, regions and municipalities shall be dependencies of the central Administration; they shall assist in the fulfilment of the functions and purposes of the State, and shall be governed by the organs established by law.
Article 42 - The President of the Republic and the Deputies to the People’s National Assembly shall be elected for a five-year term, by direct, universal suffrage and secret ballot, in general elections to be held in a single day.
The electoral process shall be regulated by law, which shall also prescribe the date on which the candidates elected shall assume office.
Chapter II
The President of the Republic
Article 43 - The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State and Government, and shall represent the Nation.
Article 44 - To be eligible for election to the office of President of the Republic, a candidate must be:
a. A citizen of Equatorial Guinea by birth;
b. Fully 30 years of age;
c. Nominated as a candidate by the Congress of the Party.
Article 45 - The President of the Republic shall direct national policy and his authority shall extend to the whole of the national territory in respect of the preservation of public order internally and of State security externally. Hence:
a. He shall approve and promulgate or veto Bills approved by the People’s National Assembly; he shall carry out laws and order them to be carried out; he shall issue regulations for the more effective enforcement of laws; he shall issue the Decrees and Orders required for that purpose in so far as it is incumbent upon the Government and Administration to do so.
b. In case of national necessity and in the absence of legislation, he shall issue the Legislative Decrees required for the proper fulfilment of the high purposes of the State.
c. He shall be the Commander-in-Chief of all the National Armed Forces.
d. He shall declare war and conclude peace.
e. He shall be free to appoint and dismiss the Ministers of the Government.
f. He shall be free to appoint and dismiss the civil and military officials of the State, the provinces, regions and municipalities. He may also vest that power in his Ministers.
g. He shall represent Equatorial Guinea in international relations; he shall receive and accredit Ambassadors.
h. He shall negotiate and ratify international agreements and treaties.
i. He shall confer State honours and decorations.
j. He shall exercise the right of pardon.
k. He shall exercise the other powers expressly conferred upon him by the Constitution and the law.
Article 46 - In case of imminent danger to the Nation, the President of the Republic shall have the power to suspend the rights guaranteed under Section IV, and to take extraordinary measures to safeguard the independence of the Nation and institutions of the Republic.
Article 47 - In the exercise of the executive function, the President of the Republic shall be assisted by a Council of Ministers consisting of the number of Ministers prescribed by law in accordance with the needs of the country.
Article 48 - The President of the Republic shall have the power to appoint a Vice President of the Republic, from among the Ministers of the Government, to whom he shall delegate the powers which he deems necessary for the most effective performance of the functions assigned to him under the Constitution.
Article 49 - The people of Equatorial Guinea, in recognition of his great virtues and outstanding achievements for the benefit of the Nation, proclaim the Honourable Comrade Don Fancisco MACIAS NGUEMA BIYOGO President for Life, thus confirming the historic declaration of the Second National Congress of the Single National Workers’ Party held in Bata, on 14 July 1972.
Article 50 - In the case of permanent incapacity of the President for Life, article 42 of this Constitution shall be suspended.
Article 51 - In the case of permanent incapacity of the President for Life of the Republic, he shall be provisionally replaced by the person whom the People’s National Assembly shall appoint by a majority vote of at least one half its members plus one, taken on the proposal of the Congress of the Party, which shall be convened in extraordinary session for that purpose.
Article 52 - In the event of the death of the President for Life of the Republic, presidential elections shall be held within thirty (30) days in accordance with article 42 of this Constitution.
Article 53 - In order to guarantee presidential elections and public order, a Revolutionary People’s Council shall be established under the chairmanship of the President of the People’s National Assembly and shall be composed of:
a. Leaders and members of the Central Committee of the Single National Workers’ Party Partido Unico Nacional de Trabajadores (PUNT).
b. Leaders and members of the provincial Committees of PUNT.
c. Leaders and members of the District Committees of PUNT.
The number of members of the People’s Revolutionary Council and its functions shall be established by law.
Article 54 - The Revolutionary Council established in accordance with the previous article shall convene an extraordinary session of the National Congress of PUNT for the purpose of nominating a candidate for the office of President of the Republic.
Article 55 - In the event of the death of the President of the Republic elected in accordance with article 32 of the present Constitution, he shall be provisionally replaced by a member of the Government who is also a member of the Central Committee of PUNT, who shall be appointed by the People’s National Assembly by a majority vote of at least one half its members plus one, taken on a proposal of the Congress of the Party, which shall be convened in extraordinary session for that purpose by the People’s Revolution Council.
The mandate of the provisional President thus elected shall have effect until the end of the presidential term of office.
When the mandate of the provisional President expires a new presidential election shall take place in the form prescribed by law.
Chapter III
People’s National Assembly
Article 56 - The People’s National Assembly shall be composed of SIXTY DEPUTIES nominated by the Party and elected in the forma and for the term provided in article 42.
Article 57 - Deputies must be Guinean citizens by birth and at least 23 years of age.
Article 58 - The Electoral Law shall regulate the procedure for the election of deputies to the People’s National Assembly, the conditions of eligibility and the rules of incompatibility.
Article 59 - The functions of the People’s National Assembly shall be the following:
a. To amend the Constitution in accordance with article 72;
b. To adopt the Codes and the Laws of the Nation;
c. To approve the national budget of income, expenditure and investment;
d. To fix contributions and taxes and abolish them when necessary;
e. To adopt the monetary system and the coining of currency;
f. To adopt the regulations for weights and measures;
g. To enact amnesty laws.
Article 60 - The Party shall have the power to revoke the mandate of its deputies at any time for failure to comply with the policy of the Party of for any other serious reason.
Article 61 - The President of the Republic, meeting with the Council of Ministers, shall have the power to order the dissolution of the People’s National Assembly and the calling of special elections. If the Assembly is dissolved during the last year of the term for which the deputies were elected, the election shall take place at an appropriate time in accordance with the provisions of article 42.
Article 62 - The procedure established in the previous article shall be followed in case vacancies should arise among the deputies, provided that as a result of those vacancies, the People’s National Assembly could not function normally for lack of a quorum.
Article 63 - No deputy may be arrested or prosecuted for the opinions he expresses in exercise of his functions in the People’s National Assembly or in connection with those functions.
Article 64 - The People’s National Assembly shall have the full authority to meet on the first day 15 days after the proclamation of the election results. The Assembly shall adopt its own rules of procedure and elect its President and Bureau.
Article 65 - The People’s National Assembly shall meet in regular public sessions twice a year, in February and October, each session lasting for a maximum period of two months.
The People’s National Assembly may meet in extraordinary session to deal with a specific agenda at the request of the President of the Republic or of a third of its members
A quorum consisting of at least half the total number of deputies plus one shall be required in order to hold a session, and decisions shall be taken by a majority vote of those present.
Article 66 - The People’s National Assembly shall elect form among its members a Standing Committee which shall function when the plenary Assembly is not in session.
The Standing Committee shall carry out all tasks assigned to it under the rules of procedure of the People’s National Assembly.
Chapter IV
Courts of Law and Office of the Public Prosecutor
Article 67 - The judicial function emanates from the people and shall be exercised on its behalf by the People’s Supreme Court and the other civilian and military courts established by law.
The law shall also determine the powers of each of the courts which it established, and shall regulate the requirements which must be met by the judges.
Article 68 - Judges of all courts shall be appointed by the President of the Republic and shall be accountable and subject to dismissal.
Article 69 - The chief function of the Attorney-General and the other Public Prosecutors of the Republic shall be to ensure strict compliance with legality, and to ensure that all organs and officials of the State, the provinces, the regions and the municipalities, as well as the citizens and foreign nationals residing in the country, abide by the Constitution, the laws and the governmental regulations in force.
The law shall regulate the way in which the Public Prosecutor shall exercise the powers conferred upon them for the purposes stated in the previous paragraph.
Article 70 - The President of the Republic shall have the power freely to appoint and dismiss the Public Prosecutors.
Article 71 - The organization of the courts shall be adapted to the political and administrative division of the national territory.
Title VI
Constitutional Reform
Article 72 - On a proposal of the party Congress, the Constitution may be amended by the People’s National Assembly with the agreement of two thirds of its members and subject to the approval of the President of the Republic meeting with the Council of Ministers.
Transitional Provision
	Until such time as the People’s National Assembly is elected and begins to exercise its functions, the President of the Republic, assisted by the Council of Ministers, shall assume all the legislative and executive functions laid down in the Constitution.
Final Provision
1. This Constitution shall enter into force from the date of its promulgation by the President of the Republic, after having been approved in a popular referendum.
2. The Constitution of 22 June 1968 and all laws and governmental provisions contrary to the provisions of the present Constitution are repealed.
