The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic acting on behalf of the people of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic and expressing its sovereign will, adopts the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic and announces its enactment from the 13th of April, 1978.
Adopted at the Ninth (Extraordinary) Session of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR,
Ninth Convocation
13th of April 1978
The Great October Socialist Revolution, made by the workers and peasants of Russia under the leadership of the Communist Party headed by Lenin, overthrew capitalist and landowner rule, established the dictatorship of the proletariat, and created the Soviet state, a new type of state, the basic instrument for defending the gains of the revolution and for building socialism and communism. 
Soviet power was established in Estonia in October, 1917.
After the defeat of the Estonian Labour Commune, brought into being by the Great October Revolution, and fallen under the blows of the combined forces of international imperialism and internal counterrevolution, the Communists of Estonia under difficult conditions of underground resistance and terror led the struggle of the workers for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. This struggle culminated in 1940 with the restoration of Soviet power. The Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic voluntarily entered into the great family of the Soviet peoples.
A developed socialist society has been built in our country as a result of the creative activity of the working people, led by the Communist Party, the society of true freedom of working people, where the creative forces of the new system and the advantages of the socialist way of life became increasingly evident; it is a society in which powerful productive forces and progressive science and culture have been created, in which the well-being of the people is constantly rising; the unbreakable alliance of the working class, collective-farm peasantry, and people's intelligentsia is consolidating.
The Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic is an egalitarian republic in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which embodies the state unity of the Soviet people and draws all its nations and nationalities together for the purpose of jointly building communism.
Guided by the high ideas of communism and according to the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which consolidated the foundations of the social order and Soviet policy, established rights, freedoms and duties of citizens, the principles of organization and purposes of the socialist state, peoples of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic, recognizing ourselves as an integral part of the entire Soviet people, adopt and proclaim this Constitution.
I
Principles of the Social Structure and Policy of the Estonian SSR 
Chapter 1
The Political System
Article 1. The Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic is a socialist state of the whole people, expressing the will and interests of the workers, peasants, and intelligentsia, the working people of all the nations and nationalities of the republic.
Article 2. All power in the Estonian SSR belongs to the people. The people exercise state power through Soviets of People's Deputies, which constitute the political foundation of the Estonian SSR.
All other state bodies are under the control of, and accountable to, the Soviets of People's Deputies.
Article 3. The Soviet state is organised and functions on the principle of democratic centralism, namely the electiveness of all bodies of state authority from the lowest to the highest, their accountability to the people, and the obligation of lower bodies to observe the decisions of higher ones.  
Democratic centralism combines central leadership with local initiative and creative activity and with the responsibility of the each state body and official for the work entrusted to them.
Article 4. The Soviet state and all its bodies function on the basis of socialist law, ensure the maintenance of law and order, and safeguard the interests of society and the rights and freedoms of citizens.
State organisations, public organisations and officials shall observe the Constitution of the USSR, Constitution of the Estonian SSR and Soviet laws.
Article 5. Major matters of state shall be submitted to nationwide discussion and put to a popular vote (referendum). 
Article 6. The leading and guiding force of the Soviet society and the nucleus of its political system, of all state organisations and public organisations, is the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.  The CPSU exists for the people and serves the people. The Communist Party, armed with Marxism-Leninism, determines the general perspectives of the development of society and the course of the home and foreign policy of the USSR, directs the great constructive work of the Soviet people, and imparts a planned, systematic and theoretically substantiated character to their struggle for the victory of communism.
All party organisations shall function within the framework of the Constitution of the USSR.
Article 7. Trade unions, the All-Union Leninist Young Communist League co-operatives, and other public organisations, participate, in accordance with the aims laid down in their rules, in managing state and public affairs, and in deciding political, economic, and social and cultural matters.
Article 8. Work collectives take part in discussing and deciding state and public affairs, in planning production and social development, in training and placing personnel, and in discussing and deciding matters pertaining to the management of enterprises and institutions, and the use of funds allocated both for developing production and for social and cultural purposes and financial incentives. 
Work collectives promote socialist emulation, the spread of progressive methods of work, and the strengthening of production discipline, educate their members in the spirit of communist morality, and strive to enhance their political consciousness and raise their cultural level and skills and qualifications. 
Article 9. The principal direction in the development of the political system of Soviet society is the extension of socialist democracy, namely ever broader participation of citizens in managing the affairs of society and the state, continuous improvement of the machinery of state, heightening of the activity of public organisations, strengthening of the system of people's control, consolidation of the legal foundations of the functioning of the state and of public life, greater openness and publicity, and constant responsiveness to public opinion. 
Chapter 2
The Economic System 
Article 10. The foundation of the economic system of the Estonian SSR is socialist ownership of the means of production in the form of state property (belonging to all the people), and collective farm-and-co-operative property. 
Socialist ownership also embraces the property of trade unions and other public organisations, which they require to carry out their purposes under these rules. 
The state protects socialist property and provides conditions for its growth. 
No one has the right to use socialist property for person gain or other selfish ends.
Article 11. State property, i.e. the common property of the Soviet people, is the principal form of socialist property. 
The land, its minerals, waters, and forests are the exclusive property of the state.  The state owns the basic means of production in industry, construction, and agriculture; means of transport and communication; the banks; the property of state-run trade organisations and public utilities, and other state-run undertakings; most urban housing; and other property necessary for state purposes. 
Article 12. The property of collective farms and other co-operative organisations, and of their joint undertakings, comprises the means of production and other assets which they require for the purposes laid down in their rules. 
The land held by collective farms is secured to them for their free use in perpetuity. 
The state promotes development of collective farm-and-co-operative property and its approximation to state property. 
Collective farms, like other land users, are obliged to make effective and thrifty use of the land and to increase its fertility.
Article 13. Earned income forms the basis of the personal property of citizens of the Estonian SSR. The personal property of citizens of the USSR may include articles of everyday use, personal consumption and convenience, the implements and other objects of a small-holding, a house, and earned savings. The personal property of citizens and the right to inherit it are protected by the state.       
Citizens may be granted the use of plots of land, in the manner prescribed by law, for a subsidiary small-holding (including the keeping of livestock and poultry), for fruit and vegetable growing or for building an individual dwelling.  Citizens are required to make rational use of the land allotted to them. The state, and collective farms provide assistance to citizens in working their small-holdings. 
Property owned or used by citizens shall not serve as a means of deriving unearned income or be employed to the detriment of the interests of society.  
Article 14. The source of the growth of social wealth and of the well-being of the people, and of each individual, is the labour, free from exploitation, of Soviet people. 
The state exercises control over the measure of labour and of consumption in accordance with the principle of socialism: ?From each according to his ability, to each according to his work”.  It fixes the rate of taxation on taxable income. 
Socially useful work and its results determine a person's status in society. By combining material and moral incentives and encouraging innovation and a creative attitude to work, the state helps transform labour into the prime vital need of every Soviet citizen. 
Article 15. The supreme goal of social production under socialism is the fullest possible satisfaction of the people's growing material, and cultural and intellectual requirements. 
Relying on the creative initiative of the working people, socialist emulation, and scientific and technological progress, and by improving the forms and methods of economic management, the state ensures growth of the productivity of labour, raising of the efficiency of production and of the quality of work, and dynamic, planned, proportionate development of the economy.
Article 16. The economy of the Estonian SSR is an integral part of the economic complex comprising all the elements of social production, distribution, and exchange on its territory. 
The economy is managed on the basis of state plans for economic and social development, with due account of the sectoral and territorial principles, and by combining centralised direction with the managerial independence and initiative of individual and amalgamated enterprises and other organisations, for which active use is made of management accounting, profit, cost, and other economic levers and incentives.
Article 17. In the Estonian SSR, the law permits individual labour in handicrafts, farming, the provision of services for the public, and other forms of activity based exclusively on the personal work of individual citizens and members of their families.  The state makes regulations for such work to ensure that it serves the interest of society.
Article 18. In the interests of the present and future generations, the necessary steps are taken in the Estonian SSR to protect and make scientific, rational use of the land and its mineral and water resources, and the plant and animal kingdoms, to preserve the purity of air and water, ensure reproduction of natural wealth, and improve the human environment.
Chapter 3
Social Development and Culture 
Article 19. The social basis of the Estonian SSR is the unbreakable alliance of the workers, peasants, and intelligentsia. 
The state helps enhance the social homogeneity of society, namely the elimination of class differences and of the essential distinctions between town and country and between mental and physical labour, and the all-round development and drawing together of all the nations and nationalities of the USSR. 
Article 20. In accordance with the communist ideal – “The free development of each is the condition of the free development of all” – the state pursues the aim of giving citizens more and more real opportunities to apply their creative energies, abilities, and talents, and to develop their personalities in every way.
Article 21. The state concerns itself with improving working conditions, safety and labour protection and the scientific organisation of work, and with reducing and ultimately eliminating all arduous physical labour through comprehensive mechanisation and automation of production processes in all branches of the economy. 
Article 22. A programme is being consistently implemented in the Estonian SSR to convert agricultural work into a variety of industrial work, to extend the network of educational, cultural, and medical institutions, and of trade, public catering, service and public utility facilities in rural localities, and transform hamlets and villages into well-planned and well-appointed settlements.
Article 23. The state pursues a steady policy of raising people's pay levels and real incomes through increases in productivity. 
In order to satisfy the needs of Soviet people more fully social consumption funds are created.  The state, with the broad participation of public organisations and work collectives, ensures the growth and just distribution of these funds.
Article 24. In the Estonian SSR, state systems of health protection, social security, trade and public catering, communal services and amenities, and public utilities, operate and are being extended. 
The state encourages co-operatives and other public organisations to provide all types of services for the population.  It encourages the development of mass physical culture and sport. 
Article 25. In the Estonian SSR there is a uniform system of public education, which is being constantly improved, that provides general education and vocational training for citizens, serves the communist education and intellectual and physical development of the youth, and trains them for work and social activity. 
Article 26. In accordance with society's needs, the state provides for planned development of science and the training of scientific personnel and organises introduction of the results of research in the economy and other spheres of life.
Article 27. The state concerns itself with protecting, augmenting and making extensive use of society's cultural wealth for the moral and aesthetic education of the Soviet people, for raising their cultural level. 
In the Estonian SSR development of the professional, amateur and folk arts is encouraged in every way.
Chapter 4 
Foreign Policy and Defence of the Socialist Motherland 
Article 28. In foreign policy the Estonian SSR is guided by the goals, tasks and principles of foreign policy defined by the Constitution of the USSR.
In the Estonian SSR war propaganda is forbidden.
Article 29. According to the Constitution of the USSR defence of the Socialist Motherland is one of the most important functions of the state, and is the concern of the whole people.
In order to defend the gains of socialism, the peaceful labour of the Soviet people, and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the state, the USSR maintains armed forces and has instituted universal military service. 
The duty of the Armed Forces of the USSR to the people is to provide reliable defence of the socialist Motherland and to be in constant combat readiness, guaranteeing that any aggressor is instantly repulsed.
Article 30. The Estonian SSR ensures the security and defence capability of the country, and supplies the Armed Forces of the USSR with everything necessary for that purpose. 
The duties of state bodies, public organisations, officials, and citizens in regard to safeguarding the country's security and strengthening its defence capacity are defined by the legislation of the USSR.
II
The State and the Individual 
Chapter 5
Citizenship of the Estonian SSR / Equality of Citizens’ Rights 
Article 31.  Uniform federal citizenship is established for the USSR. Every citizen of the Estonian SSR is a citizen of the USSR. 
The grounds and procedures for acquiring or forfeiting Soviet citizenship are defined by the Law on Citizenship of the USSR. 
Citizens of other Union republics enjoy equal rights with citizens of the Estonian SSR in the territory of the Estonian SSR.
When abroad, citizens of the Estonian SSR enjoy the protection and assistance of the Soviet state.
Article 32.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR are equal before the law, without distinction of origin, social or property status, race or nationality, sex, education, language, attitude to religion, type and nature of occupation, domicile, or other status. 
The equal rights of citizens of the USSR are guaranteed in all fields of economic, political, social, and cultural life.
Article 33.  Women and men have equal rights in the Estonian SSR. 
Exercise of these rights is ensured by according women equal access with men to education and vocational and professional training, equal opportunities in employment, remuneration, and promotion, and in social and political, and cultural activity, and by special labour and health protection measures for women; by providing conditions enabling mothers to work; by legal protection, and material and moral support for mothers and children, including paid leaves and other benefits for expectant mothers and mothers, and gradual reduction of working time for mothers with small children.
Article 34.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR of different races and nationalities have equal rights. 
Exercise of these rights is ensured by a policy of all-round development and drawing together of all the nations and nationalities of the USSR, by educating citizens in the spirit of Soviet patriotism and socialist internationalism, and by the possibility to use their native language and the languages of other peoples in the USSR. 
Any direct or indirect limitation of the rights of citizens or establishment of direct or indirect privileges on grounds of race or nationality, and any advocacy of racial or national exclusiveness, hostility, or contempt, are punishable by law. 
Article 35.  Citizens of other countries and stateless persons in the Estonian SSR are guaranteed the rights and freedoms provided by law, including the right to apply to a court and other state bodies for the protection of their personal, property, family, and other rights. 
Citizens of other countries and stateless persons, when in the Estonian SSR, are obliged to respect the Constitution of the USSR, the Constitution of the Estonian SSR and observe Soviet laws.
Article 36.  The Estonian SSR grants the right of asylum to foreigners persecuted for defending the interests of the working people and the cause of peace, or for participation in the revolutionary and national-liberation movement, or for progressive social and political, scientific, or other creative activity.
Chapter 6
The Basic Rights, Freedoms, and Duties of Citizens of the Estonian SSR 
Article 37.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR enjoy in full the social, economic, political and personal rights and freedoms proclaimed and guaranteed by the Constitution of the USSR, the Constitution of the Estonian SSR and by Soviet laws.  The socialist system ensures enlargement of the rights and freedoms of citizens and continuous improvement of their living standards as social, economic, and cultural development programmes are fulfilled. 
Enjoyment by citizens of their rights and freedoms must not be to the detriment of the interests of society or the state, or infringe the rights of other citizens.
Article 38. Citizens of the USSR have the right to work (that is, to guaranteed employment and pay in accordance wit the quantity and quality of their work, and not below the state-established minimum), including the right to choose their trade or profession, type of job and work in accordance with their inclinations, abilities, training and education, with due account of the needs of society. 
This right is ensured by the socialist economic system, steady growth of the productive forces, free vocational and professional training, improvement of skills, training in new trades or professions, and development of the systems of vocational guidance and job placement. 
Article 39. Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to rest and leisure. 
This right is ensured by the establishment of a working week not exceeding 41 hours, for workers and other employees, a shorter working day in a number of trades and industries, and shorter hours for night work; by the provision of paid annual holidays, weekly days of rest, extension of the network of cultural, educational, and health-building institutions, and the development on a mass scale of sport, physical culture, and camping and tourism; by the provision of neighbourhood recreational facilities, and of other opportunities for rational use of free time. 
The length of collective farmers' working and leisure time is established by their collective farms.
Article 40. Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to health protection. 
This right is ensured by free, qualified medical care provided by state health institutions; by extension of the network of therapeutic and health-building institutions; by the development and improvement of safety and hygiene in industry; by carrying out broad prophylactic measures; by measures to improve the environment; by special care for the health of the rising generation, including prohibition of child labour, excluding the work done by children as part of the school curriculum; and by developing research to prevent and reduce the incidence of disease and ensure citizens a long and active life.
Article 41. Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to maintenance in old age, in sickness, and in the event of complete or partial disability or loss of the breadwinner. 
The right is guaranteed by social insurance of workers and other employees and collective farmers; by allowances for temporary disability; by the provision by the state or by collective farms of retirement pensions, disability pensions, and pensions for loss of the breadwinner; by providing employment for the partially disabled; by care for the elderly and the disabled; and by other forms of social security.
Article 42.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the rights to housing. 
This right is ensured by the development and upkeep of state and socially-owned housing; by assistance for co-operative and individual house building; by fair distribution, under public control, of the housing that becomes available through fulfilment of the programme of building well-appointed dwellings, and by low rents and low charges for utility services.  
Citizens of the Estonian SSR shall take good care of the housing allocated to them.
Article 43. Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to education. 
This right is ensured by free provision of all forms of education, by the institution of universal, compulsory secondary education, and broad development of vocational, specialised secondary, and higher education, in which instruction is oriented toward practical activity and production; by the development of extramural, correspondence and evening courses, by the provision of state scholarships and grants and privileges for students; by the free issue of school textbooks; by the opportunity to attend a school where teaching is in the native language; and by the provision of facilities for self-education.
Article 44.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to enjoy cultural benefits. 
This right is ensured by broad access to the cultural treasures of their own land and of the world that are preserved in state and other public collections; by the development and fair distribution of cultural and educational institutions throughout the country; by developing television and radio broadcasting and the publishing of books, newspapers and periodicals, and by extending the free library service; and by expanding cultural exchanges with other countries.
Article 45.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR, in accordance with the aims of building communism, are guaranteed freedom of scientific, technical, and artistic work. This freedom is ensured by broadening scientific research, encouraging invention and innovation, and developing literature and the arts. The state provides the necessary material conditions for this and support for voluntary societies and unions of workers in the arts, organises introduction of inventions and innovations in production and other spheres of activity. 
The rights of authors, inventors and innovators are protected by the state.
Article 46. Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to take part in the management and administration of state and public affairs and in the discussion and adoption of laws and measures of All-Union and local significance. 
This right is ensured by the opportunity to vote and to be elected to Soviets of People's Deputies and other elective state bodies, to take part in nationwide discussions and referendums, in people's control, in the work of state bodies, public organisations, and local community groups, and in meetings at places of work or residence. 
Article 47.  Every citizen of the Estonian SSR has the right to submit proposals to state bodies and public organisations for improving their activity, and to criticise shortcomings in their work. 
Officials are obliged, within established time-limits, to examine citizens' proposals and requests, to reply to them, and to take appropriate action. 
Persecution for criticism is prohibited.  Persons guilty of such persecution shall be called to account. 
Article 48. In accordance with the interests of the people and in order to strengthen and develop the socialist system, citizens of the Estonian SSR are guaranteed freedom of speech, of the press, and of assembly, meetings, street processions and demonstrations. 
Exercise of these political freedoms is ensured by putting public buildings, streets and squares at the disposal of the working people and their organisations, by broad dissemination of information, and by the opportunity to use the press, television, and radio.
Article 49. In accordance with the aims of building communism, citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to associate in public organisations that promote their political activity and initiative and satisfaction of their various interests. 
Public organisations are guaranteed conditions for successfully performing the functions defined in their rules. 
Article 50.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR are guaranteed freedom of conscience, that is, the right to profess or not to profess any religion, and to conduct religious worship or atheistic propaganda.  Incitement of hostility or hatred on religious grounds is prohibited. 
In the Estonian SSR, the church is separated from the state, and the school from the church.
Article 51. The family enjoys the protection of the state. 
Marriage is based on the free consent of the woman and the man; the spouses are completely equal in their family relations. 
The state helps the family by providing and developing a broad system of childcare institutions, by organising and improving communal services and public catering, by paying grants on the birth of a child, by providing children's allowances and benefits for large families, and other forms of family allowances and assistance.
Article 52. Citizens of the Estonian SSR are guaranteed inviolability of the person.  No one may be arrested except by a court decision or on the warrant of a procurator. 
Article 53. Citizens of the Estonian SSR are guaranteed inviolability of the home.  No one may, without lawful grounds, enter a home against the will of those residing in it. 
Article 54. The privacy of citizens, and of their correspondence, telephone conversations, and telegraphic communications is protected by law. 
Article 55. Respect for the individual and protection of the rights and freedoms of citizens are the duty of all state bodies, public organisations, and officials. 
Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to protection by the courts against encroachments on their honour and reputation, life and health, and personal freedom and property.
Article 56.  Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to lodge a complaint against the actions of officials, state bodies and public bodies.  Complaints shall be examined according to the procedure and within the time-limit established by law. 
Actions by officials that contravene the law or exceed their powers, and infringe the rights of citizens, may be appealed against in a court in the manner prescribed by law. 
Citizens of the Estonian SSR have the right to compensation for damage resulting from unlawful actions by state organisations and public organisations, or by officials in the performance of their duties. 
Article 57. Citizens' exercise of their rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of their duties and obligations. 
Citizens of the Estonian SSR are obliged to observe the Constitution of the USSR, the Constitution of the Estonian SSR and Soviet laws, comply with the standards of socialist conduct, and uphold the honour and dignity of Soviet citizenship.
Article 58. It is the duty of, and matter of honour for, every able-bodied citizen of the Estonian SSR to work conscientiously in his chosen, socially useful occupation, and strictly to observe labour discipline.  Evasion of socially useful work is incompatible with the principles of socialist society. 
Article 59. Citizens of the Estonian SSR are obliged to preserve and protect socialist property.  It is the duty of a citizen of the Estonian SSR to combat misappropriation and squandering of state and socially-owned property and to make thrifty use of the people's wealth. 
Persons encroaching in any way on socialist property shall be punished according to the law.
Article 60. Citizens of the Estonian SSR are obliged to safeguard the interests of the Soviet state, and to enhance its power and prestige. 
Defence of the Socialist Motherland is the sacred duty of every citizen of the Estonian SSR. 
Betrayal of the Motherland is the gravest of crimes against the people.
Article 61. Military service in the ranks of the Armed Forces of the USSR is an honourable duty of citizens of the Estonian SSR.
Article 62. It is the duty of every citizen of the Estonian SSR to respect the national dignity of other citizens, and to strengthen friendship of the nations and nationalities of the multinational Soviet state.
Article 63. A citizen of the Estonian SSR is obliged to respect the rights and lawful interests of other persons, to be uncompromising toward anti-social behaviour, and to help maintain public order.
Article 64. Citizens of the Estonian SSR are obliged to concern themselves with the upbringing of children, to train them for socially useful work, and to raise them as worthy members of socialist society. Children are obliged to care for their parents and help them. 
Article 65. Citizens of the Estonian SSR are obliged to protect nature and conserve its riches.
Article 66. Concern for the preservation of historical monuments and other cultural values is a duty and obligation of citizens of the Estonian SSR. 
Article 67. It is the internationalist duty of citizens of the Estonian SSR to promote friendship and co-operation with peoples of other lands and help maintain and strengthen world peace.
III
The National-State Structure and Administrative-Territorial Structure of the Estonian SSR 
Chapter 7
The Estonian SSR is a Union Republic of the USSR.
Article 68.  The Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic is a sovereign Soviet socialist state. For the purpose of jointly building Communist society, consolidation of economic and political unity, security and defence of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic, as a result of self-determination of its people on the basis of voluntariness and equality with the Soviet Socialist Republics:
the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic 
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Azerbeijan Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Moldovian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
the Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic, 

unites unto the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, an integral, federal, multinational state formed on the principle of socialist federalism as a result of the free self-determination of nations and the voluntary association of equal Soviet Socialist Republics.
The Estonian SSR implements the decisions of the highest bodies of state authority and administration specified in Article 73 of the Constitution of the USSR. In matters that come within its jurisdiction, the Estonian SSR coordinates and controls the activity of enterprises, institutions, and organisations subordinate to the Union.
Outside the spheres listed in Article 73 of the Constitution of the USSR the Estonian SSR exercises independent authority on its territory.
Article 69. The Estonian SSR shall retain the right freely to secede from the USSR.
Article 70. The Estonian SSR takes part in decision-making in the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, the Government of the USSR, and other bodies of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The Estonian SSR shall ensure comprehensive economic and social development on its territory, facilitate exercise of the powers of the USSR on its territory, and implement the decisions of the highest bodies of state authority and administration of the USSR. In matters that come within its jurisdiction, the Estonian SSR shall coordinate and control the activity of enterprises, institutions, and organisations subordinate to the Union.
Article 71. The territory of the Estonian SSR may not be altered without its consent.  The boundaries between the Estonian SSR may be altered by mutual agreement of the Republics concerned, subject to ratification by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Article 72. The Estonian SSR has the right to enter into relations with other states, conclude treaties with them, exchange diplomatic and consular representatives, and take part in the work of international organisations.
Article 73. The Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic, represented by its highest bodies of state power and administration, shall have:
1) adoption of the Constitution of the Estonian SSR, and amendments to the Constitution, control over observance of the Constitution of the Estonian SSR;
2) the ensurance of uniformity of legislative norms of the Estonian SSR;
3) protection of public order, the rights and freedoms of citizens;
4) establishment of the general principles for the organization and functioning of republican and local bodies of state authority and administration; 
5) pursuance of a uniform social and economic policy; direction of the economy of the Estonian SSR; determination of the main lines of scientific and  technological progress and the general measures for rational exploitation and  conservation of natural resources;
6) the drafting and approval of state plans for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR, and endorsement of  reports on their fulfilment; the drafting and approval of the Budget of the Estonian SSR, and endorsement of the report on its execution; management of implementation of the budgets of the regions and cities of republican subordination;
7) determination of the taxes and revenues forming the Budget of the Estonian SSR; 
8) direction of the sectors of the economy, and of enterprises and amalgamations under Union jurisdiction, and general direction of industries under Union-Republican jurisdiction;
9) establishment of an order for the use of land, mineral resources, waters, forests; environmental protection;
10) direction of housing and public utilities, trade and public catering, communal services and amenities, housing construction and modernisation of cities and other settlements, roads, transport and connection;
11) direction of public education, cultural and scientific organizations and institutions in the Estonian SSR, health, physical culture and sport, social security;
protection of monuments of history and culture;
12) amnesty and pardon of citizens sentenced by courts of the Estonian SSR;
13) representation of the Estonian SSR in international relations;
14) settlement of other matters of Republican importance.
Article 74. The laws of the USSR shall have the same force in the Estonian SSR.
Article 75. The sovereign rights of the Estonian SSR shall be safeguarded by the USSR according to the Constitution of the USSR.
Chapter 8
Administrative-Territorial Structure of the Estonian SSR
Article 76.  The Estonian SSR shall determine its division into territories, regions, areas, and districts, and decide other matters relating to its administrative and territorial structure.
Article 77. In the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic, there are areas: Valga, Viljandi, Võru, Jõgeva, Kingisepp, Kohtla-Järve, Paide, Põlva, Pärnu, Rakvere, Rapla, Tartu, Haapsalu, Harjumaa, Hiiumaa.
Cities under Republican jurisdiction in the Estonian SSR are: Tallin, Kohtla-Järve, Narva, Pärnu, Sillamäe, Tartu.
IV
The System of Soviets of People’s Deputies in the Estonian SSR and Electoral Procedure 
Chapter 9
The system of the Soviets of People's Deputies and the principles of their work
Article 78. The Soviets of People's Deputies, i.e. the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, and the Soviets of People's Deputies of districts, cities, city districts in Tallin, settlements and villages shall constitute a single system of bodies of state authority.
Article 79. The term of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall be five years. The term of local Soviets of People's Deputies shall be two and a half years.
Elections to Soviets of People's Deputies shall be called not later than two months before the expiry of the term of the Soviet concerned.
Article 80. The most important matters within the jurisdiction of the respective Soviets of People's Deputies shall be considered and settled at their sessions. 
Soviets of People's Deputies shall elect standing commissions and form executive-administrative and other bodies accountable to them.
Article 81. Soviets of People's Deputies shall form people's control bodies combining state control with control by the working people at enterprises, collective farms, institutions, and organisations. 
People's control bodies shall check on the fulfilment of state plans and assignments, combat breaches of state discipline, localist tendencies, narrow departmental attitudes, mismanagement, extravagance and waste, red tape and bureaucracy, and help improve the working of the state machinery.
Article 82. Soviets of People's Deputies shall direct all sectors of state economic, and social and cultural development, either directly or through bodies instituted by them, take decisions and ensure their execution, and verify their implementation.
Article 83. Soviets of People's Deputies shall function publicly on the basis of collective, free, constructive discussion and decision-making, of systematic reporting back to them and the people by their executive-administrative and other bodies, and of involving citizens on a broad scale in their work.
Chapter 10
The Electoral System
Article 84. Deputies to all Soviets shall be elected on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot. 
Article 85. Elections shall be universal: all citizens of the Estonian SSR who have reached the age of 18 shall have the right to vote and to be elected, with the exception of persons who have been certified insane. 
Article 86.  Elections shall be equal: each citizen shall have one vote; all voters shall exercise the franchise on an equal footing. 
Article 87.  Elections shall be direct: deputies to all Soviets of People's Deputies shall be elected by direct vote. 
Article 88. Voting at elections shall be secret: control over voters' exercise of the franchise is inadmissible.
Article 89. The following shall have the right to nominate candidates: branches and organisations of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, trade unions, and the All-Union Leninist Young Communist League; co-operatives and other public organisations; work collectives, and meetings of servicemen in their military units. 
Citizens of the Estonian SSR and public organisations are guaranteed the right to free and all-round discussion of the political and personal qualities and competence of candidates, and the right to campaign for them at meetings, in the press, and on television and radio. 
The expenses involved in holding elections to Soviets of People's Deputies shall be met by the state.
Article 90.  Deputies to Soviets of People's Deputies shall be elected by constituencies. 
A citizen of the Estonian SSR may not, as a rule, be elected to more than two Soviets of People's Deputies. 
Elections to the Soviets shall be conducted by electoral commissions consisting of representatives, and of meetings of servicemen in military units. 
The procedure for holding elections to Soviets of People's Deputies shall be defined by the laws of the USSR, and of the Estonian SSR.
Article 91. Electors give mandates to their Deputies. 
The appropriate Soviets of People's Deputies shall examine electors' mandates, take them into account in drafting economic and social development plans and in drawing up the budget, organise implementation of the mandates, and inform citizens about it.
Chapter 11 
People’s Deputy
Article 92.  Deputies are the plenipotentiary representatives of the people in the Soviets of People's Deputies.
In the Soviets, Deputies deal with matters relating to state, economic, and social and cultural development, organise implementation of the decisions of the Soviets, and exercise control over the work of state bodies, enterprises, institutions and organisations. 
A Deputy shall be guided in his activities by the interests of the state, and shall take the needs of his constituents into account and work to implement his electors' mandates.
Article 93. A Deputy shall exercise his power without discontinuing his regular employment or duties. 
During sessions of the Soviet, and so as to exercise their deputy's powers in other cases stipulated by law, a Deputy shall be released from his regular employment or duties, with retention of his average earnings at his permanent place of work.
Article 94. A Deputy has the right to address inquiries to the appropriate state bodies and officials, who are obliged to reply to them at a session of the Soviet.
A Deputy has the right to approach any state or public body, enterprise, institution, or organisation on matters arising from his work as a Deputy and to take part in considering the questions raised by him. The heads of the state or public bodies, enterprises, institutions or organisations concerned are obliged to receive a Deputy without delay and to consider his proposals within the time-limit established by law.
Article 95. A Deputy shall be ensured conditions for the unhampered and effective exercise of his rights and duties. 
The immunity of Deputies, and other guarantees of their activity as Deputies, are defined in the Law on the Status of Deputies and other legislative acts of the USSR and of the Estonian SSR. 
Article 96. A Deputy shall report on his work and on that of the Soviet to his constituents, and to the work collectives and public organisations that nominated him. A Deputy who has not justified the confidence of his constituents may be recalled at any time by decision of a majority of the electors in accordance with the procedure established by law.
V
Higher Bodies of State Authority and Administration of the Estonian SSR 
Chapter 12
The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR
Article 97. The highest body of state authority of the Estonian SSR shall be the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR. 
The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR is empowered to deal with all matters within the jurisdiction of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, as defined by the Constitution of the USSR. The adoption and amendment of the Constitution of the Estonian SSR; approval of the state plans for economic and social development, of the Budget of the Estonian SSR, and of reports on their execution; and the institution of bodies of the Estonian SSR accountable to it, are the exclusive prerogative of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 98. The Supreme Council of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic shall consist of 285 deputies elected by constituencies with equal populations. The Supreme Council of the Estonian SSR, upon submission by the credentials commissions elected by them, shall decide on the validity of Deputies' credentials, and, in cases in which the election law has been violated, shall declare the election of the Deputies concerned null and void.
Article 99. The Supreme Council of the Estonian SSR shall elect a Chairman of the Supreme Council of the Estonian SSR and four Vice-Chairmen. A Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall preside at meetings of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, and shall be responsible for its internal regulations.
Article 100. Sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall be convened twice a year. Special sessions shall be convened by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR at its discretion or on the proposal of not less than one-third of the Deputies of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR. A session of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall consist of its sittings, as well as meetings of standing and other committees of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR carried out in the period between them.
Article 101. The right to initiate legislation in the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR is vested in the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, commissions of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and standing commissions of its chambers, Deputies of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, the Supreme Court of the Estonian SSR, and the Procurator of the Estonian SSR. The right to initiate legislation is also vested in public organizations through their Republican bodies.
Article 102. Bills and other matters submitted to the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall be debated at its sittings. Where necessary, a bill or other matter may be referred to one or more commissions for preliminary or additional consideration. Laws of the Estonian SSR, resolutions and other acts and decrees of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall be adopted by a majority of the total number of Deputies of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR. Bills and other very important matters of state may be submitted for nationwide discussion by a decision of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR or the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 103. Laws of the Estonian SSR, resolutions and other acts and decrees of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR are published in the Moldovan and Russian languages over the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 104. A Deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR has the right to address inquiries to the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, and to Ministers and the heads of other bodies formed by the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, and the heads of enterprises, institutions and organizations located on the territory of the Estonian SSR, subordinate to the Union on matters within the jurisdiction of the Estonian SSR. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, or the official to whom the inquiry is addressed, is obliged to give a verbal or written reply at the given session of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 105. A Deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR may not be prosecuted, or arrested, or incur a court-imposed penalty, without the sanction of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR or, between its sessions, of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 106. The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall elect a Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, which shall be a standing body of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, accountable to it for all its work and exercising the limits provided economic and social development of the Estonian SSR, the Estonian SSR state budget and reports on their implementation; the formation of accountable bodies shall be ordered only by the Supreme Council of the Estonian SSR. Laws of the Estonian SSR shall be adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, or by popular vote (referendum) held by decision of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 107. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall be elected from among the Deputies and shall consist of a Chairman, tow Vice-Chairmen, a Secretary of the Presidium, and 15 members of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 108. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall: 
1) name the date of elections to the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR; 
2) convene sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR;
3) co-ordinate the work of the standing commissions of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR;
4) ensure observance of the Constitution of the Estonian SSR;
5) call elections to district (city) people's courts;
6) interpret the laws of the Estonian SSR;
7) direct the work of local Soviets of People's Deputies;
8) revoke decisions and ordinances of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR should they fail to conform to the law;
9) award certificates of honour of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR; and confer honorary titles of the of the Estonian SSR;
10) grant citizenship of the Estonian SSR, and rule on matters of the renunciation or deprivation of citizenship of the Estonian SSR and of granting asylum;
11) issue acts of amnesty and exercise the right of pardon of citizens convicted by the courts of the Estonian SSR;
12) ratify and denounce international treaties of the Estonian SSR;
13) appoint and recall diplomatic representatives of the Estonian SSR to other countries and to international organizations;
14) receive the letters of credence and recall of the diplomatic representatives of foreign states accredited to it;
15) decide on the administrative-territorial structure of the Estonian SSR;
16) exercise other powers vested in it by the Constitution and laws of the Estonian SSR.
Article 109. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, between sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and subject to submission for its confirmation at the next session, shall:
1) amend existing legislative acts of the Estonian SSR when necessary;
2) form and abolish districts, establish Republican subordination of cities;
3) on the proposal of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, form and abolish ministries and state committees of the Estonian SSR;
4) by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, dismiss and appoint the individuals that make up the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR.
Article 110. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR promulgates decrees and adopts decisions.
Article 111. On expiry of the term of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall retain its powers until the newly elected Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR has elected a new Presidium. The newly elected Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall be convened by the outgoing Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR within two months of the elections.
Article 112. The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall elect standing commissions from among the Deputies to make a preliminary review of matters coming within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, to promote execution of the laws of the Estonian SSR and other acts of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and its Presidium, and to check on the work of state bodies and organizations.  The chambers of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR may also set up joint commissions on a parity basis. When it deems necessary, the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR sets up commissions of inquiry and audit, and commissions on any other matter. All state and public bodies, organizations and officials are obliged to meet the requests of the commissions of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and of its chambers, and submit the requisite materials and documents to them. The commissions' recommendations shall be subject to consideration by state and public bodies, institutions and organizations. The commissions shall be informed, within the prescribed time-limit, of the results of such consideration or of the action taken.
Article 113. The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall supervise the work of all state bodies accountable to it. The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR shall form a Committee of People's Control of the Estonian SSR to head the system of people's control. The organization and procedure of people's control bodies are defined by the Law on People's Control in the Estonian SSR.
Article 114. The procedure of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and of its bodies shall be defined in the Rules and Regulations of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and other laws of the Estonian SSR enacted on the basis of the Constitution of the Estonian SSR.
Chapter 13
The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR
Article 115. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, i.e. the Government of the Estonian SSR, is the highest executive and administrative body of state authority of the Estonian SSR.
Article 116. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall be formed by the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and shall consist of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, First Vice Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen, Ministers of the Estonian SSR, and Chairmen of State Committees of the Estonian SSR. The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, on the recommendation of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, may include in the Government of the Estonian SSR the heads of other bodies and organizations of the Estonian SSR. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall tender its resignation to a newly elected Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR at its first session.
Article 117. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall be responsible and accountable to the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and, between sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall report regularly on its work of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 118. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR is empowered to deal with all matters of state administration within the jurisdiction of the Estonian SSR insofar as, under the Constitution, they on not come within the competence of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR or the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR. Within its powers the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall:
1) ensure direction of economic, social and cultural development; draft and implement measures to promote the well-being and cultural development of the people, to develop science and engineering, to ensure rational exploitation and conservation of natural resources, to consolidate the monetary and credit system, to pursue a uniform prices, wages, and social security policy, and to organize state insurance and a uniform system of accounting and statistics; and organize the management of industrial, constructional, and agricultural enterprises and amalgamations, transport and communications undertakings, banks, and other organizations and institutions of Republican and local subordination;
2) draft current and long-term state plans for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR and the Budget of the Estonian SSR, and submit them to the  Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR; take measures to implement national plans and budget for the integrated economic and social development of the Estonian SSR, districts and cities of republican subordination; coordinate and supervise the activities of enterprises, institutions and organizations subordinated to the Union on matters, relating to the conduct of the Estonian SSR; and report to the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR on the implementation of the plans and Budget;
3) implement measures to defend the interests of the state, protect socialist property and maintain public order, and guarantee and protect citizens' rights and freedoms;
4) take measures within the limits defined by the Constitution of the USSR to ensure state security and defen?e of the country;
5) provide general direction in regard to relations with other countries and international organizations in the order established by the Union of SSR;
6) when necessary, form committees, central boards and other  departments under the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR to deal with matters of  economic, social and cultural development; 
7) direct the work of the executive committees of local Soviets.
Article 119. A Presidium of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, consisting of the Chairman, the First Vice-Chairmen, and Vice-Chairmen of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, shall function as a standing body of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR to deal with questions relating to guidance of the national economy, and with other matters of state administration in accordance with the Law on the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR.
Article 120. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, on the basis of, and in pursuance of, the laws of the Estonian SSR and other decisions and decrees of Council of Ministers of the USSR, shall issue decisions and ordinances and verify their execution.  The decisions and ordinances of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall be binding throughout the Estonian SSR.
Article 121. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR has the right, in matters within its competence, to suspend execution of decisions and ordinances of the Committees of district and city (also cities of Republican subordination) Soviets of People's Deputies, and of the other bodies subordinate to it.
Article 122. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall co-ordinate and direct the work of All-Union and Union-Republican ministries, state committees, and agrarian-industrial unions of the Estonian SSR, and other bodies subordinate to it. All-Union ministries, state committees and agrarian-industrial unions of the Estonian SSR shall direct the work of the branches of administration entrusted to them, or exercise inter-branch administration, through bodies set up by them. 
Union-Republican ministries and state committees of the Estonian SSR direct the work of the branches of administration entrusted to them, or exercise inter-branch administration, as a rule, through the Soviet of Ministries of the Estonian SSR. Ministries, state committees and agrarian-industrial unions of the Estonian SSR shall be responsible for the condition and development of the spheres of administration entrusted to them; within their competence, they issue orders and other acts on the basis of, and in execution of, the laws of the USSR and other decisions of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and its Presidium, Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and its Presidium, and of decisions and ordinances of the Council of Ministers of the USSR and the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR, acts of corresponding ministries and state committees of the Union of SSR; and organize and verify their implementation.
Article 123. The competence of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR and its Presidium, the procedure for their work, relationships between the Council of Ministers and other state bodies, and the list of Union-Republican and Republican ministries, state committees and agrarian-industrial unions of the Estonian SSR are defined, on the basis of the Constitution, in the Law on the Council of Minister of the Estonian SSR.
VI
The Local Bodies of State Authority and Administration in the Estonian SSR 
Chapter 14
The local Soviets of People's Deputies 
Article 124. The bodies of state authority in regions, districts, cities, city districts, settlements, and rural communities shall be the corresponding Soviets of People's Deputies.
Article 125. Local Soviets of People's Deputies shall deal with all matters of local significance in accordance with the interest of the whole state and of the citizens residing in the area under their jurisdiction, implement decisions of higher bodies of state authority, guide the work of lower Soviets of People's Deputies, take part in the discussion of matters of Republican and All-Union significance, and submit their proposals concerning them. Local Soviets of People's Deputies shall direct state, economic, social and cultural development within their territory; endorse plans for economic and social development an the local budget; exercise general guidance over state bodies, enterprises, institutions and organizations subordinate to them; ensure observance of the laws, maintenance of law and order; and protection of citizens' rights; and help strengthen the country's defence capacity.
Article 126. Within their powers, local Soviets of People's Deputies shall ensure the comprehensive, all-round economic and social development of their area; exercise control over the observance of legislation by enterprises, institutions and organizations subordinate to higher authorities and located in their area; and co-ordinate and supervise their activity as regards land use, nature conservation, building, employment of manpower, production of consumer goods, and social, cultural, communal and other services and amenities for the public.
Article 127. Local Soviets of People's Deputies shall decide matters within the powers accorded them by the legislation of the USSR and of the Estonian SSR. Their decisions shall be binding on all enterprises, institutions, and organizations located in their area and on officials and citizens.
Article 128. Sessions of district, city, city district councils of People's Deputies shall be convened by their executive committees at least four times a year. Sessions of township and village Soviets of People's Deputies shall be convened by their executive committees at least six times a year. Local councils of People's Deputies shall be entitled to address and resolve any issues in sessions, assigned to their jurisdiction by the legislation of the USSR and the Estonian SSR. A list of issues to be solved solely during the sessions shall be established by the laws of the local Soviets.
Article 129. Local Soviets of People's Deputies shall elect from among the deputies standing committees for preliminary consideration of matters relating to local Councils, as well as to facilitate the implementation of the decisions of the Soviets, control the activities of state bodies, enterprises, institutions and organizations. Recommendations of the standing committees of local Councils are subject to mandatory review by the relevant government and public bodies, enterprises, institutions and organizations. The results of the examination and the measures taken shall be reported to the Commission in due time.
Article 130. Local Soviets of People's Deputies have the right to annul acts of the lower Soviets in case of non-compliance with these legislative acts.
Article 131. Local Soviets of People's Deputies shall exercise their activities in connection with community organizations and labour collectives, facilitate the work of local voluntary associations and develop social initiatives of the population, consider the most notable issues for public discussion and involve citizens in the work of the standing committees, executive committees and other bodies accountable to the Soviets.
Chapter 15
The Executive Committees of the local Soviets of People's Deputies
Article 132. The executive and administrative bodies of local Soviets of People's Deputies shall be elected from among the members of the executive committees consisting of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, the Secretary and members. The Executive Committee shall at least once a year report to the elected Soviets, as well as at meetings of labour collectives and community citizens.
Article 133. The executive committees of the local Soviets of People's Deputies shall be accountable directly to the Council which elected them, as well as to the higher executive and administrative bodies.
Article 134. The executive committees of local Soviets of People's Deputies, on the basis of decisions and accountable to the Soviets and other higher state bodies, shall direct the state, economic, social and cultural development in the territory of the relevant Council. The executive committees of local Soviets of People's Deputies have the right to decide all matters referred to the jurisdiction of the Council, with the exception of those that shall be addressed only in session. The executive committees of local Soviets of People's Deputies shall convene sessions of the Council; coordinate the work of the Standing Committee; assist the local Deputies in the exercise of their powers; organize the implementation of decisions of the Board and higher state bodies, as well as orders of voters; supervise subordinate authorities.
Article 135. The executive committees of local Soviets, within their competence, make decisions and issue orders.
Article 136. The executive committees of People's Deputies have the right to annul decisions and orders of the executive committees of inferior Soviets of People's Deputies.
Article 137. On expiry of the term of Local Soviets, their executive committees shall remain their authorities until the election of the Soviets of People's Deputies until the new convocation of the executive committees.
Article 138. District, city (cities of Republican subordination) and the district of city Tallin councils of People's Deputies, in accordance with the laws of the Estonian SSR and taking into account the peculiarities of the economic, social and cultural life of the district and departments, shall form government departments that are subject to both councils and their executive committees, and to the relevant superior government.
VII
The State Plan for the Economic and Social Development of the Estonian SSR, the State Budget of the Estonian SSR 
Chapter 16  
The state plan for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR.
Article 139. The state plan for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR is part of the state plan for economic and social development of the USSR. Current and prospective state plans for economic and social development of the Estonian SSR shall be designed to ensure comprehensive economic and social development in the country in accordance with the basic goals and directions of economic and social development of the republic.
Article 140. The state plans for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR shall define the tasks of economic and socio-cultural development, provide targeted comprehensive programs, development plans for sectors of the economy of the Estonian SSR, and include plans for the economic and social development of regions and cities of Republican subordination.
Article 141. The state plan for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR shall be developed by the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR on the basis of the state plan for the economic and social development of the USSR, and on the basis of the draft plans of ministries, state committees and other bodies of state administration of the Estonian SSR, district and city (cities of Republican subordination), the Council of People's Deputies. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall bring state plans for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR to the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 142. The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR on the report of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR and the conclusions of the Planning and Budget and the other standing committees of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR, shall discuss and approve the State plan for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR.
Article 143. The Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR shall organize the implementation of state plans for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR and shall take steps to strengthen the planning discipline.
Article 144. Reports on the implementation of state plans for the economic and social development of the Estonian SSR shall be reviewed and approved by the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR. General implementation indicators shall be published for public information.
Chapter 17
The State Budget of the Estonian SSR
Article 145. The state budget is the Estonian SSR is part of the common state budget of the USSR.
Article 146. The state budget of the Estonian SSR shall combine the Republican budget of the Estonian SSR and the local budgets of districts and the cities of Republican subordination.
Article 147. Differentiation of incomes and expenditures of the state budget of the Estonian SSR between the Republican budget of the Estonian SSR and the local budgets shall be determined by the Law of the Estonian SSR on the Rights of the budget of the Estonian SSR and the local Soviets of People's Deputies.
Article 148. The state budget of the Estonian SSR shall be developed by the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR on the basis of the state plans for the economic and social development of the USSR and the Estonian SSR. 
The USSR State Budget shall be approved by the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR on the report of the Council of Ministers of the Estonian SSR and the conclusions of the Planning and Budget and other standing committees of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 149. The report on the state budget of the Estonian SSR shall be approved by the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR. General indicators of its execution shall be published for public information.
VIII
Justice, Arbitration, and Procurator’s Supervision 
Chapter 17 
Courts and arbitration
Article 150. In the Estonian SSR justice is administered only by the courts. In the Estonian SSR there are the following courts: the Supreme Court of the Estonian SSR, district (city) people's courts. The organization and procedure of the courts of the Estonian SSR are defined in the Law on the Supreme Court of the USSR and in the Law on the Supreme Court of the Estonian SSR.
Article 151.  All courts in the Estonian SSR shall be formed on the principle of the electiveness of judges and people's assessors. People's judges of district (city) people's courts shall be elected for a term of five years by the citizens of the district (city) on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot.  People's assessors of district (city) people's courts shall be elected for a term of two and a half years at meetings of citizens at their places of work or residence by a show of hands. Judges and people's assessors are responsible and accountable to their electors or the bodies that elected them, shall report to them, and may be recalled by them in the manner prescribed by law.
Article 152. The Supreme Court of the Estonian SSR is the highest judicial body in the Estonian SSR and supervises the administration of justice by the courts of the Estonian SSR. The Supreme Court of the Estonian SSR shall be elected by the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR and shall consist of a Chairman, Vice-Chairmen, members, and people's assessors and shall be elected for a term of five years.
Article 153. The hearing of civil and criminal cases in all courts is collegial; in courts of first instance cases are heard with the participation of people's assessors.  In the administration of justice people's assessors have all the rights of a judge.
Article 154. Judges and people's assessors are independent and subject only to the law.
Article 155. Justice is administered in the Estonian SSR on the principle of the equality of citizens before the law and the court.
Article 156. Proceedings in all courts shall be open to the public.  Hearings in camera are only allowed in cases provided for by law, with observance of all the rule of judicial procedure.
Article 157. A defendant in a criminal action is guaranteed the right to legal assistance.
Article 158. Judicial proceedings shall be conducted in Estonian or in the language spoken by the majority of the people in the locality. Persons participating in court proceedings, who do not know the language in which they are being conducted, shall be ensured the right to become fully acquainted with the materials in the case; the services of an interpreter during the proceedings; and the right to address the court in their own language.
Article 159. No one may be adjudged guilty of a crime and subjected to punishment as a criminal except by the sentence of a court and in conformity with the law.
Article 160. The Bar Association of the Estonian SSR is available to give legal assistance to citizens and organizations. In cases provided for by legislation citizens shall be given legal assistance free of charge. 
The organization and procedure of the bar are determined by legislation of the USSR and the Estonian SSR.
Article 161. Representatives of public organizations and of work collectives may take part in civil and criminal proceedings.
Article 162. Economic disputes between enterprises, institutions, and organizations are settled by state arbitration bodies within the limits of their jurisdiction.
Chapter 18
The procurator's office
Article 163. Supreme power of supervision over the strict and uniform observance of laws by all ministries, state committees and departments, enterprises, institutions and organizations, executive-administrative bodies of local Soviets of People's Deputies, collective farms, co-operatives and other public organizations, officials and citizens is vested in the Procurator-General of the USSR and Procurator of the Estonian SSR and procurators subordinate to him.
Article 164. The procurator of the Estonian SSR is appointed by the Procurator-General of the USSR.  The district and city procurators are appointed by the Procurator of the Estonian SSR, subject to confirmation by the Procurator-General of the USSR. The term of office of the Procurator of the Estonian SSR and all lower-ranking procurators shall be five years.
Article 165. The agencies of the Procurator's Office exercise their powers independently of any local bodies whatsoever, and are subordinate solely to the Procurator-General of the USSR.
IX
The Emblem, Flag, Anthem, and Capital of the Estonian SSR 
Article 167. The State Emblem of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic is a hammer and sickle in the sun and framed by a wreath with coniferous branches on the left and rye ears on the right. Both halves of the wreath are twisted with the red ribbon with inscriptions in Estonian and Russian “Workers of the world, unite!” and “Eesti NSV” below. At the top of the emblem is a five-pointed star.
Article 168. The State Flag of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic consists of a red cloth, with a blue wavy stripe in the middle and with two white stripes on top, forming along the length of the flag six pointed waves. Blue wavy stripes with white stripes comprises three-tenths of the width of the flag. The top red bar is half the width of the flag, the lower red stripe is one fifth of the width of the flag. On top of the red part of the flag in the upper left corner, at a distance of one-sixth of the length of the flag from the flagpole, is a golden hammer and sickle and above a five-pointed red star, framed by a gold border. The ratio of the width to the length is 1: 2.
Article 169. The State Anthem of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic is confirmed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.
Article 170. The Capital of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic is the city of Tallin.
X
The Legal Force of the Constitution of the Estonian SSR and Procedure for Amending the Constitution 
Article 171. All laws and other acts of state bodies of the Estonian SSR shall be promulgated on the basis of and in conformity with it.
Article 172. The Constitution of the Estonian SSR may be amended by a decision of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR adopted by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total number of Deputies of the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR.





