CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Finland.- July 17,1919. 
WHEREAS, Finland having become an independent and sovereign State, it has been deemed necessary to develop and consolidate its Constitution by new statutes having the character of fundamental laws, which, while securing the necessary stability of the State, enlarge the powers of the national representation, and guarantee the legal rights and liberties of the citizens; therefore, in conformity with the decision of the Diet, taken in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Section 60 of the Law of the Diet of the 20th July, 1906, this present Form of Government for Finland is hereby sanctioned.

Chapter I.-General Provisions. ART. 1. Finland is a sovereign Republic, its constitution being established by this Form of Government and by other fundamental laws. 2. Sovereign power in Finland belongs to the people represented by their delegates assembled in Diet. Legislative power shall be exercised by the Diet in conjunction with the President of the Republic. Supreme executive power is vested in the President of the Republic. Together with the President there shall be, for the general government of the State, a Council of State consisting of a Prime Minister and the necessary number of Ministers. The judicial power shall be exercised by independent tribunals, and, in final instance, by the Supreme Court and the Supreme Administrative Court. 3. The territory of the Republic of Finland shall be 7indivisible. Its boundaries cannot be modified except with the consent of the Diet. 4. Finnish citizenship belongs to every person born of Finnish parents and to a woman of foreign nationality who has married a Finnish citizen. A citizen of another country may be admitted to Finnish citizenship in accordance with the conditions and procedure specially prescribed by law.

Chapter II.-General Rights and Constitutional Protection of Finnish Citizens. 5. Finnish citizens shall be equal before the law. 6. Every Finnish citizen shall be protected by law as to life, honour, personal liberty, and property. The working faculties of citizens shall be under the special protection of the State. Expropriation for purposes of public utility with full compensation shall be regulated by law. 7. Every Finnish citizen shall have the right of sojourn in his country, of freely choosing his place of residence and of travelling from one place to another, except where otherwise provided by law. The right of Finnish citizens to leave the country is governed by special provisions. 8. Every Finnish citizen shall have the right to worship in public and in private in so far as he does not violate law or good morals; he shall be at liberty also, in conformity with the special regulations governing the matter, to leave the religious community to which he belongs as well as to join another such community. 9. The fact of belonging to any particular religious community or of not belonging to any such community shall have no influence upon the rights and duties of Finnish citizens. In respect to public posts and offices restrictions defined by law shall, however, remain in force until it be otherwise enacted. 10. Finnish citizens shall enjoy freedom of speech and the right of printing and publishing written or pictorial representations without any previous restraint being imposed. They shall also have the right of assembly without previous authorisation, for the discussion of public affairs and for all other legitimate purposes, and the right of forming associations for purposes not contrary to law or good morals. The rules governing the exercise of these rights shall be, determined by law. 11. The domicile of Finnish citizens shall be inviolable. The conditions under which domiciliary searches may be ordered and carried out shall be determined by law. 12. The secrecy of postal, telegraphic and telephonic communication shall be inviolable, except when otherwise provided by law. 13. No Finnish citizen shall be tried by any other court than that which has jurisdiction over him in accordance with the law. 14. Finnish and Swedish shall be the national languages of the Republic. The right of Finnish citizens to use their mother tongue,
whether Finnish or Swedish, before the courts and the administrative authorities, and to obtain from them documents in such language, shall be guaranteed by law, so as to safeguard the rights of the Finnish population and the rights of the Swedish population of the country in accordance with identical principles. The State shall provide for the intellectual and economic needs of the Finnish and Swedish populations in accordance with identical principles. 15. No title of nobility nor other hereditary dignity shall be conferred in the Republic. 16. These provisions concerning the general rights of Finnish citizens shall constitute no - obstacle to the establishment by law of restrictions which are necessary in time of war or insurrection, and in respect to persons in the military or naval service, at any time. Chapter III.-Legislation. 17. The organisation and the functions of the Diet are regulated by the Law of the Diet. 18. The right of proposing the enactment of a new law or the modification, interpretation, or repeal of a law in force shall belong both to the President and to the Diet. The President of the Republic shall exercise his right of initiating laws by presenting proposals of law to the Diet. Proposals of law shall be drafted by the Council of State. According to the nature of the matter, the opinion of the Supreme Court or of the Supreme Administrative Court or of both these Courts may be requested upon such proposals. The exercise of the right of the Diet to initiate laws is determined by the Law of the Diet. 19. Laws adopted by the Diet shall be submitted to the President of the Republic for his sanction. The President may as to such laws request the opinion of the Supreme Court or the Supreme Administrative Court or of both these Courts, according to the nature of the matter. The law must be sanctioned in the wording adopted by the Diet. If a law is not sanctioned by the President, it shall nevertheless come into force even without his sanction, if the Diet, after a new election, readopts it without alteration by a majority of votes cast. Otherwise the law shall be regarded as having lapsed. If the President, within three months after a law has been submitted for his sanction, has not sanctioned it, this shall be regarded as a refusal of sanction. 20. In the preamble of every law it shall be stated that it has been enacted in conformity with the decision of the
Diet, and, if the law has been enacted in accordance with the procedure required for the enactment of fundamental laws, this too shall be stated. Every law, whether it be sanctioned or whether it come into force without the sanction of the President, shall be signed by the President and countersigned by the competent Minister, after which it shall be published by the Council of State in the Statute Book of Finland. 21. The right of the President to issue ordinances is determined by Article 28. 22. Laws and ordinances as well as proposed laws. presented by the Government to the Diet, and the replies, representations, and other documents addressed by the Diet to the Government shall be drawn up in the Finnish and the. Swedish languages. Chapter IV.-Government and Administration. 23. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the people of Finland from among the native-born citizens of Finland each time for a term of six years. The election of the President shall be made by 300 presidential electors. In electing these electors, the regulations in force for elections to the Diet shall be observed in respect to suffrage and eligibility, and, in so far as applicable, also to the mode of election, the procedure of voting, and the designation of deputy electors. The election of electors shall take place on the 15th and 16th January; and on the 15th February following the electors shall assemble under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister to elect the President. The vote shall be by secret ballot. If a candidate obtains more than half of the votes cast, he shall be declared elected; otherwise a new ballot shall immediately be taken, and if no candidate obtains an absolute majority this time, another ballot shall be taken between the two candidates who obtain the highest number of votes on the second count. In case of an equal number of votes the decision shall be by lot. If a member of the Diet is elected President, his mandate as a member shall cease. A public functionary who is elected President shall be regarded as having resigned his office. If a day fixed in paragraph 3 of this article or elsewhere in this Form of Government falls upon a public holiday, the next following workday shall be substituted for it. 24. The President shall enter upon his duties on the first day of the month of March following his election, and in the presence of the Diet shall make at this time the following solemn vow:


" I, (full name), elected by the Finnish people President of the Republic of Finland, do hereby vow that in the exercise of my presidential functions I will truly and faithfully obey and uphold the constitution and the laws of the Republic, and that I will to my utmost power promote the welfare of the Finnish people." 25. If the President is prevented from fulfilling his functions, these shall be exercised by the Prime Minister. If his disability is lasting, a new President shall be elected as soon as possible, who shall enter upon his duties immediately after the election. 26. For the exercise of his functions the President shall receive an annual remuneration, the amount of which shall be fixed by law, which amount shall be neither increased nor diminished during his term of office. 27. The President shall have power to convoke the Diet in extraordinary session, to issue orders for parliamentary elections, to open and close the sessions of the Diet, and to order new elections and dissolve the Diet. 28. In cases not otherwise provided for in this present Form of Government or, in case the right has not been vested in the Council of State, the President shall have the right to issue Ordinances upon matters which have heretofore been regulated by administrative provisions, as well as Ordinances containing detailed provisions for bringing laws into force, the administration of State property, and the organisation and operation of administrative services and Ordinances shall not contain any public institutions. provision implying a modification of a law. Ordinances shall be promulgated as provided in Article 20, paragraph 2, in respect to laws. 29. In particular cases the President may, after having taken the opinion of the Supreme Court, by the exercise of his prerogative of pardon remit or reduce a penalty. In respect, however, to the pardoning of a member of the Council of State or of the Chancellor of Justice, the existing special stipulations must be observed. A general amnesty may be granted only by a special law. The President may also grant exemption from the requirements of the law in cases in which the law permits the granting of such exemption. 30. The President shall be Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of Finland; he shall have power in time of war to transfer his command to another. 31. The President may grant Finnish citizenship to a citizen of another country and may release a Finnish citizen from his citizenship. 32. The President shall supervise the administration of the State, and for this purpose he may demand explanations
from the directors or the governing boards of public departments and institutions, and order inspections to be made. 33. The President shall determine the relations of Finland with, foreign Powers, it being, however, provided that every treaty with a foreign Power must be ratified by the Diet in so far as it contains stipulations falling within the domain of legislation or if the Constitution requires such ratification for other reasons. Decisions in respect to peace and war shall be taken by the President with the consent of the Diet. Every communication with foreign Powers or with the diplomatic representatives of Finland abroad must take place through the Minister to whose department belongs the management of foreign affairs. 34. The decisions of the President shall be made in the Council of State upon the report of the Minister whose department the question involved concerns. The decisions of the President, in order to be valid, must be signed by the President and countersigned by the Minister who has reported upon the matter. This rule, however, shall not apply to the matters referred to in Articles 32 and 47. If the decision of the President concerns the entire Council of State, if shall be countersigned by the appropriate Reporter of the Council. On the reporting of military questions concerning matters of command or appointments, and on the countersigning of the decisions of the President in such matters, special' regulations shall be issued. The countersigner of a decision of the President shall be responsible for the correct form of the document in which such a decision is published. 35. If a Minister finds a decision of the President to be contrary to law, he shall refer his opinion to the Council of State, which shall thereupon proceed as is set forth in Article 45. If the decision is considered contrary to a fundamental law the Minister must refuse his countersignature. 36. The members of the Council of State, who must enjoy the confidence of the Diet, shall be chosen by the 'resident from among the citizens of Finland native born 9nd known for their honesty and ability. The Minister under whose jurisdiction affairs relating to the administration of justice are placed, and at least one other Minister, must have legal training. 37. The Council of State shall have a Chancellor of Justice who must possess an eminent knowledge of the law. The Chancellor of Justice shall have by his side an assistant
Chancellor of Justice, who in case of need shall take his place. 38. The Council of State shall include as many ministerial departments as are necessary for the different Each department shall be branches of administration. directed by a Minister. The number of ministerial departments and the general extent of their jurisdiction shall be fixed by law, but the detailed rules governing the apportionment of business among the departments and the organisation of the Council of State in other respects shall be decreed by Ordinance. 39. The Prime Minister shall be chairman of the Council of State; in case he is unable to attend, his place shall be taken by the Minister present who is first in point of precedence. When the President of the Republic is present he shall preside over the Council. 40. The business of the Council of State shall be conducted in plenary session, except in cases in which the decision of certain questions has been, by Ordinance, committed to one of the Ministers in his capacity as head of a department. A quorum of the Council shall consist of five members. 41. The Council of State shall execute the decisions of the President and decide on matters which according to the. law fall within its competence, as well as on other questions. of government and administration which have not, in the present Form of Government or in any other Law or Ordinance, been either reserved for the President or committed to a Minister in his capacity as head of a department, or to an inferior authority. The extent to which matters relating to the administration of justice, the University of Helsingfors, and military organisation, are withdrawn from the competence of the Council of State, is defined by special regulations. 42. If the Council of State is in doubt as to its competence definitively to decide any matter, the President of the Republic shall settle this question of competence. 43. The members of the Council of State shall be responsible to the Diet for their conduct of affairs. Every member of the Council of State who has taken part in the settlement of any matter by the Council shall be responsible for the decision reached, unless he shall have expressed a different opinion recorded in the minutes. 44. The questions considered by the Council of State must have been prepared by the competent department. shall supervise the Each ministerial department administration within its own sphere of authority, and shall take measures to enforce the laws, ordinances and decisions of the Council.

45. If it happen that a decision of the President which has been presented to the Council of State for execution, is found to be contrary to law, the Council, after taking the opinion of the Chancellor of Justice, shall address to the President a representation that he withdraw or modify his decision, and, if the President nevertheless adheres to his decision, the Council must declare that the decision cannot be enforced. 46. The Chancellor of Justice must see that the authorities and functionaries comply with the law and perform their duties so that no person shall suffer injury to his rights. It shall be the duty of the Chancellor of Justice to act as public prosecutor in the Supreme Court and in the Supreme Administrative Court, and generally to guard the interests of the State in these courts, as well as to institute prosecutions in other tribunals, or cause them to be instituted, when he shall deem it necessary. In his capacity as supreme public prosecutor, the Chancellor of Justice must also exercise supervision over other public prosecutors, and these must comply with his decisions. The Chancellor of Justice shall have the right to be present at the sessions of the Council of State as well as of all tribunals and public departments, and shall have access to the minutes of the Council of State and of the ministerial departments, tribunals and other authorities. 47. If the Council of State or one of its members act in a manner contrary to the law in the exercise of their functions, it is incumbent upon the Chancellor of Justice to make a representation upon the subject, and at the same time to indicate in what respect the act is illegal. If no heed is taken of such representation, the Chancellor of Justice shall have his opinion entered on the minutes of the Council of State, and shall also have the right to advise the President in respect to it. If the illegality is such as to render a member of the Council of State liable to prosecution before -the High Court mentioned in Article 59, and if the President orders such a prosecution to take place, it shall be carried out by the Chancellor of Justice. If the President finds that there is no ground for an arraignment, the Chancellor of Justice shall be free to report on the case to the Diet. If the President decides upon an arraignment of the Chancellor of Justice, the indictment shall be prosecuted by the person designated by the President for that purpose. If the President in the exercise of his functions should -commit illegal acts, the Chancellor of Justice must make a representation upon the subject as provided above. If the ,Chancellor of Justice or the Council of State considers that the President is guilty of high treason or treason-felony, the
Chancellor or the Council shall report on the matter to the Diet. And in case the Diet, by a three-fourths majority of the votes cast, decides to arraign the President, the Chancellor shall prosecute him before the Supreme Court, and in the meantime the President shall abstain from the Except in the case herein exercise of his functions. provided the President shall not be arraigned for his administrative acts. 48. The Chancellor of Justice shall present each year to the President as well as to the Diet a report upon the measures that he has taken, and his remarks on the observance of the laws. The Chancellor of Justice shall upon request give the President and the Council of State information and advice. 49. At each ordinary session the Diet shall elect, in accordance with the procedure provided for the election of its own Speaker, a person distinguished in the law who shall be the Solicitor of the Diet. The Solicitor, in conformity with the instructions given him by the Diet, shall supervise the observance of the laws in the proceedings of courts and other authorities. There shall be elected also, in accordance with the same procedure, a Deputy Solicitor, who shall act for the Solicitor in case of the latter's disability. The Solicitor of the Diet shall have the same right as the Chancellor of Justice to be present at the sessions of the Council of State and of tribunals and public departments, to have access to the minutes of the Council of State, of ministerial departments, tribunals and other authorities, and, under the responsibility imposed by law upon public prosecutors, the right to prosecute or cause to be prosecuted complaints for malfeasance or nonfeasance in office. The Solicitor shall annually present to the Diet a report on the manner in which he has performed his functions, on the state of the administration of the law, and on the defects which he has noticed in legislation. 50. For the purposes of general administration, Finland shall remain divided into provinces, shires and communes. Every modification in respect to the number of provinces shall be made by law; the Council of State shall decide all other changes in reference to administrative divisions, unless otherwise provided by law. In case of new delimitations of administrative districts, the new districts, wherever circumstances permit, shall be so formed as to include populations speaking only one language, Finnish or Swedish, or so that the minority speaking the other language shall be as small as possible. 51. The provinces shall be administered by governors. The administration of the communes shall be established upon the principle of local autonomy as prescribed by special
laws. The form and extent of local autonomy to be applied in districts larger than communes shall also be regulated by law; 1he regulations contained in Article 50, paragraph 3, shall be followed in fixing the boundaries of these districts. 52. Public departments now existing or hereafter created for different branches of the administration of the State are governed by special regulations. Chapter V.-The Judiciary. 53. The Supreme Court is the court of final resort in suits at law; moreover, it shall supervise judges and executive authorities in the administration of justice. 54. The Supreme Court shall be composed of a President and of the necessary number of Councillors of Justice. Matters pertaining to judicial administration which, by reason of special regulations, fall within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court shall be prepared by the department of the Council of State to which questions concerning the administration of justice are assigned. The head of this department shall take part in the deliberations of the Supreme Court upon these matters. In the Supreme Court questions may be decided by five members except when, for the decision of certain question, a larger or smaller number of members is specially provided for by law. 55. Provisions referring to general tribunals of first instance and of appeal are laid down in the law. 56. The Supreme Administrative Court shall, except where otherwise specially provided, be the court of last resort in cases of appeal involving administrative law. This Court shall also supervise inferior authorities in their administration of justice in the field of administrative law. 57. The Supreme Administrative Court shall be composed of a President and of the necessary number of Councillors of Administration. The provisions of Article 54, paragraph 3, shall apply also to this Court. 58. The Supreme Court and the Supreme Administrative Court shall have the right, when they think that a modification or interpretation of a law or ordinance is necessary, to address to the President of the Republic a note requesting that such legislation be enacted. 59. In case of arraignment of a member of the Council of State, of the Supreme Court, or of the Supreme Administrative Court, or the Chancellor of Justice, for an illegal act committed in the exercise of their functions, the case shall be tried by a special court called High Court, established by special regulations having the character of a fundamental law.


If an arraignment be decided upon by the Diet, the Solicitor of the Diet shall act as prosecutor. 60. Provisions as to special tribunals other than. that mentioned in Article 59 shall be made by law. No extraordinary tribunal shall be established. Chapter VI.-Public Finance. 61. Imposts, including Customs duties, shall be prescribed by law for an indeterminate or a limited period, as is the case also with the modification or abolition of a previously established impost and of compulsory public services. An impost established for a limited period shall not be collected beyond such period except in the case provided in Article 69, paragraph 1. 62. The general principles in respect to fees to be paid for the official services of public authorities, -and for documents issued by them, as well as for the use of the post, the railways, the canals, the hospitals, the schools and other public ,establishments belonging to the State, shall be fixed by law. 63. Revenue-yielding property and enterprises belonging to the State shall be exploited and utilised according to general principles established by law. 64. The consent of the Diet shall be necessary for the issue of a public loan. 65. The principles governing new budgets for public departments and institutions, as well as the modification and abrogation of principles previously established, shall be regulated by law, as shall also the question of pension rights. New public posts and departments may be created only within the limits of the annual budget. . New extraordinary pensions or subventions may be granted only from credits voted for this purpose by the Diet. 66. The annual budget, in which must be included the receipts and expenses for the financial year, shall be adopted by the Diet and promulgated in the same manner as is required for the promulgation of laws. Special regulations determine whether a fund not designed to meet the annual expenses of the State shall be ,excluded from the budget. 67. The budget for any particular year shall not omit any impost or other revenue which, in accordance with any current law or Ordinance, is that year to be paid. 68. Interest on public debts and annuities for their amortisation and other grants designed to meet some State obligation, as well as other expenses which must be defrayed in accordance with regulations in effect during the financial year, must be included without deductions in the budget. The budget must also include amounts covering expenses M [cxx]
based upon laws or ordinances but not entered in the budget as special items, as well as necessary credits placed at the disposal of the Government for unexpected needs. Other expenses contained in the budget shall be examined and voted by the Diet for a single financial year at a time. Credits voted by the Diet upon parliamentary initiative shall be inserted in the budget as conditional. The budget must show resources sufficient to cover expenses. 69. If the budget is not adopted by the Diet before the beginning of the year, although the budgetary proposals have been in the preceding year submitted by the Government at least two months before the expiration of the parliamentary session, the expenditures mentioned in Article 68, paragraph 1, shall be paid, and the revenues necessary for this purpose shall continue to be collected provisionally. If modifications in the approved budget are found to be absolutely necessary, supplementary budget proposals shall -be presented to the Diet. 70. The credits contained in the budget shall not be exceeded, nor shall they be carried over from one financial year to another, unless provision for this is made in the budget, nor shall a credit be transferred from one part separately voted by the Diet to another part of the budget. Independently of the budget every person shall have the right to receive from the Treasury what is legally due to him. 71. For the examination of Treasury accounts and balancesheets there shall be a Board of Audits, which must satisfy itself that the figures in the accounts are correct, that the receipts and expenditures are legal, and that the budget has been complied with. At every ordinary session of the Diet there shall be appointed five State auditors, who shall, on behalf of the Diet, supervise the observance of the budget and examine the condition and administration of the Treasury. These auditors shall be subject to the instructions given by the Diet, and shall be entitled to obtain from the competent authorities information and documents. They shall be elected, by proportional voting, by those members of the Diet entrusted In the same with electing parliamentary committees. manner there shall be elected also the necessary number of deputy auditors. 72. The currency of Finland shall be regulated by law. 73. The Bank of Finland shall be placed under the guarantee and care of the Diet and under the supervision of trustees elected by the Diet. The Bank of Finland shall be administered by regulations adopted in accordance with the procedure Prescribed for the enactment of laws.

The Diet shall determine how the profits of the Bank shall be used for the needs of the State. 74. Landed property, imposts, or revenue-yielding rights of the State shall not be alienated or hypothecated except as authorised by law. Occupiers of State land shall nevertheless have the right to purchase the freehold of such land in accordance with special regulations. Chapter VII.-National Defence. 75. Every Finnish citizen must take part in the defence of the country or assist therein as prescribed by law. Every conscript, unless he otherwise desires, shall if possible be enrolled in a military unit the members of which speak his own mother tongue (Finnish or Swedish), and shall in such unit receive his instruction in that language. Finnish shall be the language of command of the armed forces. 76. If the armed forces are to be put upon a war footing, the President shall issue an Order to this effect in the Council ,of State. When this Order has been given, the Council shall take measures for covering the necessary expenditure which results, and the Diet shall be convoked in case it is not in session. Chapter VIII.-Education. 77. The University of Helsingfors shall retain its right of autonomy. New regulations concerning the principles of the organisation of the university shall be determined by law; but details in respect to the university shall be regulated by ordinance. In both cases the Senate of the University must be previously consulted. 78. The State shall promote the study of, and higher instruction in, the technical, agricultural, and commercial sciences and other applied sciences, as well as the practice of and higher instruction in the fine arts, by maintaining and establishing for all these branches special schools of higher learning in so far as they are not represented at the university, or by giving grants in aid to private institutions created for these purposes. 79. The State shall maintain at its expense or, if necessary, subsidise schools for secondary education as well as for higher primary education. The principles of the organisation of State-owned schools shall be established by law. 80. The principles governing the organisation of primary instruction, the obligations of the State and the communes 'to support primary schools, and compulsory education, shall be determined by law. 
Instruction in the primary schools shall be free to all. 81. The State shall maintain or, so far as necessary, subsidise institutions for instruction in the technical professions, in agriculture and its allied pursuits, in commerce and navigation, and in the fine arts. 82. The right to establish private schools or other private institutions of instruction and to organise instruction therein shall be regulated by law. Instruction given at home shall be subject to no supervision by the authorities. Chapter IX.-Religious Communities. 83. The organisation and administration of the Evangelical Lutheran Church is regulated by the Church Law. Other existing religious communities shall be governed by rules which are or shall be prescribed in respect to them. New religious communities may be established subject to the provisions of the law. Chapter X.-Public Offices. 84. Except as otherwise provided in this Article only Finnish citizens shall be appointed to public offices. Employments of a technical nature, teaching posts in the university or other high schools, posts of teacher of foreign languages in the schools, and of translator in public departments, as well as honorary consular posts and the posts of clerical assistant and other special positions in legations and consulates, may be held by other than Finnish citizens. 85. Examinations for appointment to public offices shall be regulated by Ordinance except where such matters are regulated by law. Exemption from the qualifications prescribed by Ordinance may for special reasons be granted by the Council of State; this concession, however, shall not apply to employments in the judicial service. 86. The general principles upon which appointment to. public offices of the State may be made shall be merit, ability and proved civic virtue. 87. The President of the Republic shall appoint(1.) The Chancellor of Justice and the Assistant Chancellor of Justice. (2.) The Archbishop, the Bishops, and the Chancellor of the University. (3.) The Presidents of the Supreme Court and of the Supreme Administrative Court, and, upon the recommendation of the Supreme Court, the members of that Court and the presidents of the Courts of Appeal, as well as, upon recommendation of the Supreme Administrative Court, the members of that Court.
 (4.) The members of the Courts of Appeal and the professors of the University and of the Technical High School. (5.) The heads of the central administrative offices and the provincial governors, upon the recommendation of the Council of State, and members of the central administrative offices; (6.) The officials in the President's Chancery and, upon the recommendation of the proper authority, the reporters to the Council of State, to the Supreme Court, and to the Supreme Administraiive Court; and finally (7.) Ministers plenipotentiary and consuls (missi), upon the recommendation of the Council of State. 88. Judges of rural tribunals of first instance, burgomasters and chairmen of land-partition courts shall be appointed by the Supreme Court. In compliance with special regulations, appointment to certain employments shall be made as follows :(1.) To posts in the judiciary, by the Supreme Court or by the Superior Court within whose jurisdiction the employment falls, and to the Supreme Administrative Court, by that Court; and (2.) In administrative offices and in schools, by the Council of State, the Minister, the Provincial Government, or the governing body of the office to which the employment belongs. Appointment to other public offices shall be made by the Council of State, unless the right of appointment has been reserved to the President or committed to some other authority. 89. In filling vacancies in the central administrative offices and the employments mentioned in Article 87, Section 4, and in Article 88, and subject to the reservations contained in Article 90, the post shall first be declared open for applications, whereupon, to serve as a basis for the appointment, a list shall be drawn up by the authority to which the applications have been addressed, which list shall bear the names of the three candidates who are best qualified in accordance with the principles established. In filling vacancies in the Courts of Appeal, the Supreme Court shall give its opinion on the list of candidates. If the appointment is to be made by the same authority to which the applications are addressed, no list of candidates need be drawn up. In accordance with special regulations, certain other administrative posts may also be filled by a. procedure different from that prescribed in paragraph 1 of this Article. 90. For appointments to posts in the University, in the Evangelical Lutheran Church and the Greek Orthodox Church, to the offices of burgomaster and of aldermen in [cxx] 


towns, and to offices and employments in the Bank of Finland special regulations are in force. Officers of the army and the navy shall be appointed by the President. Special regulations shall be issued concerning other matters of military promotion and instruction. 91. No Judge shall be deprived of his office except by lawful trial and judgment. Nor shall he, without his own consent, be transferred to another post, except in the case of reorganisation of the judicial establishment. The right of other officials to retain their offices shall be regulated by a special law. The law may impose, even for irremovable officials, an obligation to*retire at a fixed, age or because of infirmity involving incapacity for work. Special regulations shall define the rights and duties of officials whose offices are abolished. 92. In the exercise of public functions the law must be strictly followed under the penalty prescribed by law. If a provision in an Ordinance is contrary to a fundamental or other law, it shall not be applied by a Judge or other official. 93. Every official is responsible for the measures that he takes or to which he contributes in his capacity as a member of a collegiate public office. A reporter is likewise responsible for a decision taken upon his report, unless he has recorded his dissenting opinion on the minutes. Whoever suffers a violation of his right, or injury, as a result of an illegal measure or of the negligence of an official, has the right to demand that this official shall be punished and pay damages, or to lay an information against him demanding his arraignment in accordance with the formalities prescribed by law. The responsibility of the State for damages caused by an official shall be governed by special regulations. Chapter XI.-Final Provisions. 94. The election of the first President .of the Republic shall be made by the Diet and shall take place immediately after the present Form of Government comes into force. The election shall be by secret ballot. If a candidate obtains more than half of the votes cast he shall be declared elected. Otherwise a new ballot shall immediately be taken, and if no candidate. obtains this time an absolute majority, another ballot shall be taken between the two candidates who on the second count obtain the highest number of votes. In case of an equal number of votes the decision shall be by lot. 95. This present Form of Government shall have in all its parts the sanctity of a fundamental law. It cannot be modified, interpreted or repealed, nor can it be departed from, except in accordance with the procedure prescribed for fundamental laws in general. The following laws are repealed by the present law: the Form of Government of the 21st August, 1772, and the Act of Union and Security of the 21st February and the 3rd April, 1789, as well as such provisions contained in other laws and enactments as are in conflict with this present Form of Government. The provisions necessary for bringing the present Form of Government into effect shall be determined by law. By all whom it may concern to be followed and obeyed. Helsingfors, July 17, 1919. Regent: MANNERHEIM. Minister of Justice:
SODERHOLM.

