THE CONSTITUTION of the FRENCH REPUBLIC
Adopted by the National Constituent Assembly September 28, 1946
PREAMBLE On the morrow of the victory of the free peoples over the régimes that attempted to enslave and degrade the human person, the French people proclaims once more that every human being, without distinction of race, religion, or belief, possesses inalienable and sacred rights. It solemnly reaffirms the rights and freedoms of man and of the citizen consecrated by the Declaration of Rights of 1789 and the fundamental principles recognized by the laws of the Republic. It further proclaims as most vital in our time the following political, economic and social principles: The law guarantees to women equal rights with men in ail domains. Anyone persecuted because of his activities in the cause of freedom has the right of asylum within the territories of the Republic. Everyone has the duty to work and the right to obtain employment. No one may suffer in his work or his employment because of his origin, his opinions, or his beliefs. Everyone may defend his rights and interests by trade-union action and may join the union of his choice. The right to strike may be exercised within the frame work of the laws that govern it. Every worker through his delegates may participate in collective bargaining to determine working conditions, as well as in the management of business. Al property and all enterprises that now have or subsequently shall have the character of a national public service or a monopoly ip fact must become the property of the community. The nation ensures to the individual and the family the conditions necessary to their development. It guarantees to all, and notably to the child, the mother, and the aged worker, health protection, material security, rest, and leisure. Every human being who, because of his age, his physical or mental condition, or because of the economic situation, finds himself unable to work, has the right to obtain from the community the means to lead a.decent existence. The nation proclaims the solidarity and equality of all Frenchmen with regard to the burdens resulting from national disasters.

The nation guarantees equal access of children and adults to education, professional training, and culture. The establishment of free, secular, public education on all levels is a duty of the state. The French Republic, faithful to its traditions, abides by the rules of international law. It will not undertake wars of conquest and will never use its arms against the freedom of any people. On condition of reciprocity, France accepts the limitations of sovereignty necessary to the organization and defense of peace. France forms with the people of its overseas territories a union based upon equality of rights and duties without distinction of race or religion. The French Union is composed of nations and peoples who wish to place in common or co-ordinate their resources and their efforts in order to develop their civilization, increase their well-being, and ensure their security. Faithful to her traditional mission, France proposes to guide the peoples for whom she has assumed responsibility toward freedom to govern themselves and democratically to manage their own affairs; putting aside any system of colonization based upon arbitrary power, she guarantees to al equal access to public office and the individual or collective exercise of the rights and liberties proclaimed or confirmed above. 

THE INSTITUTIONS OF THE REPUBLIC
TITLE I
SOVEREIGNTY

Art. 1. France is a republic, indivisible, secular, democratic, and social. Art. 2. The national emblem is the tricolor flag-blue, white, and red -in three vertical bands of equal dimensions. The national anthem is the "Marseillaise." The motto of the Republic is: "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity." Its principle is: government of the people, for the people, and by the people. Art. 3. National sovereignty belongs to the French people. No section of the people or any individual may assume its exercise. The people shall exercise it in constitutional matters by the vote of their representatives or by the referendum. In all other matters they shall exercise it through their deputies in the National Assembly, elected by universal, equal, direct, and secret suffrage. Art. 4. All French citizens and nationals of both sexes, who are of legal age and enjoy civil and political rights, may vote under conditions determined by the law.

TITLE II
THE PARLIAMENT

Art. 5. The Parliament shall be composed of the National Assembly and the Council of the Republic. Art. 6. The duration of the powers of each assembly, its mode of election, the conditions of eligibility, and grounds of ineligibilities and incompatibilities 1 shall be determined by the law.However, the two chambers shall be elected on a territorial basis, the National Assembly by universal, direct suffrage, the Council of the Republic by the communal and departmental bodies by universal, indirect suffrage. The Council of the Republic is renewable one-half at a time. Nevertheless, the National Assembly may itself elect by proportional representation councillors whose number shall not exceed one-sixth of the total number of members of the Council of the Republic. The number of members of the Council of the Republic may not be less than two hundred and fifty nor more than three hundred and twenty. Art. 7. War may not be declared without a vote of the National Assembly and the concurrent opinion of the Council of the Republic. Art. 8. Each of the two chambers shall be the judge of the eligibility of its members and the regularity of their elections; it alone may receive their resignation. Art. 9. The National Assembly shall convene by right every year on the second Tuesday in January. The total duration of interruptions of each session may not exceed four months. Adjournments of more than ten days shall be considered as interruptions. The Council of the Republic shall sit at the same time as the National Assembly. Art. 10. The meetings of the two chambers shall be public. Reports of the debates in extenso, as well as the parliamentary documents, shall be published in the "Journal Officiel". Each of the two chambers may convene as a secret committee. Art. 11. Each of the two chambers shall elect its secretariat every year, at the beginning of the session, by proportional representation of party groups. When the two chambers meet together to elect the President of the Republic, their secretariat shall be that of the National Assembly. Art. 12. When the National Assembly is not sitting, its secretariat, exercising control over the actions of the cabinet, may convoke the Parliament; it must do this upon the request of one-third of the deputies or of the president of the council of ministers. Art. 13. The National Assembly alone shall vote the laws. It may not delegate this right. Art. 14. The president of the council of ministers and the members of the Parliament shall have the initiative in legislation. Bills and proposed laws introduced by members of the National Assembly shall be filed with its secretariat. Proposed laws introduced by members of the Council of the Republic shall be filed with its secretariat and sent without debate to the secretariat of the National Assembly. They may not be received if they would result in the reduction of revenues or the creation of new expenditures. Art. 15. The National Assembly shall study the bills and proposed laws submitted to it in its committees, of which it shall determine the number, the composition, and the jurisdiction. Art. 16. The budget proposed shall be submitted to the National Assembly. This proposal may include only such provisions as are strictly financial. An organic law shall regulate the method of presentation of the budget.

Art. 17. The deputies of the National Assembly shall have the right to initiate expenditures. However, no proposals which would tend to increase expenditures already decided upon or create new ones may be presented during the discussion of the budget and of prospective or supplementary appropriations. Art. 18. The National Assembly shall regulate the accounts of the Nation. It shall be assisted in this task by the court of accounts. The National Assembly may entrust to the court of accounts all investigations or examinations concerning public revenues and expenditures or the administration of the treasury. Art. 19. Amnesty may not be granted except by a law. Art. 20. The Council of the Republic shall examine, in order to give its opinion thereon, the bills and proposed laws voted on first reading by the National Assembly. It shall give its opinion not more than two months after a measure is sent to it by the National Assembly. When the budget law is under discussion, this time may be reduced, if need be, to such time as does not exceed that taken by the National Assembly for its consideration and vote. When the National Assembly has adopted a rule for emergency procedure, the Council of the Republic shall give its opinion in the same time as that provided for debate by the rule of the National Assembly. The time limit specified in the present article shall be suspended during interruptions of the session. It may be extended by a decision of the National Assembly. If the opinion of the Council of the Republic is in agreement with that of the National Assembly, or if it bas not been given within the time limit specified in the preceding paragraph, the law shall be promulgated as passed by the National Assembly. If this opinion is not in agreement with that of the National Assembly, the latter body shall examine the bill or proposed law on second reading. It shall dispose definitively and absolutely of the amendments proposed by the Council of the Republic, accepting or rejecting them in whole or in part. If these amendments are completely or partially rejected, the vote on second reading of the law shall be by roll call and by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly, when the vote on the whole has been taken under the same conditions by the Council of the Republic. Art. 21. No member of Parliament may be prosecuted, sought by the police, arrested, detained, or tried because of opinions expressed or votes cast by him in the exercise of his function. Art. 22. No member of Parliament may be prosecuted or arrested during his term of office for a criminal offense except with the authorization of the chamber of which he is a member, or in the case of a major crime. The detention or prosecution of a member of Parliament shall be suspended if the chamber of which he is a member requests it. Art. 23. Members of Parliament shall receive compensation fixed in relation to that of a given grade of civil servants. Art. 24. No one may be a member both of the National Assembly and of the Council of the Republic. Members of Parliament may not be members of the economic council or of the Assembly of the French Union.

Constitutionsof Nations TITLE III
THE ECONOMIC COUNCIL

4rt. 25. An economie council whose statutes shall be determined by law, shall examine, in order to give its opinion thereon, the bills and proposed laws within its purview. The National Assembly shall send such bills to this council before it discusses them. The economic council may also be consulted by the council of ministers. It must be consulted by that body in the adoption of a national economie plan for full employment and the rational utilization of our material resources.

TITLE IV DIPLOMATIC TREATIES

Art. 26. Diplomatie treaties duly ratified and published shall have the force of law even when they are contrary to internal French legislation; they shall require for their application no legislative acts other than those necessary to ensure their ratification. Art. 27. Treaties relative to international organization, peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties that involve national finances, treaties relative to the personal status and property rights of French citizens abroad, those that modify French internal legislation, as well as those that involve the cession, exchange, or addition of territories, shall not become final until they have been ratified by an act of the legislature. No cession, no exchange, and no addition of territory shall be valid without the consent of the populations concerned. Art. 28. Since diplomatie treaties duly ratified and published have authority superior to that of French internal legislation, their provisions shall not be abrogated, modified, or suspended without previous formal denunciation through diplomatie channels. Whenever a treaty such as those mentioned in Article 27 is concerned, such denunciation must be approved by the National Assembly, except in the case of commercial treaties.

TITLE V THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

Art. 29. The President of the Republie shall be elected by the Parliament. He shall be elected for seven years. He shall not be eligible for re-election more than once. Art. 30. The President of the Republic shall appoint in the council of ministers the councillors of state, the grand chancellor of the Legion of Honor, the ambassadors and special envoys, the members of the superior council and the committee for national defense, the rectors of the universities, the prefects, the chiefs of the central governmental agencies, the general officers and the representatives of the government in the overseas territories. Art. 31. The President of the Republic shall be kept informed of the progress of international negotiations. He shall sign and ratify all treaties.
The President of the Republic shaLL accredit ambassadors and special envoys to foreign powers; foreign ambassadors and special envoys shall be accredited to him. Art. 32. The President of the Republic shall preside over the council of ministers. He shall order the minutes of their meetings to be recorded and shall keep them in his possession. Art. 33. The President of the Republie shall preside in the same capacity over the superior council and the committee for national defense, and shall have the title of commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Art. 34. The President of the Republic shall preside over the superior council of judiciary. Art. 35. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon in the superior council of the judiciary. Art. 36. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws within ten days after the text as finally adopted has been sent to the government. This interval may be reduced to five days if the National Assembly declares an emergency. Within the time limit fixed for promulgation of a law, the President of the Republic may, in a message stating his reasons, ask that it be reconsidered by both chambers; this reconsideration may not be refused. If the President of the Republic does not promulgate a law within the time limit fixed by the present Constitution, the president of the National Assembly shall promulgate it. Art. 37. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the Parliament by means of messages addressed to the National Assembly. Art. 38. Every act of the President of the Republic must be countersigned by the president of the council of ministers and by a minister. Art. 39. Not more than thirty days and not less than fifteen days before the expiration of the term of office of the President of the Republic, the Parliament shall elect a new President. Art. 40. If in the application of the preceding article the election must take place during the period when the National Assembly is dissolved in conformity with Article 51, the powers of the then President of the Republic shall be extended until such time as a new President is elected. The Parliament shall elect this new President within ten days after the election of the National Assembly. In this case, the president of the council of ministers shall be appointed within fifteen days after the election of the new President of the Republic. Art. 41. If the President of the Republic is not able to exercise his function for reasons duly noted by a vote of the Parliament, or in the event of a vacancy caused by death, resignation, or any other circumstance, the president of the National Assembly shall assume the interim functions of the President of the Republic. He shall be replaced in his own duties by a vice-president. The new President of the Republie shall be elected within ten days, except under the conditions specified in the preceding article. Art. 42. The President of the Republic may not be tried except for high treason. He may be indicted by the National Assembly and arraigned before the High Court of Justice under the conditions set forth in Article 57 below. Art. 43. The function of the President of the Republic is incompatible with any other public office.

Art. 44. Members of families that once reigned over France shall not be eligible for the presidency of the Republic.

TITLE VI
THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS

Art. 45. At the opening of each legislature, the President of the Republic, after the customary consultations, shall designate the president of the council. The latter shall submit to the National Assembly the program and the policy of the cabinet he intends to constitute. The president of the council and the ministers may not be formally appointed until the president of the council receives a vote of confidence from the National Assembly by a roll call vote and by an absolute majority of the deputies, except when force majeure prevents the National Assembly from meeting. The same procedure shall be followed during a legislative session in the event of a vacancy caused by death, resignation, or any other circumstance, except in the case set forth in Article 52 below. No ministerial crisis occurring within the ftifteen-day period after the appointment of the ministers shall require the application of Article 51. Art. 46. The president of the council and the ministers chosen by him shall be formally appointed by a decree of the President of the Republic. Art. 47. The president of the council shall ensure the execution of the laws. He shall appoint all civil and military officials except those specified in Articles 30, 46 and 84. The president of the couneil shall assume the direction of the armed forces and shall co-ordinate all measures necessary for the national defense. The acts of the president of the council mentioned in the present article shall be countersigned by the ministers concerned. Art. 48.The ministers shall be collectively responsible to the National Assembly for the general policy of the cabinet and individually responsible for their personal actions. They shall fot be responsible to the Council of the Republic. Art. 49. A question of confidence may not be put except after discussion by the council of ministers; it can be put only by the president of the council. The vote on a question of confidence may not be taken until one full day after it has been put before the assembly. It shall be taken by a rol call. The cabinet may not be refused a vote of confidence except by an absolute majority of the deputies in the assembly. Refusal to give such a vote shall automatically result in the collective resignation of the cabinet. Art. 50. Passage of a motion of censure by the National Assembly shall automatically result in the collective resignation of the cabinet. The vote on such a motion cannot be taken until one full day after it has been made. It must be taken by a roll call. A motion of censure may be adopted only by an absolute majority of the deputies in the assembly.

Art. 51. If in the course of an eighteen-month period two ministerial crises occur under the conditions set forth in Articles 49 and 50, the council of ministers with the concurrence of the president of the assembly may decide to dissolve the National Assembly. Its dissolution shall be proclaimed by a decree of the President of the Republic, in accordance with such decision. The provisions of the preceding paragraph may not be applied before the expiration of the first eighteen months of the legislature. Art. 52. In case of dissolution, the cabinet, with the exception of the president of the council and the minister of the interior, shall remain in office to carry out current business. The President of the Republic shall appoint the president of the National Assembly as president of the council. The latter shall appoint the new minister of the interior with the approval of the secretariat of the National Assembly. He shall appoint as ministers of state members of party groups not represented in the government. General elections shall take place not less than twenty and not more than thirty days after the dissolution. The National Assembly shall convene by right on the third Thursday after its election. Art. 53. The ministers shall have access to the two chambers and to their committees. They must be heard when they request it. In discussions before the chambers, they may be assisted by representatives designated by decree. Art. 54. The president of the couneil of ministers may delegate his powers to a minister. Art. 55. In the event of a vacancy caused by death or any other circumstance, the council of ministers shall call upon one of its members to exercise temporarily the functions of president of the council of ministers.

TITLE VII
THE LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS

Art. 56. The ministers shall be legally responsible for crimes and misdemeanors committed in the exercise of their functions. Art. 57. The ministers may be indicted by the National Assembly and arraigned before the High Court of Justice. The National Assembly shall decide this matter by secret ballot and by an absolute majority of its members, with the exception of those who may be called upon to participate in the prosecution, investigation, or judgment of the case. Art. 58. The High Court of Justice shall be elected by the National Assembly at the opening of each legislature. Art. 59. The organization of the High Court of Justice and the procedure to be followed before it shall be determined by a special law.

TITLE VIII
THE FRENCH UNION

Section I Principles 
Art. 60. The French Union shall be composed on the one hand, of the French Republic which comprises metropolitan France and the overseas departments and territories, and on the other hand, of the associated territories and states. Art. 61. The position of the associated states within the French Union shall depend in each case on the act which defines its relationship with France. Art. 62. The members of the French Union shall place in common all their resources to guarantee the defense of the whole Union. The government of the Republic shall assume the co-ordination of these resources and the direction of such policy as will prepare and ensure this defense. 

Section II Organization Art. 63. The central organs of the French Union shall be: the presidency, the High Council, and the Assembly. Art. 64. The President of the French Republic shall be the President of the French Union of which he represents the permanent interests. Art. 65. The High Council of the French Union shall be composed, under the chairmanship of the President of the Union, of a delegation of the French government and of the representatives that each associated state is permitted to accredit to the President of the Union. Its function shall be to assist the government in the general conduct of the affairs of the Union. Art. 66. The Assembly of the French Union shall be composed half of members representing metropolitan France and half of members representing the overseas departments and territories and the associated states. An organic law shall determine the mode of representation of the different sections of the population. Art. 67. The members of the Assembly of the Union shall be elected by the regional assemblies for the overseas departments and territories; for metropolitan France, they shall be elected two-thirds by the National Assembly representing the home country and one-third by the Council of the Republic representing the home country. Art. 68: The associated states may appoint delegates to the Assembly of the Union within the limitations and conditions determined by a law and an internal legislative act of each state. Art. 69. The President of the French Union shall convoke the Assembly of the French Union and shall close its sessions. He must convoke it upon the request of half of its members. The Assembly of the French Union may not sit during interruptions of the sessions of the Parliament. Art. 70. The rules set forth in Articles 8, 10, 21, 22, and 23 shall be applicable to the Assembly of the French Union under the same conditions as to the Council of the Republic. Art. 71. The Assembly of the French Union shall examine the bills or proposals submitted to it, for advice thereon, by the National Assembly or the government of the French Republic or the governments of the associated states. The Assembly shall have the power to express its opinion on resolutions submitted to it by one of its members and, if they meet with its approval, to instruct its secretariat to send them to the National Assembly. It may submit proposals to the French government and to the High Council of the French Union.

In order to be admissible, the proposed resolutions referred to in the preceding paragraph must relate to legislation concerning the overseas territories. Art. 72. In the overseas territories, the legislative power shall belong to the Parliament with regard to penal law, civil liberties, and political and administrative organization. In all other matters, French laws shall be applicable in the overseas territories only by virtue of an express provision to this effect or when they have been extended to the overseas territories by decree after consultation with the Assembly of the Union. Moreover, as an exception to Article 13, special provisions for each territory may be enacted by the President of the Republic in the council of ministers after consultation with the Assembly of the Union. Section III The Overseas Departments and Territories Art. 73. The legislative régime of the overseas departments shall be the same as that of the metropolitan departments save for exceptions determined by the law. Art. 74. The overseas territories shall be given special status which takes into account their particular interests within the framework of the general interests of the Union. This status and the internal organization of each overseas territory or group of territories shall be determined by law, after the Assembly of the French Union has expressed its opinion and after consultation with the territorial assemblies. Art. 75. The respective status of the members of the French Republic and of the French Union shall be subject to modifications. Modifications of status and passage from one category to another within the framework established in Article 60 may result only from a law passed by the Parliament after consultation with the territorial assemblies and the Assembly of the Union. Art. 76. The representative of the government in each territory or group of territories shallibe the depository of the powers of the Republic. He shall be the administrative head of the territory. He shall be responsible for his acts to the government. Art. 77. An elective assembly shall be instituted in each territory. The electoral régime, composition, and powers of this assembly shall be determined by law. Art. 78. In the groups of territories, the management of matters of common interest shall be entrusted to an assembly composed of members elected by the territorial assemblies. Its composition and its powers shall be determined by law. Art. 79. The overseas territories shall elect representatives to the National Assembly and to the Council of the Republic under the conditions determined by the law. Art. 80. All nationals of the overseas territories shall have the status of citizens, in the same capacity as French nationals of metropolitan France or the overseas territories. Special laws shall determine the conditions under which they may exercise their rights as citizens. Art. 81. All citizens and nationals of territories within the French Union shall have the status of citizens of the French Union, which ensures them the enjoyment of the rights and liberties guaranteed by the Preamble of the present Constitution. Art. 82. Those citizens who do not have French civil status shall retain their personal status so long as they have not renounced it. This status may in no case constitute a ground for refusing or limiting the rights and liberties pertaining to the status of French citizen.

TITLE IX
THE SUPERIOR COUNCIL OF THE JUDICIARY

Art. 83. The superior council of the judiciary shall be composed of fourteen members: The President of the Republic, president; The keeper of the seals of minister of justice, vice-president; Six persons elected for six years by the National Assembly, by a two-thirds majority and chosen outside its membership, and six alternates elected under the same conditions; Six persons designated as follows: Four judges elected for six years under the conditions determined by the law, and representing each category of the judiciary, and four alternates elected under the same conditions; Two members appointed for six years by the President of the Republic and chosen outside the membership of the Parliament and the judiciary, but from among the members of the legal profession, two altemates being designated under the same conditions. The decisions of the superior council of the judiciary shall be taken by majority vote. In case of a tie, the President shall cast the deciding vote. Art. 84. The President of the Republic shall appoint the judges whose names are submitted to him by the superior council of the judiciary, with the exception of those in the office of the public prosecutor. The superior council of the judiciary, in conformity with the law, shall ensure the discipline of these judges, their independence, and the administration of the courts. The presiding judges shall not be removable.

TITLE X LOCAL ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS

Art. 85. The French Republic, one and indivisible, recognizes the existence of the local administrative units. These units shall be the communes, the departments, and the overseas territories. Art. 86. The framework, the scope, the eventual regrouping, and the organization of the communes, the departments, and the overseas territories shall be determined by law. Art. 87. Local administrative units shall be governed freely through councils elected by universal suffrage. The execution of the decisions of these councils shall be ensured by their mayor or their president. Art. 88. The co-ordination of the activities of government officials, the representation of the national interests, and the administrative control of these units shall be ensured within the departmental framework by delegates of the government appointed by the council of ministers.

Art. 89. Organic laws will extend the liberties of the departments and municipalities; they may provide, for certain large cities, rules of operation and an administrative structure different from those of small towns, and include special provisions for certain departments; they will determine the conditions under which Articles 85 to 88 above are to be applied. Laws will likewise determine the conditions under which local agencies of central administrations are to function, in order to bring the central administration closer to the people.

TITLE XI
REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION

Art. 90. Revision of the Constitution shall take place in the following manner: Revision must be decided upon by a resolution adopted by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly. This resolution shall stipulate the purpose of the revision. After at least three months, this resolution shall have a second reading under the same rules of procedure as the first, unless the Council of the Republic to which the resolution has been referred by the National Assembly, has adopted the same resolution by an absolute majority. After this second reading, the National Assembly shall draw up a bill to revise the Constitution. This bill shall be submitted to the Parliament, and voted by a majority and according to the rules established for any ordinary act of the legislature. It shall be submitted to a referendum unless it has been adopted on second reading by a two-thirds majority of the National Assembly or voted by a three-fifths majority of each of the two assemblies. The bill shall be promulgated as a constitutional law within eight days after its adoption. No constitutional revision relative to the existence of the Council of the Republic may be made without the concurrence of this Council, or resort to a referendum. Art. 91. The constitutional committee shall be presided over by the President of the Republic. It shall include the president of the National Assembly, the president of the Council of the Republic, seven members elected by the National Assembly at the beginning of each annual session by proportional representation of party groups and chosen outside its own membership, and three members elected under the same conditions by the Council of the Republic. The constitutional committee shall determine whether the laws passed by the National Assembly require a revision of the Constitution. Art. 92. In the period allowed for the promulgation of the law, the committee shall receive a joint request from the President of the Republic and the president of the Council of the Republic, the Council having decided by an absolute majority of its members. The committee shall examine the law, shall strive to bring about agreement between the National Assembly and the Council of the Republic, and, if it does not succeed, shall decide the matter within five days after it has received the request. This period may be reduced to two days in case of emergency.

The Committee shall be competent to decide on the possibility of revision only of Titles I through X of the present Constitution. Art. 93. A law which, in the opinion of the committee, implies a revision of the Constitution shall be sent back to the National Assembly for reconsideration. If the Parliament adheres to its original vote, the law may not be promulgated until the Constitution has been revised according to the procedure set forth in Article 90. If the law is considered to be in conformity with Titles I through X of the present Constitution, it shall be promulgated within the period provided in Article 36, said period being prolonged by the addition of the period provided in Article 92 above. Art. 94. In the case of occupation of all or part of the metropolitan territory by foreign forces, no procedure of revision may be undertaken or continued. Art. 95. The republican form of government may not be the subject of any proposal of revision.

TITLE XII
TEMPORARY PROVISIONS

Art. 96. The secretariat of the National Constituent Assembly shall be charged with ensuring the permanence of national representation until the meeting of the deputies of the new National Assembly. Art. 97. In case of exceptional circumstances, the deputies of the National Constituent Assembly may, until the time specified in the preceding article, be called together by the secretariat of the Assembly, either on its own initiative or upon the request of the government. Art. 98. The National Assembly will meet by right on the third Thursday following the general elections. The Council of the Republic will meet the third Tuesday following its election. The present Constitution will take effect from that date. Until the meeting of the Council of the Republic, the organization of public powers will be governed by the law of November 2, 1945, the National Assembly having the attributes conferred by that law on the National Constituent Assembly. Art. 99. The Provisional Government constituted under the terms of Article 98, will hand its resignation to the President of the Republic as soon as the latter is elected by the Parliament under the conditions set forth in Article 29 above. Art. 100. The secretariat of the National Constituent Assembly shall have the responsibility of preparing the meeting of the assemblies created by the present Constitution and, especially, of providing, before the meeting of their respective secretariats, the meeting places and administrative facilities necessary to their functioning. Art. 101. During a period of not more than one year after the meeting of the National Assembly, the Council of the Republic may officially deliberate as soon as two-thirds of its members shall have been proclaimed elected. Art. 102. The first Council of the Republic will be renewed entirely within the year following the renewal of the municipal councils, which renewal will take place within one year after the promulgation of the Constitution.

Art. 103. Until the organization of the economic council and during a maximum period of three months from the meeting of the National Assembly, the application of Article 25 of the present Constitution will be suspended. Art. 104. Until the meeting of the Assembly of the French Union and during a maximum period of one year from the meeting of the National Assembly, the application of Articles 71 and 72 of the present Constitution wiU be suspended. Art. 105. Until the promulgation of the laws provided for in Article 89 of the present Constitution, and without prejudice to the provisions fixing the status of the various departments and overseas territories, the departments and communes of the French Republic will be administered in conformity with the laws now in force, except for paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 97 of the law of April 5, 1884, for the enforcement of which the police of the state shall be placed at the disposal of the mayors. However, the acts of the prefect in his capacity of representative of the department will be carried out by him under the permanent supervision of the president of the departmental assembly. The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not be applicable to the department of the Seine. Art. 106. The present Constitution will be promulgated by the President of the Provisional Government of the Republic within two days after the date of the proclamation of the results of the referendum and in the following form: The National Constituent Assembly bas adopted, The French people bas approved, The President of the Provisional Government of the Republic promulgates the constitution that follows: (Text of the Constitution) 

DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN AND OF THE CITIZEN of 26 August 1789  
Art. 1. Men are born and remain free and equal in respect of rights. Social distinctions shall be based solely upon public utility. Art. 2. The purpose of all civil associations is the preservation of the natural and imprescriptible rights of man. These rights are liberty, property, security, and resistance to oppression. Art. 3. The nation is essentially the source of al sovereignty; nor shall any body of men or any individual exercise authority which is not expressly derived from it. Art. 4. Liberty consists in the power of doing whatever does not injure another. Accordingly, the exercise of the natural rights of every man has no other limits than those which are necessary to secure to every other man the free exercise of the same rights; and these limits are determinable only by the law.
Art. 5. The law ought to prohibit only actions hurtful to society. What is not prohibited by the law should not be hindered; nor should any one be compelled to do that which the law does not require. Art. 6. The law is an expression of the common will. All citizens have a right to concur, either personally or by their representation, in its formation. It should be the same for all, whether it protects or punishes; and all, being equal in its sight, are equally eligible to all honours, places, and employments, according to their different abilities, without any other distinction than that of their virtues and talents. Art. 7. No one shall be accused, arrested, or imprisoned, save in the cases determined by law, and according to the forms which it has prescribed. All who solicit, promote, execute, or cause to be executed, arbitrary orders, ought to be punished, and every citizen summoned or apprehended by virtue of the law, ought immediately to obey, and becomes culpable if he resists. Art. 8. The law should impose only such penalties as are absolutely and evidently necessary; and no one ought to be punished but by virtue of a law promulgated before the offence, and legally applied. Art. 9. Every man being counted innocent until he has been convicted, whenever his arrest becomes indispensable, all rigour more than is necessary to secure his person ought to be provided against by law. Art. 10. No man is to be interfered with because of his opinions, not even because of religious opinions, provided his avowal of them does not disturb public order as established by law. Art. 11. The unrestrained communication of thoughts or opinions being one of the most precious rights of man, every citizen may speak, write and publish freely, provided he be responsible for the abuse of this liberty, in the cases determined by law. Art. 12. A public force being necessary to give security to the rights of men and of citizens, that force is instituted for the benefit of the community, and not for the particular benefit of the person to whom it is entrusted. Art. 13. A common contribution being necessary for the support of the public force, and for defraying the other expenses of government, it should be divided equally among the members of the community, according to their abilities. Art. 14. Every citizen has a right, either of himself or his representative, to a free voice in determining the necessity of public contributions, the appropriation of them, and their amount, mode of assessment, and duration. Art. 15. The community has the right to demand of all its agents an account of their conduct. Art. 16. Every community in which a security of rights and a separation of powers is not provided for needs a constitution. Art. 17. The right to property being inviolable and sacred, no one shall be deprived of it, except in cases of evident public necessity, legally ascertained, and on condition of a previous just indemnity.

