THE CONSTITUTIONS
AND OTHER

SELECT DOCUMENTS
ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE

HISTORY OF FRANCE
1789-1907
BY

FRANK MALOY ANDERSON
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA

SECOND EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED

N1 VV YORK j RUSSELL E RUSSELL

FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1904 SECOND EDITION REVISED, 1908 REPRINTED FROM THE SECOND EDITION AND REISSUED, 1967, BY RUSSELL & RUSSELL A DIVISION OF ATHENEUM HOUSE INC. L. C. CATALOG CARD NO: 66-24665

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Constitution of 1848.

Preamble. In the Presence of God, and in the Name of the French People, the National Assembly Proclaims: I. France is constituted a republic. In definitely adopting that form of government, it proposes for its aim to move more freely in the path of progress and civilization, to assure a more and more equitable distribution of the burdens and advantages of society, to increase the comfort of each person by large reductions in the public expenditures and taxes, and without new commotion, through the successive and constant action of institutions and laws, to cause every one to reach a degree of morality, enlightenment and well-being constantly becoming more elevated. IL The French Republic is democratic, one and indivisible. III. It recognizes rights and duties existing before and superior to positive laws. IV. It has for its maxim liberty, equality, and fraternity. It has for its basis the family, labor, property, and public order. V. It respects foreign nationalities, as it intends to cause its own to be respected; it does not undertake any war for the purpose of conquest, and it never employs its forces against the liberty of any people. VI. Reciprocal duties bind the citizens to the Republic, and the Republic to the citizens. VII. The citizens ought to love the fatherland, to serve the Republic, to defend it at the price of their lives, and to share the expenses of the state in proportion to their fortunes; they ought to secure for themselves, by labor, means of subsistence, and, by foresight, resources for the future; they ought to contribute to the common well-being by fraternally co-operating with one another, and to the general order by observing the moral and the written laws which control society, the family, and the individual. The Republic ought to protect the citizen in his VIII. person, his family, his religion, his property, his labor, and to put within the reach of each person the education indispensable for all men ; it is bound to assure by fraternal assistance the

maintenance of indigent citizens, either by furnishing work to them within the limits of its resources, or, in the absence of the family, by giving assistance to those who are unable to work. For the purpose of fulfilling all these duties and for a guarantee of all these rights, the National Assembly, faithful to the traditions of the great assemblies which inaugurated the French revolution, decrees as follows, the constitution of the Republic. Constitution. Chapter I. Of the Sovereignty. i. Sovereignty resides in the totality of the French citizens. It is inalienable and imprescriptible. No individual nor any part of the people can claim for themselves the exercise thereof. Chapter II. Rights of the Citizens Guaranteed by the Constitution. 2. No one can be arrested or held in custody except according to the provisions of the law. 3. The dwelling-place of every person living on French soil is inviolable ; it can be entered only according to the forms and in the cases provided by law. 4. No one shall be removed from the jurisdiction of his natural judges. No extraordinary commissions or tribunals can be created under any title or denomination whatsoever. 5. The death penalty for political offences is abolished. 6. Slavery cannot exist upon any French soil. 7. Every person freely professes his religion, and receives from the state, for the exercise of his worship, an equal prd-tection. Ministers, either of the sects now recognized by law or of those which may be recognized in the future, have the right to receive a stipend from the state. 8. Citizens have the right to form associations, to assemble peaceably and without arms, to petition, and to express their opinions by means • of the press or otherwise.

The exercise of these rights has for limits only the rights and liberty of others and the public security. The press cannot in any case be subjected to the censorship. 9. Instruction is free. The liberty of instruction is exercised according to the conditions of capacity and morality that are determined by law and under the oversight of the state. This oversight extends to all establishments for education and instruction, without any exception. 1o. All citizens are equally eligible to all public employments; without any other grounds for-preference than their own merits, and according to the conditions which shall be fixed by the laws. All titles of nobility, all distinctions of birth, class or caste are forever, abolished. 11 . All property is inviolable. Nevertheless, the state can demand the sacrifice of a property on the ground of a legally established public utility, and by furnishing a just and prior indemnity. 12. The confiscation of property can never be re-established. 13. The constitution guarantees to citizens liberty of labor and of industry. Society favors and encourages 'the development of labor by gratuitous primary education, professional education, equality of relations between the employer and the workingman, institutions of savings and of credit, agricultural institutions, voluntary associations, and the establishment by the state, the departments and the communes of public works suitable far the employment of unemployed hands; it furnishes assistance to abandoned children, the infirm, and the aged that are without resources and whose families cannot relieve them. 14. the public debt is guaranteed. Every form of engagement made by the state with its creditors is inviolable. 15. Every tax is imposed for the common utility. Each person contributes thereto in proportion to his means and his fortune. 16. No tax can be imposed or collected except by virtue of the law.

57. Direct taxation is consented to only for one year. Indirect taxes can be consented to for several years.
Chapter III. Of the Public Powers.

i8. All the public powers, whatever they may be, spring from the people. They cannot be delegated hereditarily. 59. The separation of the powers is the fundamental principle of a free government.
Chapter IV. Of the Legislative Power.

20. The French people delegate the legislative power to a single assembly,* 21. The total number of the representatives of the people shall be seven hundred and fifty, including the representatives of Algeria and the French colonies. 22. This number shall be increased to nine hundred for the assemblies which are called to alter the constitution. 23. The basis for election is population. 24. The suffrage is direct and universal. The ballot is secret. 25. All Frenchmen, twenty-one years of age and enjoying their civil and political rights, are electors, regardless of property. 26. All electors twenty-five years of age, regardless of their domicile, are eligible to election. 27. The electoral law shall determine the causes which can deprive a French citizen of the right to elect and to be elected. It shall designate the citizens who, exercising or having exercised functions in a department or a territorial jurisdiction, cannot be elected there. 28. Every remunerated public employment is incompatible with the commission of representative of the people. No member of the National Assembly, during the continuance of the legislature, can be appointed or preferred for public salaried employments of which the incumbents are appointed by the executive power. The exceptions to the provisions of the two preceding paragraphs shall be determined by the organic electoral law. 29. The provisions of the preceding articles are not applicable to the assemblies elected to alter the constitution.

3o. The election of the representatives shall be by departments and by scrutin de liste. The electors shall vote in the head-town of the canton; nevertheless, on account of local conditions, the canton can be divided into several districts, in the form and upon the conditions that shall be determined by the electoral law. 31. The National Assembly is elected for three years, and is renewed in a body. At least forty-five days before the end of the legislature, a law determines the time of the new elections. If any law does not intervene within the limit fixed by the preceding article, the electors meet as if regularly convoked upon the thirtieth day preceding the end of the legislature. The new assembly is convoked ipso facto upon the day following that upon which the commission of the preceding assembly expired. 32. It is permanent. Nevertheless, it can adjourn for a period which it shall fix. During the continuance of the prorogation, a commission, composed of members of the bureau and of twenty-five members appointed by the assembly through secret ballot and majority vote has the right to convoke it in case of urgency. The President of the Republic also has the right to convoke the assembly. The National Assembly determines the place of its meetings. It determines the extent of the military forces provided for its security, and it controls them. 33. Representatives, are always re-eligible. 34. Members of the National Assembly are the representatives, not of the department which selects them, but of all France. 35. They cannot receive imperative instructions. 36. The representatives of the people are inviolable. They cannot be questioned; accused nor condemned at any time for opinions that they have expressed in the National Assembly. 37. They cannot be arrested upon a criminal charge, unless taken in the act, nor prosecuted except after the assembly has authorised the prosecution. In case of the arrest of one taken in the act, it shall be forthwith referred to the assembly, which shall authorise or

forbid the continuance of the prosecution. This provision applies to the case in which a citizen under arrest is elected representative. 38. Each representative of the people receives a salary which he cannot •refuse. 39. The sittings of the assembly are public. Nevertheless, the assembly can form itself into secret committee, upon the demand of the number of representatives fixed by the rule. Each representative has the right of parliamentary initiative; he shall exercise it according to the forms determined by the rule. 4o. The presence of half plus one of the members of the assembly is necessary for the valid enactment of laws. 45. No proposal for a law, unless in case of urgency, shall be voted definitively except after three deliberations at intervals which cannot be less than five days. 42. Every proposal whose purpose is to declare urgency is preceded by a statement of reasons. If the assembly agrees to give effect to the proposal of urgency it orders the reference thereof to the bureaux and fixes the time at which the report upon the urgency shall be presented. Upon this report, if the assembly recognizes the urgency, it makes declaration thereof, and fixes the time of the discussion. If it decides that there is no urgency, the proposal follows the course of ordinary propositions. Chapter V. Of the Executive Power. 43. The French people delegate the executive power to a citizen who receives the title of President of the Republic. 44. The President must be French born, at least thirty years of age, and never have lost the quality of Frenchman. 45. The President of the Republic is elected for four years and is re-eligible only after an interval of four years. Furthermore, neither the Vice-President, nor any of the kinsmen or connections of the President to the sixth degree inclusive, can be elected after him. 46. ' The election takes place ipso facto upon the second Sunday of •the month of May. In case, owing to death, resignation or any other cause,

the President should be elected at any other time, his powers shall expire upon the second Sunday of the month of May of the fourth year following his election. The President is selected, through secret ballot and majority of the votes, by the direct vote of all the electors of the French departments and of Algeria. 47. The minutes of the electoral proceedings are transmitted immediately to the National Assembly, which decides without delay upon the validity of the election and proclaims the President of the Republic. If no candidate has obtained more than half of the vote cast, and at least two million votes, or if the conditions prescribed by article 44 are not fulfilled, the National Assembly elects the President of the Republic, by majority and secret ballot, from among the five eligible candidates who have received the most votes. 48. Before entering upon his duties, the President of the Republic in the presence of the National Assembly takes the following oath:

In the presence of God and before the French people, represented by the National Assembly, I swear to remain faithful to the democratic Republic one and indivisible, and to fulfil all the duties that the constitution imposes upon me.
49. He has the right to cause propositions of law to be presented by his ministers to the National Assembly. He supervises and secures the execution of the laws. 50. He disposes of the armed force, without power ever. to command in person. 51. He cannot cede any portion of the territory, nor dissolve or prorogue the National Assembly, nor suspend in any way the absolute authority of the constitution and the laws.. 52. He presents each year, in a message to the National Assembly, a statement of the general condition of the affairs of the Republic. 53. He negotiates and ratifies treaties. No treaty is definitive until after it has been ratified by the National Assembly. 54. He, watches over the defence of the state, hut he cannot undertake any war without the consent of the National Assembly.

55. He has the right to pardon, but he can exercise this right only after taking the opinion of the Council of State. Amnesties can be accorded only by a law. The President of the Republic, and the ministers, as well as all others persons condemned by the high court of justice, can be pardoned only by the National Assembly. 56. The President of the Republic promulgates the laws in the name of the . French people. 57. The laws of urgency are promulgated within a period of three days, and the other laws within a period of one month, counting from the day on which they shall have been adopted by the National Assembly. 58. Within the period fixed for promulgation, the President of the Republic, by an explanatory message can request a new consideration. The assembly deliberates; its resolution becomes definitive; it is transmitted to the President of the Republic. In that case, the promulgation takes place within the time fixed for laws of urgency. 59. In default of promulgation by the President of the Re within the periods required by the preceding articles, the president of the assembly shall provide for it. 6o. Envoys and ambassadors of foreign powers are accredited to the President of the Republic. 61. He presides at national solemnities. 62. He is housed at the expense of the Republic and receives a salary of six hundred thousand francs per annum. 63. He resides in the place in which the National Assembly sits, and cannot leave the continental territory of the Republic without being authorised thereto by a law. 64. The President of the Republic appoints and dismisses the ministers. He appoints and dismisses, in council of the ministers, the diplomatic agents, the commanders-in-chief of the army and the navy, the prefects, the superior commandant of the national guards of the Seine, the governors of Algeria and the colonies, the procureurs-general and other officials of high rank. He appoints and dismisses, upon the proposal of the proper minister and according to the regular conditions determined by law, the subordinate agents of the government.

65. He has the right to suspend, for a term that cannot exceed three months, the agents of the executive power elected by the citizens. He can dismiss •them only upon the advice of the Council of State. The law determines the cases in which dismissed agents can be declared ineligible for the same employments. This declaration of ineligibility can be pronounced only by a judicial order. 66. The number of the ministers and their prerogatives are fixed by the legislative power. 67. The acts of the President of the Republic, except those by which he appoints and dismisses ministers, are not valid unless they are countersigned by a minister. 68. The President of the Republic, the ministers, and the agents and depositories of public authority are responsible, each in that which concerns him, for all , the acts of the government and the administration. Every measure by which the President of the Republic dissolves the National Assembly, prorogues it or places an obstacle to the exercise of its commission, constitutes the crime of, high treason. By this act alone, the President is stripped of his functions ; the citizens are required to refuse him obedience; the executive power passes ipso facto to the National Assembly. The judges of the high court of justice meet immediately upon pain of forfeiture : they convoke the jurors in the place that they designate, in order to proceed to the trial of the President and his accomplices; they themselves designate the public officers who shall be charged with performing the functions of the public ministry. A law shall determine the other cases of responsibility, as well as the forms and the conditions of the prosecution. 69. The ministers have admission to the body of the National Assembly ; they are heard whenever they demand it and can have the assistance of commissioners appointed by a decree of the President of the Republic. 70. There is a Vice-President of the Republic appointed by the National Assembly out of three candidates presented by the President within the month that follows his election. The Vice-President takes the same oath as the President.

The Vice-President cannot be chosen from among the kinsmen and connections of the President to the sixth degree inclusive. In case of the disability of the President, the Vice-President acts for him. If the presidency becomes vacant by death, resignation of the President, or otherwise, an election for president takes place within a month. Chapter VI. Of the Council of State. 71. There shall be a Council of State of which the VicePresident of the Republic shall be president, ex-officio. 72. The members of this council are appointed for six years by the National Assembly. They are renewed by a half within the first three months of each legislature through secret ballot and majority. They are re-eligible indefinitely. 73. Those of the members of this council who have been taken from the body of the National Assembly shall be replaced immediately as representatives of the people. 74. The members of the Council of State can be dismissed only by the assembly and upon the proposal of the President of the Republic. 75. The Council of State is consulted upon the government's proposals for laws, which according to law must be previously submitted for its examination and upon projects of parliamentary initiative which the assembly shall have submitted to it. It prepares the regulations for public administration; of these regulations, it makes only those for which the National Assembly has given it a special authorisation. It exercises over the public aministration all the powers of control and supervision which are conferred upon it by law. The law shall determine its other duties. Chapter VII. Of the Internal Administration. 76. The division of the territory into departments, districts, cantons and communes is retained. The present limits can be changed only by a law. 77. There are: 1st. In each department, an administra-

tion composed of a prefect, a council-general and council of prefecture; 2d. In each district, a sub-prefect; 3d. In each canton, a cantonal council; nevertheless only one cantonal council shall be established in cities divided into several cantons; 4th. In each commune, an administration composed of a mayor, assistants, and a municipal council. 78. A law shall determine the composition and the prerogatives of the councils-general, the cantonal councils, the municipal councils, and the manner of selecting the mayors and the assistants. 79. The councils-general and the municipal councils are elected by the direct vote of all the citizens domiciled in the department or the commune. Each canton elects one member of the council-general. A special law shall regulate the mode of election in the department of the Seine, in the city of Paris, and in cities of more than twenty thousand souls. 80. The councils-general, the cantonal councils, and the municipal councils can be dissolved by the President of the Republic upon the advice of the Council of State. The law shall fix the period within which a new election shall be held. Chapter VIII. Of the Judicial Power. 81. Justice is administered gratuitously in the name of the French people. Trials are public, unless publicity would be dangerous to order or morality ; and in that case the tribunal declares it by a judicial order. 82. The jury shall continue to be employed in criminal trials. 83. Jurisdiction over all political offences and all offences committed by means of the press belongs exclusively to the jury. The organic laws shall determine the jurisdiction in the matter of criminal libels against individuals. 84. The jury alone decides upon the damages claimed for acts or offences of the press. 85. The justices of the peace and their substitutes, the

judges of first instance and of appeal, the members of the court of cassation and the court of accounts are appointed by the President of the Republic, according to an order of candidature or conditions which shall be regulated by the organic laws. 86. The magistrates of the public ministry are appointed by the President of the Republic. 87. The judges of first instance and of appeal, the members of the court of cassation and of the court of accounts are appointed for life. They cannot be dismissed or suspended except by a judicial order, nor retired except for the causes and in the forms determined by the laws. 88. The councils of war and of revision for the army and navy, the maritime tribunals, the tribunals of commerce, the trade councils and other special tribunals retain their organization and existing prerogatives until they have been altered by a law. 89. Conflicts of jurisdiction between the administrative and judicial authorities shall be regulated by a special tribunal of members of the court of cassation and councillors of state, selected every three years in equal number by their respective bodies. This tribunal shall be presided over by the minister of justice. 9o. Appeals for lack of jurisdiction and excess of power against the decrees of the court of accounts shall be carried before the magistracy of conflicts. 95. A high court of justice decides, without appeal or. recourse in cassation, the accusation brought by the National Assembly against the President of the Republic or the ministers. It likewise tries all persons accused of crimes, attempts or conspiracies against the internal or external security of the state, whom the National Assembly shall have sent before it. Except in the case provided for by article 68, it cannot be assembled except by virtue of a decree of the National Assembly, which designates the city where the court shall hold its sittings.

92. The high court is composed of five judges and thirtysix j urors. Each year, within the first fifteen days of the month of November, the court of cassation appoints from among its members by secret ballot and, majority vote the judges of the high court, to the number of five, and two substitutes. The five judges called to sit choose their own president. The magistrates filling the functions of the public ministry are selected by the President of the Republic, and, in case of the accusation of the President or the ministers, by the National Assembly. The jurors, to the number of thirty-six, and four substitute jurors, are taken from among the members of the councils-general of the departments. The representatives of the people cannot form part of them. 93. When a decree of the National Assembly has ordered the formation of the high court of justice, and, in the case provided for by article 68 upon the requisition of the president or of one of the judges, the president of the court of appeal, and, in default of the court of appeal, the president of the tribunal of first instance of the judicial head-town of the department, draws by lot in public audience the name of a member of the council-general. 94. Upon the day appointed for the trial if there are less than sixty jurors present, that number shall be completed by supplementary jurors drawn by lot by the , president of the high court from among the members of the council-general of the department in which the court shall sit. 95. Jurors who shall not have furnished a valid excuse shall be condemned to a fine of from one thousand to ten thousand francs, and deprivation of political rights for five years at most. 96. The accused and the public prosecutor exercise the right of challenge as in other cases. 97. The verdict of the jury that the accused is guilty can he rendered only by a two-thirds majority. 98. In all cases of responsibility of the ministers, the National Assembly can, according to circumstances, send the accused minister before the high court of justice or before the ordinary tribunals for civil damages. 99. The National Assembly and the President of the Republic can in all cases turn over the examination of the

acts of any officer, other than the President of the Republic, to the Council of State, whose report is made public. 100 . The President of the Republic is amenable only to the high court of justice. With the exception of the case provided for by article 68, he cannot be prosecuted except upon the accusation brought by the National Assembly, and for crimes and offences which shall be determined by law. Chapter IX. Of the Public Forces. mt. The public forces are established to defend the state against its enemies abroad and to secure within the maintenance of order and the execution of the laws. It is composed of the national guard and of the army and the navy. 102. Every Frenchman, with the exceptions fixed by law, owes service to the army and the national guard. The means by which a citizen may be freed from personal military service shall be regulated by the law of recruiting. 103. The organization of the national guard and the constitution of the army shall be regulated by law. 104. The public forces are of necessity obedient. No armed body can deliberate. 505. The public forces employed to preserve internal order act only upon the requisition of the constituted authorities, according to the regulations determined by the legisla. tive power. 106. A law shall determine the cases in which the state of siege can be declared and shall regulate the forms and consequences of that measure. 107. No foreign troops can be introduced upon French soil, without the previous consent of . the National Assembly. Chapter X. Special Provisions. 108. The Legion of Honor is retained; its statutes shall be revised and put in harmony with the constitution. 109. The territory of Algeria and of the colonies is declared to be French territory, and shall be ruled by separate laws until a special law places them under the regime of 1 0 the present constitution. . The National Assembly confides the safe-keeping of

the present constitution, and the rights which it consecrates, to the guardianship and patriotism of all the French. Chapter XI. Of the Revision of the Constitution. 111 . Whenever, in the last year of a legislature, the National Assembly shall have expressed the wish that the constitution should be altered in whole or in part, such revision shall proceed in the following manner: The wish expressed by the assembly shall be converted into a definitive decision only after three consecutive considerations, taken at intervals of a month each, and by threefourths of the votes cast. The number of voters must be at least five hundred. The assembly of revision shall be appointed only for three months. It must occupy itself only with the revision for which it shall have been convoked. Nevertheless, it can, in case of urgency, provide for necessary legislation. Chapter XII. Temporary Provisions. 112. The provisions of the• existing codes, laws and regulations, which are not in conflict with the present constitution, remain in force until they are legally altered. 113. All the authorities constituted by the existing laws continue in the exercise of their functions until the promulgation of organic laws affecting them. 114. The law for the organization of the judiciary shall determine the special method of appointment for the first composition of the new tribunals. 115. After the vote upon the constitution, the National Constituent Assembly shall proceed to frame the organic laws whose drafting shall be determined by a special law. x16. The first election of the President of the Republic shall occur in conformity with the special law passed by the

National Assembly, October 28, 1848.

