THE CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS OF FRANCE 
Constitutional Law on the Organization of the Public Powers
(February 25, 1875.) 

ARTICLE 1. The legislative power shall be exercised by two assemblies: the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. The Chamber of Deputies shall be elected by universal suffrage, under the conditions determined by the electoral law.* The composition, the method of election, and the powers of the Senate shall be regulated by a special law.
ARTICLE 2. The President of the Republic is chosen by an absolute majority of votes of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies united in National Assembly. He shall be elected for seven years. He shall be eligible for reelection. 
ARTICLE 3. The President of the Republic shall have the initiative of laws concurrently with the members of the two Chambers. He shall promulgate the laws when they have been voted by the two Chambers; he shall look after and secure their execution. He shall have the right of pardon; amnesty may only be granted by law. He shall dispose of the armed forces. He shall appoint to all civil and military positions. He shall preside over state functions; envoys and ambassadors of foreign powers shall be accredited to him. Every act of the President of the Republic must be counter-signed by a minister. 
ARTICLE 4. As vacancies occur on and after the promulgation of the present law, the President of the Republic shall appoint, in the Council of Ministers, the Councillors of State in ordinary service. The Councillors of State thus chosen may be dismissed only by decree rendered in the Council of Ministers.  ARTICLE 5. The President of the Republic may, with the assent of the Senate dissolve the Chamber of Deputies before the legal expiration of its term.  In that case the electoral colleges are summoned for new elections within three months.* ARTICLE 6. The Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Chambers for the general policy of the government, and individually for their personal acts. The President of the Republic shall be responsible only in case of high treason. ARTICLE 7. In case of vacancy by death or for any other reason, the two Chambers assembled together shall proceed at once to the election of a new President. In the meantime the Council of Ministers shall be invested with the executive power. ARTICLE 8. The Chambers shall have the right by separate resolutions, taken in each by an absolute majority of votes, either upon their own initiative or upon the request of the President of the Republic, to declare that occasion has arisen for a revision of the constitutional law. After each of the two Chambers shall have come to this decision, they shall meet together in National Assembly to proceed with the revision. The acts effecting revision of the constitutional laws, in whole or in part, shall be passed by an absolute majority of the members composing the National Assembly. ARTICLE 9. The seat of the executive power and of the two chambers is at Versailles.* 

II
Constitutional Law on the Organization of the Senate

(February 24, 1875.) 
ARTICLE 1. The Senate shall consist of three hundred members; two hundred and twenty-five elected by the departments and colonies and seventy-five elected by the National Assembly. ARTICLE 2. The departments of the Seine and of the Nord shall each elect five senators. The following departments shall elect four senators each: Seine-Inferieure, Pasde-Calais, Gironde, Rhone, Finistere, Cotes-du-Nord. The following departments shall elect three senators each: Loire-Inferieure, Saone-et-Loire, Ille-et-Vilaine, Seine-et-Oise, Isere, Puy-de-Dome, Somme, Bouches-du-Rhone Aisne, Loire, Manche, Maine-et-Loire, Morbihan, Dordogne, Haute-Garonne, Charente-Inferieure, Calvados, Sarthe, Herault, Basses-Pyrenees, Gard, Aveyron, Vendee, Orne, Oise, Vosges, Allier.
All the other departments shall elect two senators each. The following shall elect one senator each: the territory of Belfort, the three departments of Algeria, the four colonies of Martinique, Guadeloupe, Réunion, and the French Indies. ARTICLE 3. No one shall be a senator, unless he is a French citizen, at least forty years of age, and in the enjoyment of civil and political rights. ARTICLE 4. The senators of the departments and of the colonies shall be elected by an absolute majority and by scrutin de liste by a college, meeting at the capital of the department or colony and composed: (1) Of the deputies; (2) Of the general councillors; (3) Of the arrondissement councillors; (4) Of delegates elected, one by each municipal council, from among the voters of the commune. In the French Indies the members of the colonial council or of the local councils are substituted for the general councillors, arrondissement councillors, and delegates from the municipal councils. They shall vote at the seat of government of each district. ARTICLE 5. The senators chosen by the Assembly shall be elected by scrutin de liste and by an absolute majority of votes. ARTICLE 6. The senators of the departments and of the colonies shall be elected for nine years and renewable by thirds every three years. At the beginning of the first session the departments shall be divided into three series containing each an equal number of senators. It shall be determined by lot which series shall be renewed at the expiration of the first and second triennial periods. ARTICLE 7 The senators elected by the Assembly are irremovable: Vacancies by death, resignation, or any other cause, shall, within the space of two months, be filed by the Senate itself. ARTICLE 8. The Senate shall have, concurrently with the Chamber of Deputies, the power to initiate and to pass laws. Finance laws, however, shall first be introduced in and passed by the Chamber of Deputies. ARTICLE 9. The Senate may be constituted a Court of Justice to try either the President of the Republic or the Ministers and to take cognizance of attacks made upon the safety of the State. ARTICLE 10. Elections to the Senate shall take place one month before the time fixed by the National Assembly for its own dissolution. The Senate shall be constituted and enter upon its duties the same day that the National Assembly is dissolved. ARTICLE 11. The present law shall be promulgated only after the passage of the law on the Public Powers. 

III.
Constitutional Law on the Relations of the Public Powers
(July 16, 1875.)

ARTICLE 1.

The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall assemble each year on the second Tuesday in January, unless convened earlier by the President of the Republic. The two Chambers shall continue in session at least five months each year. The sessions of the two Chambers shall begin and end at the same time. On the Sunday following the opening of the session, public prayers shall be addressed to God in the churches and temples, to invoke His aid in the labors of the Chambers. ARTICLE 2. The President of the Republic pronounces the closing of the session. He may convene the Chambers in extraordinary session. He shall convene them if during the recess, an absolute majority of the members of each Chamber request it. The President may adjourn the Chambers. The adjournment, however, shall hot exceed one month, nor take place more than twice in the same session. ARTICLE 3. One month at least before the legal expiration of the powers of the President of the Republic, the Chambers shall be called together in National Assembly to proceed to the election of a new President. In default of a summons, this meeting shall take place, as of right, the fifteenth day before the expiration of the term of the President. In case of the death or resignation of the President of the Republic, the two Chambers shall assemble immediately, as of right. In case the Chamber of Deputies, in consequence of Article 5 of the law of February 25, 1875, is dissolved at the time when the presidency of the Republic becomes vacant, the electoral colleges shall be convened at once, and the Senate shall assemble as of right. ARTICLE 4. Every meeting of either of the two Chambers which shall be held at a time when the other is not in session is illegal and void, except in the case provided for in the preceding article, and when the Senate meets as a court of justice; in the latter case, judicial functions alone shall be exercised. ARTICLE 5. The sittings of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall be public. Nevertheless either Chamber may meet in secret session, upon the request of a fixed number of its members, determined by its rules. It shall then decide by absolute majority whether the sitting shall be resumed in public upon the same subject. ARTICLE 6. The President of the Republic communicates with the Chambers by messages, which shall be read from the tribune by a Minister. The Ministers shall have entrance to both Chambers, and shall be heard when they request it. They may be assisted, for the discussion of a specific bill, by commissioners named by decree of the President of the Republic. ARTICLE 7. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws within the month following the transmission to the Government of the laws as finally passed. He shall promulgate, within three days, laws the promulgation of which shall have been declared urgent by an express vote of each Chamber. Within the time fixed for promulgation the President of the Republic may, by a message with reasons assigned, request of the two Chambers a new discussion, which cannot be refused. ARTICLE 8. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties. He shall acquaint the Chambers of them as soon as the interests and safety of the State permit. Treaties of peace and of commerce, treaties which involve the finances of the State, those relating to the person and property of French citizens in foreign countries, shall be ratified only after having been voted by the two Chambers. No cession, exchange, or annexation of territory shall take place except by virtue of a law. ARTICLE 9. The President of the Republic shall not declare war without the previous consent of the two Chambers. ARTICLE 10. Each Chamber shall be the judge of the eligibility of its members, and of the regularity of their election; it alone may receive their resignation. ARTICLE 11. The Bureau of each Chamber shall be elected each year for the duration of the entire session and of every extraordinary session which may be held before the regular session of the following year. When the two Chambers meet together as a National Assembly, their Bureau shall be composed of the President, Vice-Presidents, and Secretaries of the Senate. ARTICLE 12.The President of the Republic may be impeached by the Chamber of Deputies only, and may be tried only by the Senate. The Ministers may be impeached by the Chamber of Deputies for offences committed in the performance of their duties. In this case they shall be tried by the Senate. The Senate may be constituted into a court of justice by a decree of the President of the Republic, issued in the Council of Ministers, to try all persons accused of attempts upon the safety of the State. If proceedings should have been begun in the regular courts, the decree convening the Senate may be issued at any time before the granting of a discharge. A law shall determine the method of procedure for the accusation, trial, and judgment. ARTICLE 13. No member of either Chamber shall be prosecuted or held responsible on account of any opinions expressed or votes cast by him in the performance of his duties. ARTICLE 14. No member of either Chamber shall, during the session, be prosecuted or arrested for any offense or misdemeanor, except upon the authority of the Chamber of which he is a member, unless he be taken in the very act. The detention or prosecution of a member of either Chamber shall be suspended for the session, and for the entire term of the Chamber, if the Chamber requires it. 

AMENDMENTS
Constitutional Law Revising Article 9 of the Constitutional Law of February 25, 1875 (June 21, 1879.) ARTICLE 9 of the constitutional law of February 25, 1875, is repealed. 

Constitutional Law Partially Revising the Constitutional Laws (August 14, 1884.)

1. Paragraph 2 of Article 5 of the constitutional law of February 25, 1875, on the organization of the Public Powers, is amended as follows: "In that case the electoral colleges shall meet for new elections within two months and the Chamber within the ten days following the close of the elections." ARTICLE 2. To paragraph 3 of Article 8 of the same law of February 25, 1875, is added the following: "The republican form of government shall not be made the subject of a proposed revision.

"Members of families that have reigned in France are ineligible to the Presidency of the Republic."
ARTICLE 3. Articles 1 to 7 of the constitutional law of February 24, 1875, on the Organization of the Senate, shall
no longer have a constitutional character. 

ARTICLE 4. Paragraph 3 of Article 1 of the constitutional law of July 16, 1875, on the Relations of the Public Powers, is repealed.

Law Relating to the Seat of the Executive Power and of the Two Chambers at Paris
(July 22, 1879.) 
ARTICLE 1. The seat of the executive power and of the two Chambers is at Paris. 
ARTICLE 2. The palace of the Luxemburg and the Palais-Bourbon are assigned the first to the use of the Senate, and the second to that of the Chamber of Deputies. Nevertheless each of the Chambers is authorized to choose in the city of Paris, the palace which it wishes to occupy. 
ARTICLE 3. The various parts of the palace of Versailles now occupied by the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall preserve their arrangements. Whenever, according to Articles 7 and 8 of the law of February 25, 1875, on the organization of the public powers, a meeting of the National Assembly takes place, it shall sit at Versailles, in the present hall of the Chamber of Deputies.
