THE BEGINNING OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL ERA A Bicentennial Comparative Analysis of the First Modem Constitutions
RETT R. LUDWIKOWSKI AND WILLIAM F. FOX, JR.

THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF AMERICA PRESS WASHINGTON, D.C.

Copyright © 1993 The Catholic University of America Press All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National Standards for Information Science—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Ludwikowski, Rett R. The beginning of the constitutional era : a bicentennial comparative analysis of the first modern constitutions / Rett R. Ludwikowski and William F. Fox, Jr. p.	 cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. I. United States—Constitutional history. z. France—Constitutional history. 3. Poland— Constitutional history. 4. United States—Politics and government-1783-1809. 5 . France—Politics and government— 1789– 18 r 5 . 6. Poland—Politics Fox, William E and government-1763-1796.	 ii. Title. xF4554•1..83 1993 34 2. 73 '02.9 —dczo
ISBN

[347.302.2.9] o-813z-o776-z (alk. paper)

92.-34679

The French Constitution of the Year III 22 August, 1795 (5 Fructidor, Year III)

DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF MAN AND CITIZEN The French people proclaim, in the presence of the Supreme Being, the following declaration of the rights and duties of man and citizen.
RIGHTS

i. The rights of man in society are liberty, equality, security, and property. z. Liberty consists of being able to do whatever is not injurious to the rights of others. 3. Equality is a circumstance in which the law is the same for all, whether it protects or punishes. Equality does not admit any distinction of birth, or any inheritance of powers. 4. Security is a consequence of the concurrence of all to assure the rights of each individual. 5. Property is the right to enjoy and dispose of one's property, one's income, and the product of one's labor and industry. 6. Law is the general will, expressed by the majority of citizens or their representatives. 7. Whatever is not prohibited by law may not be prevented. No one may be constrained to do what it does not prescribe. 8. No one may be sued at law, indicted, arrested, or detained except in the cases determined by law, and according to the forms prescribed thereby. 9. 'Whoever incite, promote, sign, execute, or have executed any arbitrary acts are guilty and must be punished. 1o. All severity unnecessary for securing the person of an accused shall be severely repressed by law. II. No one may be sentenced until after having been heard or legally summoned. z. The law shall enact only penalties that are strictly necessary and proportionate to the offence. 13. Every usage which aggravates the penalty determined by law is a crime. 14. No law, either civil or criminal, may have retroactive effect. 15. Every man may contract his time and his services; but he may not sell himself or be sold; his person is not an alienable property. z6. Every tax is established for the general good; it shall be assessed among the taxpayers in proportion to their means. z6z

The Constitution of the Year III

263

17. Sovereignty resides essentially in the totality of the citizens. 18. No individual, no partial gathering of citizens may assume sovereignty. 19. No one may exercise any authority or hold any public office without legal delegation. 2.0. Every citizen has an equal right to concur, directly or indirectly, in the formation of the law, in the nomination of the representatives of the people and the public functionaries. Public offices may not become the property of those who hold them. zz. The social guarantee cannot exist if the division of powers is not established, if their limits are not determined, and if the responsibility of public functionaries is not assured. DUTIES I. The declaration of rights contains the obligations of the legislators; the maintenance of society requires that those who constitute it likewise know and perform their duties. z. All the duties of man and citizen derive from these two principles, graven by nature on every heart: Do not to others what you would not wish them to do to you; Do constantly to others the good that you would wish to receive from them. 3. The obligations of each individual towards society consist of defending it, serving it, living subject to the laws, and respecting those who are the agents thereof. 4. No one is a good citizen if he is not a good son, good father, good brother, good friend, good husband. 5. No one is a good man if he is not a frank and religious observer of the laws. 6. Whosoever openly violates the laws declares himself at war with society. 7. Whosoever, without openly violating the laws, evades them by craft or skill, harms the interests of all; he renders himself unworthy of their goodwill and esteem. 8. The cultivation of land, all production, every means of labor, and the entire social order are dependent upon the maintenance of property. 9. Every citizen owes his services to the Patrie, and to the maintenance of liberty, equality, and property, whenever the law summons him to defend them. CONSTITUTION I. The French Republic is one and indivisible. The totality of French citizens is the sovereign.

2..

264

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS
TITLE I DIVISION OF TERRITORY

3. France is divided into . . . departments. 4. The boundaries of the departments may be altered or rectified by the Legislative Body; but, in such case, the area of a department may not exceed zoo square myriameters (400 average square leagues). 5. Each and every department is divided into cantons; each and every canton into communes. The cantons shall preserve their present limits. Nevertheless, their boundaries may be altered or rectified by the Legislative Body; but, in such case, they may not be more than one myriameter (two average leagues of 2,566 toises each) from the commune farthest from the chief town of the canton. 6. The French colonies are integral parts of the Republic, and shall be subject to the same constitutional law. 7. They are divided into departments, as follows: The island of San Domingo, the division of which, into not fewer than four or more than six departments, shall be determined by the Legislative Body; Guadeloupe, Maria Galante, Désirade, the Saintes, and the French part of Saint Martin; Martinique; French Guiana and Cayenne; Saint Lucia and Tobago; Ile de France, the Seychelles, Rodriguez, the settlements of Madagascar; The Ile de la Reunion; The East Indies, Pondicherry, Chandernagore, Mahe, Karikal, and other settlements. TITLE II POLITICAL STATUS OF CITIZENS 8. Every man fully twenty-one years of age, born and residing in France, who has had himself enrolled on the civic register of his canton, has lived thereafter for a year on the territory of the Republic, and pays a direct land tax or personal property tax, is a French citizen. 9. Frenchmen who have waged one or more campaigns for the establishment of the Republic are citizens, without any qualifications as to tax. o. A foreigner becomes a French citizen when, after having attained the age of fully twenty-one years, and having declared his intention of settling in France, he has resided there for seven consecutive years, provided that he pays a direct tax, and, in addition, possesses landed property or an agricultural or commercial establishment there, or has married a French woman. Only French citizens may vote in the primary assemblies and be summoned to the functions established by the Constitution. 12. Exercise of the rights of citizenship is lost: 1st, By naturalization in a foreign country;

The Constitution of the Year III	

z65

2nd, By affiliation with any foreign corporation which implies distinctions of birth or requires religious vows; 3 rd, By acceptance of offices or pensions offered by a foreign government; 4th, By condemnation to ignominious or corporal penalties, until rehabilitation. 13. Exercise of the rights of citizenship is suspended: 1st, By judicial interdiction on grounds of insanity, dementia, or imbecility; and, By the status of insolvent debtor, or of immediate heir, holder by gratuitous title of all or part of the estate of a bankrupt; 3 rd, By the status of wage-earning domestic attached to personal or household service; 4th, By status of indictment; 5th, By a judgment of contempt of court, so long as the judgment is not annulled. 14. Exercise of the rights of citizenship shall be lost or suspended only in the cases enumerated in the two preceding articles. 15. Every citizen who has resided for seven consecutive years outside the territory of the Republic, without mission or authorization given in the name of the nation, shall be deemed a foreigner; he may regain his French citizenship only after having fulfilled the requirements prescribed in article io. 16. Young men may not be enrolled on the civic register unless they prove that they can read, write, and carry on a mechanical occupation. The manual operations of agriculture are included among the mechanical occupations. The present article shall be effective only dating from the Year XII of the Republic. TITLE III PRIMARY ASSEMBLIES 17. The primary assemblies shall be composed of citizens domiciled in the same canton. The domicile requisite for voting in such assemblies is acquired only by residence for one year, and is lost only by a year's absence. 18. No one may serve by proxy in the primary assemblies, or vote on the same matter in more than one of said assemblies. 19. There shall be at least one primary assembly per canton. When there are several of them, each one shall be composed of not fewer than 45 0 or more than 900 citizens. Said numbers include the citizens, present or absent, who have the right to vote therein. zo. The primary assemblies shall constitute themselves provisionally under the presidency of the eldest; the youngest shall perform the duties of secretary provisionally. 21. They shall be definitively constituted by the election, by ballot, of a president, a secretary, and three tellers. zz. If difficulties arise concerning the qualifications required for voting, the

266	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

assembly shall rule provisionally, reserving recourse to the departmental civil court. 23. In every other case the Legislative Body alone shall pass upon the validity of the activities of the primary assemblies. 24. No one may appear armed in the primary assemblies. 25. They shall have charge of their own policing. z6. The primary assemblies shall meet: 1st, To accept or reject amendments to the Constitutional Act proposed by the assemblies of revision; 2nd, To conduct the elections appertaining to them according to the Constitutional Act. 27 . They shall assemble annually, without need of sanction, on 1 Germinal, and shall proceed, as there is occasion, with the election: 1st, Of the members of the electoral assembly; 2nd, Of the justice of the peace and his assistants; 3 rd, Of the president of the cantonal administration, or the municipal officials in communes of more than 5,000 inhabitants. z8. Immediately after such elections, communal assemblies shall be held in communes of fewer than 5 ,000 inhabitants, to elect the communal agents and their assistants. 29 . Whatever is done in a primary or communal assembly, over and above the purpose of its convocation, and contrary to the forms determined by the Constitution, shall be invalid. 3 o. Assemblies, whether primary or communal, shall conduct only those elections assigned to them by the Constitutional Act. 31. All elections shall be conducted by secret ballot. 3z. Every citizen legally convicted of having sold or purchased a vote shall be excluded from primary and communal assemblies, and from every public office for twenty years; in case of a second offence, he shall be excluded forever. TITLE IV ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES 33. Every primary assembly shall choose one elector in proportion to every zoo citizens, present or absent, who have the right to vote in said assembly. Only one elector shall be chosen for up to and including 300 citizens; Two shall be chosen for from 301 to 500; Three for from 501 to loo; Four for from 701 to 900. 34. The members of electoral assemblies shall be elected annually, and may be re-elected only after an interval of two years. 35. No one may be chosen elector unless he is fully twenty-five years of age, and, in addition to the qualifications necessary for the exercise of the rights of French citizenship, fulfills one of the following requirements, to wit: In communes of more than 6,000 inhabitants, that of being proprietor or usufructuary of a property evaluated at a revenue equal to the local value of

The Constitution of the Year III	

z67

zoo days' labor, or of being tenant of either a habitation evaluated at a revenue equal to the value of 15o days' labor or a rural property evaluated at zoo days' labor; In communes of fewer than 6,000 inhabitants, that of being proprietor or usufructuary of a property evaluated at a revenue equal to the local value of 1 5 o days' labor, or of being tenant of either a habitation evaluated at a revenue equal to the value of 100 days' labor or a rural property evaluated at 100 days' labor; And in rural districts, that of being proprietor or usufructuary of a property evaluated at a revenue equal to the local value of 150 days' labor, or of being the farmer or métayer of property evaluated at zoo days' labor. With regard to those who are both proprietors or usufructuaries on the one hand, and tenants, farmers, or métayers on the other, their properties by such several titles shall be cumulated up to the rate necessary for establishing their eligibility. 36. The electoral assembly of every department shall meet annually on zo Germinal, and shall complete, in a single session of ten days at most and without power to adjourn, all the elections which are to take place; after which, it is automatically dissolved. 37. The electoral assemblies may not deal with any matter apart from the elections for which they are responsible; they may not send or receive any address, petition, or deputation. 38. The electoral assemblies may not correspond among themselves. 39. No citizen who has been a member in such capacity with those who have been members of said same assembly. Infraction of the present article constitutes an attack on general security. 4 o. Articles 18, zo,	 2 3 , 24 , 2 5 , 29 , 3 o, 31, and 32 of the preceding title on primary assemblies shall apply to the electoral assemblies. 41. The electoral assemblies shall elect, as there is occasion: 1st, The members of the Legislative Body, to wit, the members of the Council of Elders, then the members of the Council of Five Hundred; znd, The members of the Court of Cassation; 3rd, The grand jurors; 4th, The departmental administrators; 5 th, The president, public prosecutor, and clerk of the criminal court; 6th, The judges of the civil courts. 42. When a citizen is elected by the electoral assemblies to replace a deceased, resigned, or dismissed functionary, he shall be elected only for the remainder of the term of the person replaced. 43. The commissioner from the Executive Directory to the administration of every department is required, on penalty of dismissal, to inform the Directory of the opening and closing of the electoral assemblies. Said commissioners may neither impede nor suspend their activities, nor enter the place of their sessions; but they have the rights to ask for communication of the minutes of every session within the ensuing twenty-four hours; and they are required to inform the Directory of infractions of the Constitutional Act. In all cases the Legislative Body alone shall pronounce upon the validity of the activities of the electoral assemblies.

268

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS TITLE V LEGISLATIVE POWER

GENERAL PROVISIONS
44. The Legislative Body shall be composed of a Council of Elders and a

Council of Five Hundred. 45. Under no circumstances may the Legislative Body delegate to one or more of its members, or to anyone whomsoever, any of the functions assigned to it by the present Constitution. 46. It may not, by itself or through delegates, exercise the executive or the judicial power. 47. The status of member of the Legislative Body is incompatible with the holding of any other public office, except that of Archivist of the Republic. 48. The law shall determine the method of replacement, permanent or temporary, of public functionaries who are elected members of the Legislative Body. 49. Each and every department shall concur, in proportion to its population alone, in the selection of the members of the Council of Elders and the Council of Five Hundred. 5 o. Every ten years the Legislative Body shall determine, on the basis of statements of population transmitted thereto, the number of members of each Council to be furnished by each department. 51. During the intervening period no change may be made in such apportionment. 52. The members of the Legislative Body are not representatives of the department which has elected them, but of the entire nation; and no mandate may be given them. 53. Both Councils shall be renewed annually by one-third. 54. Members retiring after three years may be re-elected immediately for the three ensuing years, after which an interval of two years must elapse before they may be elected again. 55. Under no circumstances may anyone be a member of the Legislative Body for more than six consecutive years. 56. If, owing to extraordinary circumstances, one of the two Councils finds itself reduced to less than two-thirds of its members, it shall give notice thereof to the Executive Directory, which is required to convoke, without delay, the primary assemblies of departments which, as a consequence of such circumstances, have members of the Legislative Body to replace; the primary assemblies shall immediately choose the electors, who shall effect the necessary replacements. 57. The newly elected members of either Council shall meet annually on Prairial, in the commune designated by the preceding Legislative Body, or, if another has not been designated, in the same commune in which it held its last sessions. 58. The two councils shall always reside in the same commune. 59. The Legislative Body is permanent; nevertheless, it may adjourn for periods determined by it.

The Constitution of the Year III	

269

6o. Under no circumstances may the two councils meet in one and the same hall. 61. The functions of president and secretary may not exceed the duration of one month in either the Council of Elders or that of Five Hundred. 6z. The two Councils shall have respectively the right of police in the place of their sessions and in the external precincts determined by them. 63. They shall have respectively the right of police over their members; but they may not pronounce any penalty more severe than censure, arrest for one week, or imprisonment for three weeks. 64. The sessions of both Councils shall be public; the number of spectators may not exceed one-half that of the respective members of each Council. The minutes of the sessions shall be printed. 65. Every resolution shall be made by a rising vote. In case of doubt, the roll call shall be used; but in such case voting shall be secret. 66. Upon the request of Zoo of its members, each Council may resolve itself into secret committee of the whole, but only for discussion and not for deliberation. 67. Neither Council may create any permanent committee within its own midst. But each Council shall have the power, when a matter appears to merit a preparatory examination, to appoint from among its members a special commission, which shall confine itself solely to the purpose for which it was formed. Such commission shall be dissolved as soon as the Council had legislated upon the matter with which it was charged. 68. The members of the Legislative Body shall receive an annual compensation, established for both Councils at the value of 3,000 myriagrams of wheat (61 3 quintals, 32 pounds). 69. The Executive Directory may not have any body of troops pass or sojourn within six myriameters (twelve common leagues) of the commune in which the Legislative Body holds its sessions, except upon its requisition or with its authorization. 70. A guard of citizens, drawn from the permanent National Guard of all departments and chosen by their brothers in arms, shall be stationed near the Legislative Body. Such guard may not be fewer than 1, 5 00 men in active service. 71. The Legislative Body shall determine the method and duration of such service. 72. The Legislative Body shall not attend any public ceremony or send deputations thereto.
THE COUNCIL OF FIVE HUNDRED

73. The Council of Five Hundred is established unalterably at that number. 74. In order to be elected a member of the Council of Five Hundred it shall be necessary to be fully thirty years of age, and to have been domiciled on the territory of the Republic during the ten years immediately prior to the election. The stipulation of thirty years of age shall not be required before the seventh

2.70

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

year of the Republic; until such time, the age of fully twenty-five years shall suffice. 75. The Council of Five Hundred may not deliberate unless the session is composed of at least zoo members. 76. The proposal of laws shall appertain exclusively to the Council of Five Hundred. 77. No proposal may be deliberated upon or resolved in the Council of Five Hundred, except in conformity with the following usages: There shall be three readings of the proposal; the interval between two of said readings may not be less than ten days. After each reading, the proposal shall be discussed; nevertheless, after the first or second reading, the Council of Five Hundred may declare that there is cause for adjournment, or that there is no occasion for deliberation. Every proposal shall be printed and distributed two days before the second reading. Following the third reading, the Council of Five Hundred shall decide whether there is occasion for adjournment. 78. No proposal which, after being discussed, has been definitively rejected following the third reading may be introduced again until a year has elapsed. 79. Proposals adopted by the Council of Five Hundred shall be called resolutions. 80. The preamble of every resolution shall state: 1st, The dates of the sessions in which the three readings of the proposal have taken place; znd, The instrument whereby, after the third reading, declaration has been made that there was no occasion for adjournment. 81. Proposals recognized as urgent by a previous declaration of the Council of Five Hundred shall be exempt from the forms prescribed by article 77. Such declaration shall state the motives for urgency, and shall be referred to in the preamble of the resolution.
THE COUNCIL OF ELDERS

8z. The Council of Elders shall be composed of 250 members. 83. No one may be elected a member of the Council of Elders: Unless he is fully forty years of age; Unless, moreover, he is married or a widower; And unless he has been domiciled on the territory of the Republic during the fifteen years immediately prior to the election. 84. The conditions of domicile prescribed by the preceding article and by article 74 do not affect citizens who have left the territory of the Republic on mission for the Government. 85. The Council of Elders may not deliberate unless at least 1z6 members are present. 86. Approval or rejection of resolutions of the Council of Five Hundred shall appertain exclusively to the Council of Elders. 87. As soon as a resolution of the Council of Five Hundred has reached the Council of Elders, the president shall read the preamble.

The Constitution of the Year III	

271

88. The Council of Elders shall refuse to approve resolutions of the Council of Five Hundred which have not been adopted according to the forms prescribed by the Constitution. 89. If the proposal has been declared urgent by the Council of Five Hundred, the Council of Elders shall deliberate on the approval or rejection of the statement of urgency. 9o. If the Council of Elders rejects the statement of urgency, it shall not deliberate on the grounds of the resolution. 91. If the resolution is not preceded by a statement of urgency, it shall be given three readings. The interval between such readings may not be less than five days. After each reading, the resolution shall be discussed. Every resolution shall be printed and distributed at least two weeks before the second reading. 92. Resolutions of the Council of Five Hundred which are adopted by the Council of Elders shall be called laws. 93. The preamble of a law shall state the dates of the sessions of the Council of Elders at which the three readings have taken place. 94. The decree by which the Council of Elders recognizes the urgency of a law shall be justified and mentioned in the preamble to said law. 95. The proposal of a law made by the Council of Five Hundred shall comprise all the articles of one and the same project. The Council of Elders shall reject or approve them in their entirety. 96. The approval of the Council of Elders shall be expressed upon each proposal of law by the following formula, signed by the president and the secretaries: The Council of Elders approves 	 97. Refusal to adopt, because of the omission of forms indicated in article 77, shall be expressed by the following formula, signed by the president and the secretaries: The Constitution annuls 	 98. Refusal to approve the basis of the law proposed shall be expressed by the following formula, signed by the president and the secretaries: The Council

of Elders cannot adopt 	
99. In the case of the preceding article, the rejected draft of a law may not be presented again by the Council of Five Hundred until a year has elapsed. 100. Nevertheless, the Council of Five Hundred may present, at any time whatsoever, a draft of a law containing articles included in a rejected project. 101. During the course of the day, the Council of Elders shall send the laws which it has adopted to the Council of Five Hundred, as well as to the Executive Directory. 102. The Council of Elders may change the residence of the Legislative Body; in such case, it shall designate a new place and the time at which the two Councils are required to repair thereto. The decree of the Council of Elders on said matter shall be irrevocable. 103. On the day of such decree, neither of the Councils may deliberate further in the commune where they have resided up to that time. Members who continue their duties there will render themselves guilty of attacking the security of the Republic. 104. Members of the Executive Directory who retard or refuse to seal, pro-

272

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

mulgate, or dispatch the decree of transfer of the Legislative Body shall be guilty of the same offence. 105. If, within twenty days after the day determined by the Council of Elders, the majority of each Council has not informed the Republic of its arrival at the new place designated, or of its meeting in any other place whatsoever, the departmental administrators, or, in their default, the departmental civil courts, shall convoke the primary assemblies to choose electors, who shall proceed immediately with the formation of a new Legislative Body by the election of 2 5 0 deputies for the Council of Elders and 5 00 for the other Council. 106. Departmental administrators who, in the case of the preceding article, are remiss in convoking the primary assemblies will render themselves guilty of high treason and of an attack upon the security of the Republic. 107. All citizens who, in the case of article 106, impede the convocation of the primary and electoral assemblies shall be declared guilty of the same offence. 108. The members of the new Legislative Body shall assemble in the place to which the Council of Elders has transferred its sessions. If they cannot meet in such place, wherever a majority is present, there is the Legislative Body. 109. Except in the case of article 102, no proposal of law may originate in the Council of Elders.
OF THE GUARANTEE OF MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY

110. Citizens who are or who have been members of the Legislative Body may not be investigated, indicted, or tried at any time for what they have said or written in the performance of their duties. Members of the Legislative Body may not be put on trial, from the time of their election until the thirtieth day after the expiration of their tenure of office, except according to the forms prescribed by the following articles. 112. For criminal acts they may be seized flagrante delicto; but notice thereof must be given, without delay, to the Legislative Body, and the prosecution may be continued only after the Council of Five Hundred has proposed that they be brought to trial, and the Council of Elders has decreed it. 113. Apart from cases of flagrante delicto, members of the Legislative Body may not be brought before police officers or placed under arrest until after the Council of Five Hundred has proposed that they be brought to trial, and the Council of Elders has decreed it. 114. In the case of the two preceding articles, members of the Legislative Body may not be brought before any court other than the High Court of Justice. 115. They shall be brought before said same court for acts of treason, embezzlement, plots for overthrowing the Constitution, and attacks upon the internal security of the Republic. 116. No denunciation of a member of the Legislative Body may give rise to prosecution unless it is drawn up in writing, signed, and addressed to the Council of Five Hundred. 117. If, after having deliberated according to the form prescribed by article

The Constitution of the Year III 	

273

77 , the Council of Five Hundred accepts the denunciation, it shall so declare in the following terms: for the act of 	 dated 	 signed by The denunciation of 	

	

is allowed.

118. The accused is then summoned. He shall have three days of grace in which to make his appearance, and when he appears he shall be heard in the place of the sessions of the Council of Five Hundred. 119. Whether the accused has presented himself or not, the Council of Five Hundred shall declare, after such interval, whether there is occasion for examination of his conduct. zo. If the Council of Five Hundred declares that there is occasion for such examination, the accused shall be summoned by the Council of Elders. He shall have two days of grace in which to appear; and if he appears, he shall be heard in the place of the sessions of the Council of Elders. 121. Whether the accused has presented himself or not, the Council of Elders, after such interval, and after having deliberated according to the forms prescribed by article 9 1, shall pronounce indictment if there is occasion, and shall send the accused before the High Court of Justice, which is required to institute action without delay. 12.2.. All discussion, in either Council, relative to commitment or indictment of a member of the Legislative Body shall take place in Committee of the Whole. Every deliberation upon such matters shall be taken by roll call and secret ballot. 12. 3 . Indictment pronounced against a member of the Legislative Body shall entail suspension. If he is acquitted by judgment of the High Court of Justice, he may resume office.
RELATIONS OF THE TWO COUNCILS WITH EACH OTHER
12.4. When the two Councils are definitively constituted, they shall give notice thereof reciprocally by a messenger of State. 125. Each Council shall appoint four messengers of State for its service. 126. Said messengers shall convey the laws and acts of the Legislative Body to each of the Councils, and to the Executive Directory; and for such purpose they shall have entree to the place of the sessions of the Executive Directory. They shall be preceded by two ushers. 12.7 . Neither of the two Councils may adjourn for more than five days without the consent of the other.

PROMULGATION OF LAWS

128. The Executive Directory shall have the laws and other acts of the Legislative Body sealed and published within two days after receiving them. 129 . It shall have those laws and acts of the Legislative Body which are preceded by a decree of urgency sealed and promulgated within a day. 1 3 o. Publication of laws and acts of the Legislative Body shall be ordered in the following form:

274

	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

	

"In the name of the French Republic, (law) or (act of the Legislative Body) The Directory orders that the above law or legislative act be published, executed, and authenticated with the seal of the Republic:' 131. Laws, the preambles of which do not attest observation of the forms prescribed by articles 77 and 9 1, may not be promulgated by the Executive Directory, and its responsibility in such connection shall continue for six years. Laws for which a statement of urgency has been approved by the Council of Elders are excepted. TITLE VI EXECUTIVE POWER 132. The Executive Power shall be delegated to a Directory of five members appointed by the Legislative Body, which for such purpose performs the functions of an electoral body, in the name of the nation. 1 3 3. The Council of Five Hundred shall prepare, by secret ballot, a list of ten times the number of members of the Directory to be appointed, and shall present it to the Council of Elders, which shall choose, also by secret ballot, from said list. 134. The members of the Directory must be at least forty years of age. 135. They may be chosen only from among citizens who have been ministers or members of the Legislative Body. The present article shall be observed only dating from the ninth year of the Republic. 136. Dating from the first day of Year V of the Republic, members of the Legislative Body may not be elected members of the Directory or ministers, either during the continuance of their legislative functions or during the first year after the expiration of same. 137. The Directory shall be renewed in part by the election of one new member annually. During the first four years, the order of retirement of those first elected shall be determined by lot. 138. None of the retiring members may be re-elected until after an interval of five years. 139. Ancestors and descendants in direct line, brothers, uncles and nephews, first cousins, and those related by marriage in said several degrees may not be members of the Directory at one and the same time, or succeed one another therein until after an interval of five years. 1 4o. In case of the removal of one of the members of the Directory by death, resignation, or otherwise, his successor shall be elected by the Legislative Body within ten days at the latest. The Council of Five Hundred shall be required to propose candidates within the first five days, and the Council of Elders shall complete the election within the last five days. The new member shall be elected only for the term of office remaining to the one to be replaced.

The Constitution of the Year III

	

2,75

Nevertheless, if such time does not exceed six months, the person elected shall remain in office until the end of the fifth year following. 1 4 1. Each member of the Directory shall preside over it in turn for three months only. The president shall possess the right of signature, and shall have custody of the seal. Laws and acts of the Legislative Body shall be addressed to the Directory in the person of its president. 1 4 z. The Executive Directory may not deliberate unless at least three of its members are present. 143. It shall choose for itself, from outside its own membership, a secretary who shall countersign dispatches and record deliberations in a register, in which every member has the right to have his motivated opinion inscribed. When it deems it expedient, the Directory may deliberate without the presence of its secretary; in such case, the deliberations shall be recorded in a special register by one of the members of the Directory. 144. The Directory shall provide, according to law, for the external and internal security of the Republic. It may issue proclamations in conformity with the laws, and for the execution thereof. It shall dispose the armed force, but neither the Directory collectively nor any one of its members may, under any circumstances, command same while in office or during the two years immediately following the expiration of his term. 145. If the Directory is informed that a conspiracy is being plotted against the external or internal security of the State, it may issue warrants of apprehension and arrest against those who are presumed to be the authors or accomplices thereof; it may question them; but it shall be required, under the penalties provided for the crime of arbitrary detention, to send them before the police officer within two days, in order to proceed according to law. 146. The Directory shall appoint the generals in chief; it may not choose them from among the blood or marriage relations of its members in the degrees stated in article 139. 147. It shall supervise and assure the execution of laws in the administrations and courts, through commissioners of its own appointment. 148. It shall appoint the ministers, from outside its own membership, and may dismiss them when it thinks it advisable. It may not select anyone under the age of thirty years, or from among the blood or marriage relations of its members in the degrees stated in article 139. 149. The ministers shall correspond directly with the authorities that are subordinate to them. 15o. The Legislative Body shall determine the number of the ministers and their prerogatives. Such number may not be fewer than six or more than eight. 151. The ministers do not constitute a council. 15z. The ministers shall be jointly and severally responsible for nonexecution of laws, as well as for nonexecution of orders of the Directory.

2.76	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

153. The Directory shall appoint the collector of direct taxes in each and every department. 154. It shall appoint the superintendents in chief for the administration of indirect taxes and the national domains. 155. Until peace has been made, all public functionaries in the French colonies, except in the departments of the Ile de France and the Ile de la Reunion, shall be appointed by the Directory. 156. The Legislative Body may authorize the Directory to send to all French colonies, as occasion may require, one or more special agents appointed by it for a limited time. Such special agents shall perform the same duties as the Directory, and shall be subordinate thereto. 157. No member of the Directory may leave the territory of the Republic until two years after his retirement from office. 158. During such interval, he shall be required to furnish the Legislative Body with proofs of his residence. Articles 112 to 1z 3 , inclusive, relative to the guarantee of the Legislative Body, shall apply also to members of the Directory. 159. In case more than two members of the Directory are placed on trial, the Legislative Body shall provide, in the usual forms, for their provisional replacement during the trial. 16o. Apart from the cases in articles 119 and 120, neither the Directory nor any of its members may be summoned by either the Council of Five Hundred or the Council of Elders. 161. Reports and explanations requested of the Directory by either Council shall be furnished in writing. 16z. The Directory shall be required to present both Councils annually with a written estimate of expenses, the financial situation, and the state of existing pensions, as well as a plan for those which it thinks ought to be established. It shall indicate abuses which have come to its attention. 163. The Directory may, in any case, submit a written request to the Council of Five Hundred to take a matter under consideration; it may propose measures thereto, but not projects drafted in the form of laws. 164. No member of the Directory may be absent for more than five days, or go farther than four myriameters (eight common leagues) from the place of residence of the Directory, without authorization of the Legislative Body. 165. In the performance of their duties, either outside or inside their dwellings, members of the Directory may appear only in their appropriate costume. i66. The Directory shall have its customary guard, paid by the Republic, and composed of 120 infantry and 120 cavalry. 167. The Directory shall be accompanied by its guard in public ceremonies and processions, where it shall always have first rank. 168. When in public, every member of the Directory shall be accompanied by two guards. 169. Every army post owes the Directory, and every one of its members, the highest military honors. 17o. The Directory shall have four messengers of State, whom it appoints and whom it may dismiss.

The Constitution of the Year III

	

2,77

They shall convey letters and memoranda of the Directory to the two Legislative Councils; for such purpose they shall have entree into the place of sessions of the Legislative Councils. They shall be preceded by two ushers. 1 7 1. The Directory shall reside in the same commune as the Legislative Body. 1 7 1. The members of the Directory shall be lodged at the expense of the Republic, and in one and the same edifice. 173. The annual stipend of each of them is established at the value of 50,000 myriagrams of wheat (10, z z z quintals). TITLE VII ADMINISTRATIVE AND MUNICIPAL BODIES 174. In each and every department there shall be a central administration, and in each and every canton at least one municipal administration. 175. Every member of a departmental or municipal administration must be at least twenty-five years of age. 176. Ancestors and descendants in direct line, brothers, uncles and nephews, and those related by marriage in said same degrees, may not be members of the same administration at one and the same time, nor may they succeed one another therein until after an interval of two years. 177. Each and every departmental administration shall be composed of five members; it shall be renewed annually by one-fifth. 178. Every commune of from 5 ,000 to ioo,000 inhabitants shall have a municipal administration of its own. 179. In every commune of fewer than 5 ,000 inhabitants there shall be a municipal agent and an assistant. 180. The assembly of the municipal agents of every commune shall constitute the cantonal municipality. 181. Moreover, a president of the municipal administration shall be chosen from the entire canton. 18z. There shall be five municipal officials in communes of from 5 ,000 to 10,000 inhabitants; Seven for from 10,000 to 5 o,000; Nine for from 5 o,000 to 100,000. 183. In communes of more than 100,000 inhabitants there shall be at least three municipal administrations. In said communes the division of municipalities shall be made in such manner that the population of the arrondissement of each one may not exceed 50,000 persons, and may not be fewer than 3 0,000. The municipality of every arrondissement shall be composed of seven members. 184. In communes which are divided into several municipalities, there shall be a central bureau for matters deemed indivisible by the Legislative Body. Said bureau shall be composed of three members, appointed by the departmental administration and confirmed by the executive power. 185. The members of every municipal administration shall be appointed for

2.78	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

two years, and renewed annually by one-half or by the fraction nearest onehalf, and by the larger and smaller fraction alternately. 186. The departmental administrators and members of municipal administrations may be re-elected once without an interval between terms. 187. Any citizen who has been elected departmental administrator or member of a municipal administration twice in succession, and who has performed the duties thereof by virtue of both elections, may not be re-elected until after an interval of two years. 188. In case a departmental or municipal administration loses one or more of its members by death, resignation, or otherwise, the remaining administrators, in filling the vacancies, may add to themselves temporary administrators, who shall act in such capacity until the following elections. 189. The departmental and municipal administrations may not alter acts of the Legislative Body or of the Executive Directory, or suspend the execution thereof. They may not interfere with matters connected with the judiciary. 1 9o. The administrators are essentially charged with the assessment of direct taxes, and with the supervision of funds accruing from public revenues in their territory. The Legislative Body shall determine the rules and method of their functions in such connection, as well as in other branches of internal administration. 191. The Executive Directory shall appoint a commissioner for every departmental and municipal administration; it may recall him whenever it deems it expedient. Said commissioner shall supervise and require the execution of the laws. 1 9 z. The commissioner for every local administration shall be chosen from among the citizens domiciled for a year in the department in which such administration is established. He must be at least twenty-five years of age. 193. The municipal administrations shall be subordinate to the departmental administrations, and these, in turn, to the ministers. Accordingly, the ministers may annul, each in whatever concerns him, acts of the departmental administrations; and these, in turn, acts of the municipal administrations, when such acts are contrary to law or to the orders of higher authorities. 194. The ministers may also suspend departmental administrations which have contravened laws or the orders of higher authorities; and departmental administrations shall have the same right with respect to members of municipal administrations. 195. No suspension or annulment may become definitive without formal confirmation by the Executive Directory. 196. The Directory may also annul acts of the departmental or municipal administrations immediately. It may suspend or dismiss immediately, whenever it thinks it necessary, either departmental or cantonal administrators, and may send them before the departmental courts when there is occasion. 197. Every order providing for the annulment of acts, or the suspension or dismissal of an administrator, must include a statement of reasons therefor.

The Constitution of the Year III

	

2.79

198. When the five members of a departmental administration are dismissed, the Executive Directory shall provide for their replacement until the following election; but it may choose their provisional substitutes only from among former administrators of the same department. 199. The administrations, whether departmental or cantonal, may correspond among themselves only concerning matters assigned to them by law, and not concerning the general interests of the Republic. zoo. Every administration shall render an annual report of its activities. The reports rendered by departmental administrations shall be printed. 201. All acts of administrative bodies shall be rendered public by depositing the register in which they are recorded, and granting all persons under the administration access thereto. Said register shall be closed every six months, and shall be on deposit only from the day that it was closed. The Legislative Body may, according to circumstances, extend the term established for such deposit. TITLE VIII JUDICIAL POWER

GENERAL PROVISIONS
zoz. Judicial functions may not be performed by either the Legislative Body or the executive power. 203. Judges may not interfere with the exercise of the legislative power, or make any regulation. They may not impede or suspend the execution of any law, or summon administrators before them because of their acts. 204. No commission or competence, other than those established by a previous law, may deprive anyone of the judges assigned to him by law. 205. Justice shall be rendered gratuitously. zo6. Judges may be dismissed only for legally pronounced forfeiture, and may be suspended only by an admitted indictment. 207. Ancestors and descendants in direct line, brothers, uncles and nephews, first cousins, and those related by marriage in said several degrees, may not be members of the same court at one and the same time. zo8. Court sessions shall be public; judges shall deliberate in secret; decisions shall be pronounced orally; they shall include a statement of reasons and of the terms of the law applied. 209. No citizen may be elected judge of a departmental court, or justice of the peace, or assistant to a justice of the peace, or judge of a court of commerce, or member of the Court of Cassation, or juror, or commissioner of the Executive Directory at the courts, unless he is fully thirty years of age.

28o	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS OF CIVIL JUSTICE

210. The right of having differences passed upon by arbiters who are chosen by the parties concerned may not be impaired. 211. The decision of such arbiters shall be without appeal, and without recourse to cassation, unless the parties have expressly reserved it. 212. In every arrondissement established by law there shall be a justice of the peace and his assistants. They shall be elected for two years, and may be re-elected immediately and indefinitely. 2.1 3 . The law shall determine the matters over which justices of the peace and their assistants have final jurisdiction. It shall assign them others, on which they may pronounce judgment subject to appeal. 21 4 . There shall be special courts for commerce on land and sea; the law shall determine the places suitable for their establishment. Their power to pronounce judgment in the last resort may not be extended beyond the value of 500 myriagrams of wheat (1o2. quintals, twenty-two pounds). 2.1 5 . Cases which are subject to the jurisdiction of neither justices of the peace nor courts of commerce, either in the last resort or subject to appeal, shall be brought directly before the justice of the peace and his assistants for conciliation. If the justice of the peace is unable to conciliate them, he shall send them before the civil court. 216. There shall be one civil court for every department. Every civil court shall be composed of at least twenty judges, one commissioner and one substitute appointed and removable by the Executive Directory, and one clerk. The election of all members of the court shall take place every five years. The judges may be re-elected. 217. At the time of the election of judges, five substitutes shall be selected, three from among citizens residing in the commune where the court sits. 218. The civil court shall pronounce in the last resort, in the cases determined by law, upon appeals from judgments either of justices of the peace, or of arbiters, or of commercial courts. 2.19. Appeal from judgments pronounced by the civil court shall be taken to the civil court of one of the three nearest departments, as determined by law. zzo. The civil court shall be divided into sections. A section may not pronounce judgment unless five judges are present. 221. The assembled judges in every court shall select the president of each section, from among themselves, by secret ballot. OF CORRECTIONAL AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE 2.22. No one may be arrested except to be brought before the officer of police; and no one may be placed under arrest or detained, except by virtue of a warrant of arrest from the officers of police or from the Executive Directory,

The Constitution of the Year III	

28i

in the case of article 1 45 , or an order of arrest, either from a court or from the foreman of the grand jury, or a writ of indictment from the Legislative Body where it has authority to pronounce one, or a judgment of condemnation to prison or correctional detention. 223. In order that the instrument ordering the arrest may be executed, it shall be necessary: 1st, That it state formally the cause for the arrest, and the law in compliance with which it is ordered; znd, That the accused be notified and provided with a copy thereof. 224. Every person arrested and brought before the officer of police shall be examined immediately, or during the day at the latest. 225. If the examination discloses that there is no ground for accusation against him, he shall be placed at liberty immediately; or, if there is occasion for sending him to jail, he shall be taken there as soon as possible, in any case within three days. 226. No arrested person may be detained, if he gives sufficient bail, in any of the cases in which the law permits him to remain at liberty under bail. 2.27 . No person, in case his detention is authorized by law, may be brought to or detained elsewhere than in the places legally and publicly designated to serve as jails, courthouses, or houses of detention. 228. No custodian or jailer may receive or detain any person except by virtue of a warrant of arrest, according to the forms prescribed by article zzz and 223 , an order for arrest, a writ of indictment, or a judgment of condemnation to prison or correctional detention, and unless the transcript thereof has been entered upon his register. 2.2.9. Every custodian or jailer shall be required, and no order may dispense therewith, to present the detained person to the civil official who is in charge of the police of the house of detention, whenever so required by that officer. 23 0. Production of the detained person may not be refused to his relatives and friends bearing an order from the civil official, who shall always be required to grant it, unless the custodian or jailer presents an order from the judge, transcribed upon his register, to hold the arrested person incommunicado. 2 3 I. Any man, whatever his position or employment, other than those to whom the law has given the right of arrest, who gives, signs, executes, or has executed an order for the arrest of any person, or anyone who, even in the case of an arrest authorized by law, brings to, receives, or detains a person in a place of detention not publicly and legally designated, and all custodians or jailers who contravene the provisions of the three preceding articles, shall be guilty of the crime of arbitrary imprisonment. 23 2. All severities employed in arrests, detentions, or executions, other than those prescribed by law, shall be considered as crimes. z33. In each and every department there shall be at least three, and not more than six, correctional courts, for the trial of offences for which the punishment is neither corporal nor degrading. Such courts may not pronounce penalties more severe than imprisonment for two years.

z8z

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

Cognizance of offences for which the penalty does not exceed the value of three days' labor, or imprisonment for three days, shall be delegated to the justice of the peace, who shall pronounce in the last resort. 2 34 . Every correctional court shall be composed of a president, two justices of the peace or assistants of justices of the peace of the commune in which it is established, a commissioner from the executive power, appointed and removable by the Executive Directory, and a clerk. 2.35. The president of each correctional court shall be chosen every six months, and in rotation, from among the members of the sections of the departmental civil court, the presidents excepted. 236. There may be appeal from judgments of the correctional court to the departmental criminal court. 237. In the matter of offences entailing corporal or degrading penalties, no person may be tried except upon an indictment admitted by the jurors, or decreed by the Legislative Body in case the issuance of the indictment appertains thereto. 2.38. A grand jury shall declare whether the indictment is to be admitted or rejected; the facts shall be passed upon by a trial jury; and the penalty determined by law shall be applied by the criminal courts. 239. The jurors shall vote only by secret ballot. 240. In each and every department there shall be as many grand juries as there are correctional courts. The presidents of the correctional courts shall be the foremen thereof, each in his own arrondissement. In addition to the president of the correctional court, in communes of over 5 0,000 inhabitants, as many foremen of grand juries as the transaction of business requires may be established by law. 241. The duties of commissioner from the executive power and of clerk for the foreman of the grand jury shall be performed by the commissioner and the clerk of the correctional court. 242. Every foreman of a grand jury shall have immediate surveillance over all the police officers of his arrondissement. 243. The foreman of the jury, as police officer, shall prosecute immediately, on denunciations made to him by the public prosecutor, whether ex officio or in accordance with orders of the Executive Directory: 1st, Attacks upon the liberty or individual security of citizens; znd, Those committed against the law of nations; 3 rd, Resistance to the execution of judgments or of any executory acts emanating from the constituted authorities; 4th, Disturbances occasioned and assaults committed in order to hinder the collection of taxes and the free circulation of provisions and other articles of commerce. 244. There shall be one criminal court for every department. 245. The criminal court shall be composed of a president, a public prosecutor, four judges taken from the civil court, the commissioner from the executive power at the same court (or his substitute), and a clerk. In the criminal court of the department of the Seine, there shall be a vice-

The Constitution of the Year III	

283

president and a substitute for the public prosecutor; said court shall be divided into two sections; eight members of the civil court shall perform the duties of judges therein. 2.4 6. The presidents of the sections of the civil court may not perform the duties of judges in the criminal court. 247. The other judges, in turn, shall serve there for six months, in order of appointment, and they may not perform any duties in the civil court during such time. 2.48. The public prosecutor shall be responsible: 1st, For prosecuting offences according to writs of indictment admitted by the grand juries; znd. For transmitting to the police officers denunciations addressed directly to him; 3 rd, For supervising to the police officers of the department, and for prosecuting them, according to law, in case of negligence or more serious offences. 2.49 . The commissioner from the executive power shall be responsible: 1st, For requiring regularity of forms in the course of the examination, and application of the law before the judgment; znd, For carrying out the execution of judgments rendered by the criminal court. 2. 5 o. The judges may not propound any complex question to the jurors. 2.51. The trial jury shall consist of at least twelve jurors: the accused shall have the right to challenge, without giving motives, the number of them determined by law. 2. 5 2.. The examination before the trial jury shall be public, and the accused may not be denied the assistance of counsel whom they have the right to chose, or who have been officially appointed for them. 2,53. No person acquitted by a legal jury may be rearrested or indicted again for the same offence. COURT OF CASSATION 2. 54 . For the entire Republic there shall be one Court of Cassation. It shall pass: 1st, Upon petitions in cassation against judgments in the last resort rendered by the courts; znd, Upon petitions for removal from one court to another, because of legitimate suspicion or public security; 3 rd, Upon rulings of judges and suits against an entire court. 2.55. The Court of Cassation may never have cognizance of the grounds of suits; but it may reverse judgments rendered upon proceedings in which forms have been violated, or which contain some express contravention of the law, and it may refer the grounds of the suit to the court which has cognizance thereof. 2. 5 6. When, after one cassation, the second judgment on the grounds is

284

	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

contested on the same basis as the first, the question may no longer be discussed before the Court of Cassation without having been submitted to the Legislative Body, which shall declare a law with which the Court of Cassation is required to comply. 25 7. The Court of Cassation shall be required to send annually, to every one of the sections of the Legislative Body, a deputation which shall present it with the list of judgments rendered, with marginal notes and the text of the laws determining the judgments. 2. 5 8. The number of judges in the Court of Cassation may not exceed threefourths of the number of departments. 2 59 . Said court shall be renewed annually by one-fifth. The departmental electoral assemblies shall elect, successively and alternately, judges to replace those retiring from the Court of Cassation. The judges of said court may always be re-elected. z6o. Every judge of the Court of Cassation shall have a substitute, elected by the same electoral assembly. 26r. A commissioner and substitutes, appointed and removable by the Executive Directory, shall be attached to the Court of Cassation. 262. The Executive Directory, through its commissioner and without prejudice to the right of the interested parties, shall inform the Court of Cassation of acts in which judges have exceeded their powers. z63. The court shall annul such acts; and if they occasion forfeiture, the fact shall be announced to the Legislative Body, which shall render writ of indictment after having heard or summoned the accused. 264 . The Legislative Body may not annul decisions of the Court of Cassation, except in the case of personal prosecution of judges who have incurred forfeiture.
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE 2,65. There shall be a High Court of Justice to pass judgment upon indictments admitted by the Legislative Body, against either its own members or those of the Executive Directory. 266. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of five judges and two national prosecutors taken from the Court of Cassation, and of high jurors elected by the departmental electoral assemblies. 267. The High Court of Justice shall be constituted only by virtue of a proclamation of the Legislative Body, drafted and published by the Council of Five Hundred. z68. It shall be constituted and shall hold its sessions in the place designated by the proclamation of the Council of Five Hundred. Said place must be at least twelve myriameters distant from that where the Legislative Body is located. 269. When the Legislative Body has proclaimed the formation of the High Court of Justice, the Court of Cassation, in a public session, shall select by lot fifteen of its members; then it shall select, at the same session, five of said fifteen, by secret ballot; the five judges thus selected shall be the judges of the High Court of Justice; they shall choose a president from among themselves.

The Constitution of the Year III	

285

2.70. In the same session, the Court of Cassation shall select, by ballot and absolute majority, two of its members to perform the duties of national prosecutors before the High Court of Justice. 2.7 1. Writs of indictment shall be drafted and worded by the Council of Five Hundred. 272. The departmental electoral assemblies shall elect a jury for the High Court of Justice annually. 273. The Executive Directory shall have the list of jurors who are elected for the High Court of Justice printed and published one month after the date of the elections. TITLE IX THE ARMED FORCE 274. The armed force is established to defend the State against enemies from without, and to assure the maintenance of order and the execution of the laws within. 275. The public force is essentially obedient; no armed body may deliberate. 276. It shall be divided into a resident National Guard and a National Guard on active service. OF THE RESIDENT NATIONAL GUARD 2.77 . The resident National Guard shall be composed of all citizens and sons of citizens who are capable of bearing arms. 278. Its organization and discipline shall be the same throughout the entire Republic; they shall be established by law. 279. No Frenchman may enjoy the rights of citizenship unless he is registered on the roll of the resident National Guard. 280. Distinctions of rank and subordination may exist therein only in relation to service, and throughout its duration. 281. The offices of the resident National Guard shall be elected, at stated times, by the citizens who compose it, and may be re-elected only after an interval. 282. The command of the National Guard of an entire department may not be entrusted ordinarily to a single citizen. z8 3 . If it is deemed necessary to assemble the entire National Guard of a department, the Executive Directory may appoint a temporary commander. 284. The command of the resident National Guard in cities of 100,000 inhabitants and over may not be entrusted ordinarily to one man. OF THE NATIONAL GUARD ON ACTIVE SERVICE 285. The Republic shall maintain in its pay, even in time of peace, an army on land and sea under the name of National Guard on active service. z86. The army shall be constituted by voluntary enlistment, and, in case of need, by the method determined by law.

z86	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

2.8 7 . No foreigner who has not acquired the rights of French citizenship may be admitted into the French armies, unless he has waged one or more campaigns for the establishment of the Republic. 288. The commanders or leaders on land and sea shall be appointed only in case of war; they shall receive from the Executive Directory commissions which are revocable at will. The duration of such commissions shall be limited to one campaign; but it may be extended. 289. The general command of the armies of the Republic may not be entrusted to one man. 290. The army on land and sea shall be subject to special laws for discipline, the form of trials, and the nature of penalties. 291. No part of the resident National Guard or the National Guard on active service may act in the internal service of the Republic, except upon written requisition of the civil authority, in the forms prescribed by law. 292. The public force may be requisitioned by the civil authorities only within the extent of their territory; it may not move from one canton to another without being authorized thereto by the departmental administration, or from one department to another without orders from the Executive Directory. 293. Nevertheless, the Legislative Body shall determine means of assuring, by the public force, the execution of judgments and the prosecution of accused person on French territory 294. In case of imminent danger, the municipal administration of a canton may requisition the National Guard of neighboring cantons; in such case, the administration making requisition and the leaders of the National Guards requisitioned both shall be required to render immediate account thereof to the departmental administration. 295. No foreign troops may be brought upon French territory without the previous consent of the Legislative Body. TITLE X PUBLIC INSTRUCTION 296. There shall be primary schools in the Republic where pupils may learn reading, writing, the elements of computation, and the fundamentals of morality. The Republic shall provide for the expense of lodging the teachers who preside over said schools. 297. In divers parts of the Republic there shall be schools superior to the primary schools, and the number of same shall be such that there is at least one for every two departments. 298. For the entire Republic there shall be a National Institute, responsible for collecting discoveries and perfecting the arts and sciences. 299. The several establishments of public instruction shall have no relation of subordination to or administrative correspondence with one another. 300. Citizens shall have the right to constitute private establishments for education and instruction, as well as free societies to contribute to the progress of the sciences, letters, and arts. 301. National festivals shall be established to maintain fraternity among the citizens, and to attach them to the Constitution, the Patrie, and the laws.

The Constitution of the Year III 	
TITLE XI FINANCES
TAXES

287

302. Public taxes shall be deliberated upon and established annually by the Legislative Body. The establishment thereof shall appertain to it alone. They may not continue beyond one year, unless expressly renewed. 303. The Legislative Body may create any kind of tax that it deems necessary; but it shall establish a land tax and a personal tax annually. 304. Every individual, who, not subject to articles iz and 1 3 of the Constitution, has not been included on the roll of direct taxes, shall have the right to present himself at the municipal administration of his commune, and to have himself registered thereon for a personal tax equal to the local value of three days' agricultural labor. 305. The registration referred to in the preceding article may be effected only during the month of Messidor of each year. 306. Taxes of every sort shall be apportioned among all those liable to taxation, in proportion to their ability to pay. 307. The Executive Directory shall direct and supervise the collection and payment of taxes, and shall give all orders necessary therefor. 308. The detailed accounts of the expenditure of the ministers, signed and certified by them, shall be made public at the beginning of every year. The same shall apply with regard to statements of receipts of the divers taxes and all public revenues. 309. The statements of said expenses and receipts shall be distinguished according to their nature; they shall indicate the sums received and expended, year by year, in every branch of the general administration. 310. The accounts of the special expenses of the departments, and those relative to the courts, administrations, the progress of the sciences, and all public works and establishments shall likewise be published. 311. The departmental administrations and the municipalities may not make any assessment in excess of the sums established by the Legislative Body, or deliberate upon or permit, without authorization therefrom, any local loan at the expense of citizens of the department, commune, or canton. 312. The right to regulate the manufacture and issue of every sort of money, to establish the value and weight, and to determine the type thereof, shall appertain to the Legislative Body alone. 313. The Directory shall supervise the manufacture of monies, and shall appoint the officers responsible for the immediate performance of such inspection. 314. The Legislative Body shall determine the taxes of the colonies, and their commercial relations with the mother country.

288	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS NATIONAL TREASURY AND ACCOUNTING

315. Five commissioners of the National Treasury shall be elected by the Council of Elders, from a triple list presented by that of Five Hundred. 316. They shall hold office for five years; one of them shall be renewed annually, and may be re-elected indefinitely and without interval. 317. The commissioners of the Treasury shall be responsible for supervising the receipt of all national revenues; With ordering the movement of funds and the payment of all public expenses authorized by the Legislative Body; With keeping an open expense and receipt account with the collector of the direct taxes of every department, with the several national excise offices, and with the paymasters established in the departments; With maintaining with the said receivers and paymasters, with the excise offices and administrations, the correspondence necessary for securing exact and regular return of funds. 318. They may not under penalty of forfeiture, make any payment, except by virtue: 1st, Of a decree of the Legislative Body, and up to the amount of funds decreed thereby for each purpose; znd, Of a decision of the Directory; 3rd, Of the signature of the minister ordering the expenditure. 319. They may not, likewise under penalty of forfeiture, approve any payment, unless the warrant, signed by the minister whom such kind of expenditure concerns, states the date of the decision of the Executive Directory and of the decrees of the Legislative Body authorizing said payment. 3zo. The collectors of direct taxes in every department, the several national excise offices, and the paymasters in the departments shall remit to the National Treasury their respective accounts; the Treasury shall verify and settle them. 321. There shall be five commissioners of national accounting, elected by the Legislative Body at the same time, and according to the same forms and conditions, as the commissioners of the Treasury. 3zz. The general account of receipts and expenditures of the Republic, supported by the special accounts and vouchers, shall be presented by the commissioners of the Treasury to the commissioners of accounting, who shall verify and settle it. 323. The commissioners of accounting shall inform the Legislative Body of abuses, malversation, and all cases of irresponsibility which they discover in the course of their activities; they shall propose, on their part, measures suitable to the interests of the Republic. 324. The result of the accounts settled by the commissioners of accounting shall be printed and made public. 325. The commissioners, both of the National Treasury and of accounting, may be suspended or removed only by the Legislative Body. But during the adjournment of the Legislative Body, the Executive Directory may provisionally suspend and replace the commissioners of the National Treasury to the

The Constitution of the Year III 	

2.89

number of two at most, upon condition of referring the matter to both Councils of the Legislative Body as soon as they have resumed their sessions. TITLE XII FOREIGN RELATIONS 3 z6. War may be declared only by decree of the Legislative Body, upon the formal and necessary proposal of the Executive Directory. 32.7. The two Legislative Councils shall concur, according to the usual forms, in the decree by which war is declared. 3z8. In case of imminent or actual hostilities, of threats of or preparations for war against the French Republic, the Executive Directory shall be required to employ, for the defence of the State, the means placed at its disposal, upon condition of informing the Legislative Body thereof without delay. In such case it may even recommend the augmentations of force and the new legislative measures which circumstances necessitate. 32.9. The Directory alone may maintain political relations abroad, conduct negotiations, dispose the forces by land and sea as it deems expedient, and regulate the direction thereof in case of war. 33o. It shall be authorized to make preliminary stipulations, such as armistices and neutralizations, it may also agree upon secret conventions. 331. The Executive Directory shall agree upon, sign, or have signed, all treaties of peace, alliance, truce, neutrality, commerce, and other conventions with foreign powers which it deems necessary for the welfare of the State. Such treaties and conventions shall be negotiated, in the name of the French Republic, by diplomatic agents appointed by the Executive Directory and charged with its instructions. 332.. In case a treaty includes secret articles, the provisions of such articles may not be destructive of the open articles, or contain any alienation of the territory of the Republic. 333. Treaties shall be valid only after having been examined and ratified by the Legislative Body; nevertheless, the secret terms may be executed provisionally from the moment they are agreed upon by the Directory. 334. Neither of the Legislative Councils may deliberate upon war or peace, except in committee of the whole. 335. Foreigners, whether established in France or not, may inherit from their kinsmen, whether French or foreign; they may contract for, acquire, and receive property situated in France, and may dispose thereof, just as French citizens, by every means authorized by law. TITLE XIII REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION 336. If experience indicates defects in any articles of the Constitution, the Council of Elders may propose the revision thereof.

290

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

337. In such case, the proposal of the Council of Elders shall be subject to

ratification by the Council of Five Hundred. 338. When, within a period of nine years, the proposal of the Council of Elders, ratified by the Council of Five Hundred, has been made on three occasions, at least three years apart, an assembly of revision shall be convoked. 339. Said assembly shall be constituted of two members from each department, all elected in the same manner as members of the Legislative Body, and possessing the same qualifications as those required for the Council of Elders. 34o. For the meeting of the assembly of revision, the Council of Elders shall designate a place, at least twenty myriametes distant from that where the Legislative Body sits. 341. The assembly of revision shall have the right to change the place of its residence, subject to observation of the distance prescribed by the preceding article. 342. The assembly of revision may not perform any legislative or governmental function; it shall limit itself to the revision of the constitutional articles designated by the Legislative Body. 343. All articles of the Constitution, without exception, shall continue in force until the changes proposed by the assembly of revision have been accepted by the people. 344. The members of the assembly of revision shall deliberate in common. 345. Citizens who are members of the Legislative Body at the time of convocation of an assembly of revision may not be elected members of such assembly. 346. The assembly of revision shall direct immediately to the primary assemblies the plan of reform it has agreed upon. It shall be dissolved as soon as said plan has been dispatched thereto. 347. The duration of the assembly of revision may not, under any circumstances, exceed three months. 348. The members of the assembly of revision may not be investigated, accused, or tried at any time for what they have said or written in the performance of their duties. Throughout the duration of said duties they may not be placed on trial, except by a decision of the members of the assembly of revision themselves. 349. The assembly of revision may not participate in any public ceremony; its members shall receive the same indemnity as members of the Legislative Body. 3 5 o. The assembly of revision shall have the right to perform, or to have performed, the policing of the commune where it is located. TITLE XIV GENERAL PROVISIONS 3 5 1. There shall be no superiority among citizens other than that of public functionaries, and that only in relation to the performance of their duties. 352.. The law shall recognize neither religious vows nor any obligation contrary to the natural rights of man.

The Constitution of the Year III	

291

353 . No one may be prevented from speaking, writing, printing, or publishing his ideas. Writings may not be subjected to any censorship before their publication. No one may be held responsible for what he has written or published, except in cases provided for by law. No one may be prevented from performing the worship of his choice, 354. so long as he complies with the laws. No one may be forced to contribute to the expenses of a religion. The Republic does not pay for any. 355. There shall be neither privilege, nor mastership, nor wardenship, nor limitation on the liberty of the press, of commerce, or of the practice of industry or arts of any kind. When circumstances render such prohibitive laws necessary, they shall be essentially provisional, and shall be effective for one year only, unless formally renewed. 356. The law shall watch particularly over the professions which affect public morals and the security and health of citizens; but admission to the practice of such professions may not be made conditional upon any pecuniary payment. 357. The law shall provide for the compensation of inventors, or for the maintenance of the exclusive ownership of their discoveries or productions. 358. The Constitution guarantees the inviolability of all property, or just indemnification for that of which legally established public necessity requires the sacrifice. 359. The house of every citizen is an inviolable asylum; during the night no one shall have the right to enter thereunto except in case of fire, flood, or a call proceeding from inside the house. During the day, orders of the constituted authorities may be executed therein. No domiciliary visit may take place except by virtue of a law, and for the person or object expressly designated in the warrant ordering such visit. 36o. Corporations and associations which are contrary to public order may not be formed. 361. No assembly of citizens may call itself a popular society. 36z. No private society which concerns itself with political questions may correspond with another, or affiliate therewith, or hold public sessions composed of the members of the societies and of associates distinguished from one another, or impose conditions of admission and eligibility, or arrogate to itself rights of exclusion, or cause its members to wear any external insignia of their association. 363. Citizens may exercise their political rights only in the primary or communal assemblies. 364. All citizens shall be free to address petitions to the public authorities, but they must be individual ones; no association may present the collectively, except the constituted authorities, and only for matters within their competence. The petitioners must never forget the respect due the constituted authorities. 365. Every armed gathering is an attack upon the Constitution; it shall be dispersed immediately by force. 366. Every unarmed gathering, likewise, shall be dispersed, at first by verbal command, and, if necessary, by the deployment of armed force.

292.	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

367. Several constituted authorities may never unite for the purpose of deliberating together; no instrument emanating from such a union may be executed. 368. No one may wear distinctive symbols indicative of duties formerly performed or services rendered. 369. The members of the Legislative Body, and all public functionaries, shall wear, in the performance of their duties, the costume or insignia of the authority with which they are invested; the form thereof shall be determined by law. 37o. No citizen may renounce, in whole or in part, the indemnity or salary assigned to him by law because of public duties. 37 1. There shall be uniformity of weights and measures throughout the Republic. 372.. The French era shall date from 22 September, 1792, the day of the establishment of the Republic. 373. The French nation declares that under no circumstances will it permit the return of Frenchmen who, having abandoned their Patrie since 15 July, 1 7 89, are not included in the exceptions provided in the laws against émigrés; and it forbids the Legislative Body to make new exceptions in such connection. The property of émigrés is irrevocably acquired for the benefit of the Republic. 374. The French nation likewise proclaims, as a guarantee of public faith, that after a legally consummated auction of national property, whatever its origin, the lawful acquirers may not be dispossessed thereof; reserving to third claimants, if need be, indemnification by the National Treasury. 375. None of the powers instituted by the Constitution shall have the right to change it in its entirety, or in any of its parts, except for reforms which may be effected by way of revision in conformity with the provisions of Title XIII. 376. The citizens shall always remember that the duration, preservation, and prosperity of the Republic depend principally upon the wisdom of elections in the primary and electoral assemblies. 377. The French people entrust the present Constitution to the fidelity of the Legislative Body, the Executive Directory, the administrators, and the judges; to the vigilance of fathers of families, to wives and mothers, to the affection of young citizens, to the courage of all Frenchmen.

