CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

GABON
1982-1993 by DANIEL G. ANNA Translation by DANIEL G. ANNA

RELEASE 93-4 Issued June 1993

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

This work contains material © Copyright by The Philadelphia Constitution Foundation, reproduced with permission. For copyright and permission statements in Constitutions of the Countries of the World, generally, please see Overall Table of Contents. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4 Copyright 1993 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

GABONESE REPUBLIC
UNION—WORK—JUSTICE

CONSTITUTION OF THE GABONESE REPUBLIC

LOI No 3/91 of 26 March 1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS PREAMBLE PRELIMINARY TITLE Fundamental Rights and Principles TITLE I The Republic and Sovereignty TITLE II Executive Authority 1 - The President of the Republic 2 - The Government TITLE III ' Legislative Authority TITLE IV Relations Between Executive Authority and Legislative Authority TITLE V Judicial Authority 1 - Judicial Authority 2 - The Supreme Court 3 - The High Court of Justice and Other Extraordinary Jurisdictions TITLE VI The Constitutional Court Art. 83 to 93 Art. 67 to 72 Art. 73 to 77 Art. 78 to 82 Art. 35 to 46 Art. 8 to 27 Art. 28 to 34 Art. 2 to 7 Art. 1

Art. 47 to 66

1

TITLE VII The National Council of Communication TITLE VIII The Economic and Social Council TITLE IX Local Units TITLE X International Treaties and Accords TITLE XI Cooperation and Association Accords TITLE XII Revision of the Constitution TITLE XIII Temporary Provisions Art. 118 to 120 Art. 116 to 117 Art 115 Art. 113 to 114 Art. 112 Art 103 111 Art. 94 to 102

2

CONSTITUTION OF THE GABONESE REPUBLIC LAW No. 3/91 March 26, 1991 The National Assembly deliberated and adopted: The President of the Republic, Head of State, shall promulgate the law comprised of the following: PREAMBLE The gabonese people, conscious of its responsibility before History, animated by the willingness to assure its independence and its national unity, to organize the common life according to the principles of national sovereignty, multiparty democracy, social justice, and republican legality; Solemnly affirms its adherence to Human Rights and the fundamental liberties such as they result from the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen of 1789, consecrated by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, by the African Charter of the Rights of Man and the Rights of Peoples of 1981, and by the National Charter of Liberties of 1990; Solemnly proclaims its adherence to profound and traditional social values, to the cultural patrimony, material and spiritual, to the respect of liberties, rights and duties of the citizen. In virtue of these principles and of those of the sovereignty of the people, it adopts the present Constitution. PRELIMINARY TIT LE Fundamental Rights and Principles
Article One. The Gabonese Republic shall recognize and guaranty the

inviolable and imprescriptible rights of Man, which obligatorily constrain public powers.

3

1)

each citizen has the right to the free development of his person, in respect of the rights of others and public order. No one shall be humiliated, mistreated, or tortured, especially when he is in a state of arrest or imprisonment; the freedom of conscience, thought, opinion, expression, communication, the free practice of religion, shall be guaranteed to all, under the reservation of respect of public order; the freedom to come and go in the interior of the territory of the Gabonese Republic, to exit it and to reenter it, shall be guaranteed to all Gabonese citizens, under the reservation of respect of public order; the right to a defense, in the judicial process, shall be guaranteed to all; preventative detention shall not exceed the time allocated by the law; the secrecy of correspondence, postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and telematic communications shall be inviolable. Restriction of this inviolability shall only be ordered in application of the law, for reasons of public order and the security of the State; the limits of the usage of information systems for the safeguard of Man, the personal and familial intimacy of persons, and the full exercise of their rights, shall be fixed by law; each citizen shall have the right to work and the right to obtain employment. No one shall be impaired in his work by reason of his origins, his sex, his race, his opinions; the State, according to its possibilities, shall guarantee to all, notably to the child, the mother, the handicapped, to aged workers and to the elderly, the protection of health, social security, a preserved natural environment, rest and leisure. every Gabonese citizen sejouring or residing abroad shall benefit from the protection and the assistance of the State, under conditions fixed by national law or international accords;

2)

3)

4)

5)

6)

7)

8)

9)

4

10)

every person, individually as well as collectively, shall have the right to property. No one shall be deprived of his property, if it is not when public necessity, legally declared, urges it and under the condition of a just and prior compensation; however, the expropriations of immovables engaged in for the cause of public utility, for the insufficiency or absence of productive use, and regarding unregistered properties, shall be regulated by law; every Gabonese shall have the right to freely fix his domicile or residence in no matter what area of the national territory and to there exercise all activities, under the reservation of respect of public order and of the law; the domicile is inviolable. It shall only be ordered searched by a judge or by other authorities designated by the law. Searches shall only be executed in the forms provided for herein. Measures touching upon the inviolability of the domicile or limiting it shall only be taken in order to prepare for collective dangers or to protect public order from imminent menaces, notably in order to fight against the risks of epidemic or in order to protect persons in danger; the right to form associations, political parties or formations, syndicates, societies, establishments for social interests as well as religious communities, shall be guaranteed to all under conditions fixed by the law, religious communities shall conduct and administrate their Oaks in an independent manner, under reserve of respect of the principles of national sovereignty, public order and the preservation of the moral and mental integrity of the individual. Political associations, parties or formations, syndicates, societies, establishments for social interests as well as religious communities of which the activities are contrary to law, or to the good relations of ethnic groups or ensembles may be prohibited according to the terms of the law. Any act of racial, ethnic, or religious discrimination as well as any regionalist propaganda capable of touching the internal or

11)

12)

13)

5

external security of the State or the integrity of the Republic shall be punished by law. 14) the family is the basic natural unit of society; marriage is the legitimate support of it. They shall be placed under the particular protection of the State; the State shall have the duty to organize a general census of the population every ten years; the support to be given to children and their education constitute, for parents, a natural right and duty which they shall exercise under the surveillance and with the aid of the State and public entities. Parents shall have the right, in the area of scholarly obligation, to decide upon the moral and religious education of their children. The children shall have, vis-a-vis the State, the same rights concerning assistance as well as their physical, intellectual and moral development; the protection of the young against exploitation and against moral, intellectual and physical abandon, shall be an obligation for the State and public entities; the State shall guarantee equal access of the child and the adult to instruction, to professional education and to culture; the State shall have the duty to organize pubic education on the principle of religious neutrality and, according to possibilities, on the basis of gratuity; the granting of diplomas shall be the prerogative of the State; However, freedom of education shall be guaranteed to all. Any person may open a preschool, primary, secondary, superior establishment or a university, under conditions fixed by the law. The law shall fix the conditions of participation of the State and public entities in the financial duties of private establishments of education, recognized of public utility.

15) 16)

17)

18) 19)

6

In public educational establishments, religious instruction may be dispensed to students upon the demand of their parents, under conditions determined by regulations. The law shall fix the conditions of operation of private educational institutions taking into account their specificity; 20) the nation shall proclaim the solidarity and equality of all before the public charges; everyone shall participate, in proportion to his resources, to the financing of public expenses. The nation shall proclaim in addition the solidarity of all before the charges which result from natural and national calamities; 21) each citizen shall have the duty to defend the fatherland and the obligation to protect and respect the Constitution, the laws and the regulations of the Republic; the defense of the nation and the safeguard of public order shall be essentially assured by the national defense and security forces. In consequence, no person, no group of persons may constitute itself in private militia or paramilitary grouping; the national defense and security forces shall be at the service of the State. In times of peace, the Gabonese Armed Forces may participate in the work of economic and social development of the nation; 23) no one shall be arbitrarily detained; No one shall be kept under watch or placed under a warrant for arrest if he presents sufficient guarantees of representation, under reservation of the necessities of security and procedure. All accused shall be presumed innocent until the establishment of his culpability following regular process, offering indispensable guarantees to his defense.

22)

7

Judicial authority, the guardian of individual liberty, shall assure the respect of these principles within the periods fixed by the law. TITLE I The Republic and Sovereignty Article 2. Gabon is an indivisible, secular, democratic and social Republic. It shall affirm the separation of State and religions and recognize all beliefs, under the reservation of respect for public order. The Gabonese Republic shall assure the equality of all citizens before the law, without distinction of origin, race, sex, opinion or religion. The national emblem is the tricolor flag, green yellow, blue in three horizontal bands of equal dimension. The national anthem is "La Concorde". The motto of the Republic is: "Union-Work-Justice". The seal of the Republic is a "Nursing Maternity". Its principle shall be: "Government of the people, by the people and for the people." The Gabonese Republic adopts French as the official language of work. In addition, she shall strive for the protection and the promotion of the national languages. The capital of the Republic is Libreville. She shall only be transferred in virtu of a law by referendum. The national holiday shall be celebrated on August 17. Article 3. National sovereignty shall belong to the people who shall exercise it directly, by referendum or by election, according to the principle of multiparty democracy, and indirectly by constitutional institutions.

8

No faction of the people, no group, no individual shall attribute to itself the exercise of the national sovereignty.
Article 4. Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret. It can be direct

or indirect, within the conditions provided by the Constitution or by law. Under the conditions provided by law, all Gabonese of both sexes, 18 years of age, possessing their civil and political rights shall be electors and eligible.
Article 5. The Gabonese Republic shall be organized according to the

principle of national sovereignty and that of the separation of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers.
Article 6. Parties and political groupings shall concur in the expression

of suffrage. They shall form themselves and exercise their activities freely, in the area fixed by law, according to the principles of multiparty democracy.
Article 7. Any act touching upon the republican form, unity, secularity,

sovereignty and independence, shall constitute a crime of high treason punishable by' law. TITLE II Executive Authority I - THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
Aricle. 8. The. President of the Republic is the Head of State; he shall

strive to respect the Constitution; he shall assure, by his arbitration, the regular operation of public authorities as well as the continuity of the State. He is the guarantor of national independence, of territorial integrity, of respect of accords and treaties. He shall determine, in concert with the government, the policy of the nation.

9

He is the supreme holder of the executive power which he shall share with the Prime Minister.
Article 9. The President of the Republic shall be elected for five years,

by direct universal suffrage. He shall be re-eligible one time. The President of the Republic shall be elected by an absolute majority of the votes cast. If this is not obtained in the first round, it shall be followed, the second following Sunday, by a second round. Only the two candidates having received the largest number of votes in the first round shall be presented in the second round. In the second round, the election shall be determined by relative majority.
Article 10. If, before the first round, one of the candidates dies or

finds himself incapacitated, the Constitutional Court shall pronounce the results of the election. In the case of death or incapacity of one of the two most favored candidates in the first round before eventual withdrawals, the Constitutional Court shall declare that a new set of elections must shall proceed; it shall be the same in the case of the death or incapacitation of one of the two candidates remaining in competition in the second round. The Constitutional Court may extend the periods provided, in conformity with Article 11 hereafter, as long as the balloting does not take place more than thirty five days after the date of the decision of the Constitutional Court. If the application of the provisions of the present article have for effect the delay of the election to a date after the expiration of the mandate of the incumbent President, he shall continue to function until the election of his successor. All Gabonese of both sexes possessing their civil and political rights, at least forty years of age and at most sixty five years shall be eligible for the Presidency of the Republic. Any person having acquired the Gabonese nationality shall not present himself as a candidate for the Presidency of the Republic. 10

Only a descendancy having demeured without discontinuity in Gabon shall be eligible, starting with the fourth generation. The means of application of the present article shall be fixed by an organic law. Article 11. The mandate of the President of the Republic shall commence the day of his presentation by ceremony and shall end upon the expiration of the fifth year following his election. The election of the President of the Republic shall take place at least one month and at most two months before the expiration of the mandate of the incumbent President. He shall not shorten his mandate in whatever manner in order to solicit another. If the incumbent President of the Republic presents himself as a candidate, the National Assembly shall not be dissolved. He shall not, in addition, from the moment of the official announcement of his candidacy until the election exercise his power to legislate by ordinance. In the case of necessity, the National Assembly shall be convened in extraordinary session. Article 12. When he takes office, the President of the Republic shall solemnly take the oath here-under, in the presence of Parliament, the Constitutional Court, his left hand placed upon the Constitution, his right hand raised before the national flag: "I swear to consecrate all my efforts for the good of the Gabonese People, with the view of assuring their well-being and to preserve it from all malaise, to respect and defend the Constitution and the State of law, to conscientiously fulfill the duties of my charge and to be just toward all." Article 13. In the case of vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic for whatever cause, or definitive incapacity of its title holder determined by the Constitutional Court convened by the government and stating by an absolute majority of its members, the functions of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those provided for in Articles 18, 19, and 118, paragraph 2, shall be provisionally exercised by the President of the National Assembly and, if he be incapacitated in his 11

turn, by the First Vice-President of the National Assembly. In this case, neither one nor the other shall be candidates in the presidential election. In the case of vacancy or when the incapacity is determined definitive by the Constitutional Court, the balloting for the election of a new President shall take place, except in the case of force majeure declared by the Constitutional Court, at least thirty days and at the most forty-five days after the opening of the vacancy or of the declaration of the definitive character of the incapacity.
Article 14. The functions of the President of the Republic shall be

incompatible with the exercise of any other public function and private activity of a lucrative character.
Article 15. The President of the Republic shall name the Prime

Minister who shall obtain the approval of the National Assembly after the forming of the government and the presentation of his program of general policy. He [the President] shall end his [the Prime Minister's] functions, upon his own initiative, or upon the presentation by the Prime Minister of the resignation of the government, or following a vote of defiance or the adoption of a motion of censure by the National Assembly. Upon the proposition of the Prime Minister, he shall name the other members of the government and end their functions.
Article 16. The President of the Republic convenes and presides over

the Council of Ministers and for a fixed agenda. He shall be supplanted, should need be, by the Prime Minister, upon an express appointment and for a fixed agenda.
Article 17. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the

definitively adopted laws within the twenty five days which follow their transmission to the government. This period may be reduced to ten days in the case of emergency declared by the National Assembly or the government. The President of the Republic may, during the period of promulgation, demand of Parliament a new deliberation on the law or

12

on certain articles. This new deliberation shall not be refused. The text thus submitted to a second deliberation shall be adopted by a two thirds majority of its members, either in its original form, or after modification. The President of the Republic shall promulgate it within the period fixed above. Upon default of promulgation of the law by the President of the Republic within the conditions and periods here-above, he shall defer the text to the Constitutional Court. In case of rejection of review by the. Constitutional Court and if the President of the Republic persists in his refusal, the President of the National Assembly shall promulgate the law within the conditions and the periods provided for here-above.
Article . 18. The President of the Republic, upon his own initiative or

upon the proposition of the government, or upon the proposition of the National Assembly by an absolute majority of its members may, during the sessions, submit to referendum any bill touching the application of the principles contained in the Preamble or Title I of the Constitution and touching directly or indirectly the operation of institutions. When the referendum has concluded in the adoption of the project, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it in conformity with Article 17 here-above.
Article 19. The President of the Republic may, after consultation of

the Prime Minister and of the President of the National Assembly pronounce the dissolution of the National Assembly. However, the recourse to this prerogative, limited to two times over the course of the same Presidential mandate, shall not intervene consecutively in the twelve months which follow the first dissolution. General elections shall take place at least thirty days and at most forty five days, after publication of the decree enacting dissolution. The National Assembly shall convene of full right the second Tuesday which follows its election. If this meeting takes place outside the

13

periods provided for ordinary sessions, a session shall open of full right for a period of fifteen days. If, following the second dissolution, a majority is not favorable to him, the President of the Republic may present his resignation. The President of the National Assembly shall convene the Constitutional Court for the purpose of organizing new Presidential elections. The electoral body shall be convened within the period of at least thirty days and at most forty five days after the resignation of the President of the Republic, in conformity with Article 9.
Article 20. The President of the Republic shall appoint, in the Council

of Ministers, to high civil and military offices of the State, in particular, Ambassadors and Extraordinary Envoys as well as superior and general military officers. An organic law shall define the system of accession to these positions.
Article 21. The President of the Republic shall accredit Ambassadors

and Extraordinary Envoys before foreign powers and international organizations. Ambassadors and Extraordinary Envoys shall be accredited before him.
Article 22. The President of the Republic is the Supreme Chief of the

Armed forces and of Security. He shall preside over the High Councils and Committees of national defense. He shall be supplanted, should need be, by the Prime Minister, upon an express appointment and for a fixed agenda.
Article 23. The President of the Republic shall have the right of grace. Article 24. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the

National Assembly by messages which he shall have read by the President of this institution. Upon his demand, he may be heard by Parliament. These communications shall not give rise to any debate.

14

Out of session, the National Assembly shall be specially convened for this purpose.
Article 25. The President of the Republic may, when circumstances

demand, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers and vote of the National Assembly by a two thirds majority, proclaim by decree a state of siege, a state of alert or a state of emergency, which shall confer upon him special powers, under conditions determined by law.
Article 26. When the institutions of the Republic, independence or the

superior interests of the nation, territorial integrity or the execution of its international engagements are menaced in a grave and immediate manner and that the regular operation of constitutional public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic shall take by ordinance, during the intersessions, with the least delay, measures necessitated by the circumstances, and after consultation of the National Assembly as well as the Constitutional Court He shall inform the nation of this by a message. During the sessions, these measures arise in the domain of the law. The National Assembly shall not be dissolved, nor shall revision of the Constitution be commenced or achieved.
Article 27. The acts of the President of the Republic other than those

specified in Articles 15 paragraph 1, 17 paragraphs 1,2, and 3, 18, 19, 23, 24, 78, 79, 98, and 116 shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister and the ministers charged with their execution.
H - THE GOVERNMENT Article 28. The Government shall conduct the policy of the nation,

under the authority of the President of the Republic and in concert with him. It shall conduct, to this effect, the administration of the Armed and Security Forces.

15

The Government shall be responsible before the President of the Repubic and the National Assembly, under conditions and procedures provided by the present Constitution. Article 29. The Prime Minister shall direct the action of the Government. He shall assure the execution of the laws. Under reserve of the provision of the above-mentioned Article 20, he shall exercise the regulatory power and appoint civil and military positions of the State. He shall supplant the President of the Republic in the pre-cited cases. He may delegate certain of his powers to other members of the
Government.

The interim of the Prime Minister shall be assured by a member of the Government designated by a decree of the President of the Republic, in conformity with the order of nomination of the decree fixing the composition of the Government. The Minister assuring the interim of the Prime Minister shall be invested, by temporary title, with the plenitude of the powers of the Prime Minister. The acts of the Prime Minister shall be countersigned by the members of the Government charged with their execution. Article 30. Bills, ordinances and regulatory decrees shall be deliberated upon in the Council of Ministers, after the advice of the Administrative Chamber. Article 31. The Government shall be composed of the Prime Minister, the ministers and the secretaries of the State. The Prime Minister is the Head of the Government. The members of the Government shall be chosen from the center of the National Assembly and from elsewhere. They shall be at least 35 years of age, having a professional experience of 7 years and possessing all of their civil and political rights.

16

Any member of the Government or any other citizen defeated in an uncontested election shall not be redirected or appointed to the Government within the eighteen months which follow this election. Article 32. The functions of a member of the Government shall be incompatible with the exercise of a parliamentary mandate. An organic law shall fix the treatment and the advantages accorded to members of the Government and enumerate their other public functions and private activities of which the exercise shall be incompatible with their functions. Article 33. The members of the Government shall be politically cohesive. They shall be penally responsible for the crimes and misdemeanors committed in the exercise of their functions. Article 34. In case of resignation, the Government shall assure the expedition of current affairs until the constitution of a new Government.

TITLE III Legislative Authority
Article 35. The legislative authority shall be represented by a Parliament called the National Assembly. The members of the National Assembly carry the title of Deputy. They shall be elected for a duration of five years by direct universal suffrage. The National Assembly shall be integrally renewed with the term of the legislature. Article 36. The Parliament shall vote upon law, consent to taxes and control the executive power under conditions provided by the present Constitution.

17

Article 37. An organic law shall fix the number of Deputies, their
indemnity, the forms and the conditions of their election as well as the regime of ineligibilities and incompatibilities. It shall equally fix the conditions in which the persons called to assure, in the case of vacancy of a seat, the replacement of deputies until the renewal of the National Assembly shall be elected, as well as the regime of ineligibilities and incompatibilities.

Article 38. No member of the National Assembly shall be observed,
investigated, arrested, detained or judged as a result of his opinions or votes given by him in the exercise of his functions. Any member of Parliament shall only, during sessions, be observed, investigated, arrested for a criminal, correctional or simple police matter, with the authorization of the office of the National Assembly, except in the case of flagrant delict or definitive condemnation. The detention or the observation of a member of Parliament shall be suspended until the end of his mandate, except in the case of waiver of parliamentary immunity.

Article 39. Any imperative mandate shall be void. The right to vote of
members of Parliament is personal. The operation of the Assembly shall exceptionally authorize the delegation of the vote. No one shall receive the delegation of more than one mandate.

Article 40. The Parliament shall meet of plain right the first day
possible following the fifteenth day after its election. Its agenda shall then comprehend exclusively of the election of its President and of its Office. The President of the National Assembly and the other members of the Office shall be elected by their peers by secret ballot, for a duration of thirty months renewable, conforming with the provisions of operation of the National Assembly. Always, at any moment, after their entry into function, the National Assembly may relieve them of their mandate following a vote of 18

defiance for grave fault, by a two thirds majority for the President and an absolute majority for the other members of the Office.

Article 41. The Parliament shall meet by plain right in two ordinary
sessions per year. The first session shall open the third Tuesday in April; its duration shall not exceed fifteen days. The second session shall open the first Tuesday in October and shall end at the latest the third Friday in December. The opening of the session shall be delayed to the next day if this day is a holiday or, the case arising, the first openable day which follows.

Article 42. The Parliament shall meet by plain right during the
duration of a state of siege and in the case provided for in Article 26 here-above.

Article 43. The Parliament shall meet in extraordinary session, upon
the convocation of the President of the National Assembly, for a specific agenda, at the demand, either of the President of the Republic on the proposition of the Prime Minister, or of an absolute majority of the members of the national Assembly. The extraordinary sessions shall open and close by decree of the President of the Republic. They shall not exceed a duration of fifteen days.

Article 44. The meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. An
integral account of the debates shall be published in the Journal of debates. The public authorities shall assure the retransmission of the debates of the National Assembly by the medias of the State in conformity with the provisions of operation of the National Assembly. The National Assembly may meet in closed session, at the demand, either of the President of the Republic, or of the Prime Minister or a fifth of its members.

19

Article 45. The National Assembly shall decide its procedures which shall enter into effect only after having been recognized as conforming with the Constitution by the Constitutional Court. Any ulterior modification shall be equally submitted to this last [procedure]. Article 46. The National Assembly shall possess and exercise financial autonomy. TITLE IV Relations Between Executive Authority And Legislative Authority Article 47. Outside of the cases expressly provided for by the Constitution, the law shall fix the rules concerning: the exercise of fundamental rights and duties of citizens;. the constraints imposed on Gabonese and on foreigners in their person and their goods, notably in view of public utility and national defense; the nationality, state and capacity of persons, matrimonial regimes, successions and gifts, status of foreigners and immigration; the organization of the civil state; the conditions of the usage of information systems so that honor, personal and familial intimacy of citizens, as well as the full exercise of their rights shall be safeguarded; the electoral system of the National Assembly and local assemblies; the judicial organization, the creation of new orders of jurisdiction and the status of magistrates; the organization of ministerial and public offices, the professions of ministerial officers; the determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties which shall be applicable to them, the penal procedure, the penitentiary and amnesty system; the state of readiness, state of emergency, state of alert and state of siege; the system of associations, parties, political groups, and syndicates;

20

the tax base, the tax rate and the means of recovery of impositions of any nature, the system of currency regulation; the general status of the public function and particular statuses; the nationalization of enterprises and the transfer of ownership of enterprises of the public sector to the private sector; the creation or the suppression of autonomous public establishments and services; the general administrative and financial organization; the creation, operation and free development of territorial units, their competencies, their resources and their tax base; the conditions of participation of the State in the ownership of all societies and the control by these means of the development of these societies; the administration of public goods, land use, forestry, mining and habitat; the protection of the artistic, cultural and archeological patrimony; the protection of nature and the environment; the system of ownership, of real rights and of civil and commercial obligations; the debts and financial engagements of the State; the programs of economic and social action; the conditions in which the laws of finance shall be presented and decided and the accounts of the nation shall be arranged. the laws of finance determining the resources and the obligations of the State under conditions provided for by an organic law. the laws of a program fixing the objectives of the State in economic, social, cultural and national defense matters. The law shall otherwise determine the fundamental principles; of education; of health; of social security; of the right to work; of the right to syndicate and there comprising the exercise of the right to strike; of mutuality and savings; of the general organization of the national defense and of public security. 21

-

The provisions of the present Article may be made more precise or more complete by an organic law. Article 48. All resources and obligations of the State shall, for each financial exercise, be evaluated and written into the annual budgetary bill placed by the government before the National Assembly at the opening of the second ordinary session and at the latest the thirtieth of October. If, at the end of the budgetary session, the Parliament adjourns without having passed a balanced budget, the government shall be authorized to repromulgate by ordinance the preceding budget. This ordinance may in spite of this provide for, in case of necessity, any reduction of expenditures or increase in revenues. Upon the demand of the Prime Minister, Parliament shall be convened in two weeks in extraordinary session for a new deliberation. If Parliament has not passed the balanced budget at the end of this extraordinary session, the budget shall be definitively established by ordinance taken in the Council of Ministers and signed by the President of the Republic. The new revenues which may be created, if they consist of direct taxes and contributions or similar taxes, shall become effective the first of January. The General Accounting Office shall assist Parliament and the government in the control of the execution of the budget. The bill of management established by the government, accompanied by the general declaration of conformity and general report of the General Accounting Office, shall be placed before the National Assembly at the latest the fifteenth of October of the year which follows that of execution of the budgetary Act concerned. Article 49. A Declaration of War by the President of the Republic shall be authorized by Parliament by a two thirds majority of its members. Article 50. The extension of a state of siege, beyond twenty one days, shall be authorized by the National Assembly by a two thirds majority of its members.

22

Article 51. Matters other than those which are of the domain of the State shall have a regulatory character. They shall be the objects of decrees of the President of the Republic. These matters may, for the application of these decrees, be the object of administrative decisions taken by the Prime Minister or, upon delegation of the Prime Minister, by the ministers responsible or by the other administrative authorities habituated to making them. Article 52. The government may, in case of emergency, for the execution of its program, demand of Parliament the authorization to be taken by ordinance during Parliamentary recess, measures which are normally of the domain of the law. The ordinances shall be taken in the Council of Ministers after the advice of the Administrative Section and signed by the President of the Republic. They shall become effective upon their publication. They shall be ratified by Parliament in the course of its next session. Parliament shall have the possibility to modify the ordinances by way of amendments. In the absence of a law of ratification, the ordinances shall be null and void. Ordinances may be modified by another ordinance or by a law. Article 53. The initiative of laws shall belong concurrently to the government and to Parliament. Article 54. Bills shall be deliberated in the Council of Ministers, after the advice of the Administrative Section, and filed with the Office of the National Assembly. In the name of the Prime Minister, a member of the government shall be charged, the case necessitating, with describing the provisions of [the bill] and supporting the discussion before the National Assembly.

23

The bill or the proposition of an organic law shall be submitted to deliberation and to vote of the National Assembly only upon the expiration of a period of fifteen days after its filing. All propositions of law transmitted to the government by the National Assembly and which have not been the object of an examination within a period of sixty days shall by rule be put to deliberation at the center of the National. Assembly. Article 55. Members of the government shall have the right of amendment. Propositions of law and amendments of Parliamentary origin shall be irreceivable when their adoption would have for consequence, either a diminution of public revenues, or the creation or aggravation of a public charge without the removal of the corresponding revenues. Amendments need not be deprived of all agreement with the text to which they correspond. If the Government so demands, the National Assembly shall pronounce by vote upon all or part of the text under discussion therein retaining only the amendments proposed or accepted by the Government. Article 56. If it appears, during the course of the legislative procedure, that a text or an amendment is not within the domain of the law, in the sense of Article 47 here above, or exceeds the limits of legislative empowerment accorded to the Government in virtu of Article 52, the Prime Minister or the President of the National Assembly may raise its irreceivability, at the demand of a fifth of its members.
In

the case of disagreement, the Constitutional Court shall be seated. It shall decide in a period of eight days. Any person aggrieved by a text judged unconstitutional may equally convene the Constitutional Court which shall decide within the same period. If this period is not respected, the text shall become void.

24

Article 57. The agenda of the National Assembly shall consist of, by

priority and in the order fixed by it, the discussion of bills filed by the Government and propositions of law accepted by it. The Government shall be informed of the working agenda of the National Assembly and its commissions. The Prime Minister and the other members of the government shall have the right of access and speech in the National Assembly and its Commissions. They shall be heard by it at their demand or the demand of the Commissions.
Article 58. The emergency vote of a law may be demanded, either by

the Government, or by the members of Parliament by an absolute majority. When consisting of an emergency upon organic laws, the period of fifteen days shall be shortened to eight days.
Article 59. Bills and propositions of law shall be sent, for examination,

to the competent commissions of the National Assembly before deliberation in plenary session. After the opening of public debates, no amendment shall be examined if it has not been previously submitted to the competent commission.
Article 60. Organic laws provided for in the present Constitution shall

be deliberated and passed according to the normal legislative procedure. Organic laws, before their promulgation, shall be deferred to the Constitutional Court by the Prime Minister.
Article 61. The means of control of the legislative upon the executive

shall be the following: interpellations, written and oral questions, commissions of inquiry and control, the motion of censure exercised by the National Assembly under the conditions provided for in Article 63 of the present Constitution. One meeting per week shall be reserved to questions of Deputies and to responses of members of the Government. 25

The executive shall be obligated to furnish to Parliament all elements of information which are demanded of him upon his conduct and his activities.
Article 62. An organic law shall determine the conditions in which the

written question shall be transformed into an oral question with debates, and the conditions of organization and operation of the commissions of inquiry and control. One meeting per week shall be consecrated to the examination of oral questions relative to actuality.
Article 63. The Prime Minister, after deliberation of the Council of

Ministers, shall engage the responsibility of government before the National Assembly, by posing the question of confidence, either by a declaration of general policy, or upon the passing of a text of law. The debate upon the question of confidence shall only intervene three full days after it was posed. The confidence shall only be refused by an absolute majority of the members composing the National Assembly.
Article 64. The National Assembly shall put to issue the responsibility

of the government by the passing of a motion of censure. Such a motion shall only be receivable if it is signed by at least a quarter of the members of the National Assembly. The vote of the motion to censure shall only take place three days after its filing. The motion to censure shall only be adopted by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly. In case of rejection of the motion of censure, the signatories shall not propose a new one over the course of the same session, except in the case provided for in Article 65 here-under.
Article 65. When the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure

or denies its confidence to the Prime Minister, he shall immediately submit his resignation to the President of the Republic. The resignation of the Prime Minister shall encompass the resignation of the entire government.

26

A new Prime Minister shall then be appointed under the conditions of Article 15.
Article 66. The closing of ordinary and extraordinary sessions shall be

delayed by right in order to permit, the case necessitating, the application of the provisions of Articles 25, 26 and 50 here-above.
TITLE V Judicial Authority I - JUDICIAL AUTHORITY Article 67. Justice shall be rendered, in the name of the Gabonese

people, by the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Courts of Appeal, Tribunals, the High Court of Justice and the other extraordinary jurisdictions.
Article 68. Justice shall be an authority independent of legislative

authority and executive authority. Judges shall only be submitted, in the exercise of their functions, to the authority of the law.
Article 69. The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the

independence of judicial authority, with respect to the provisions of the present Constitution, notably in its Article 36. He shall be assisted by the President of the Supreme Court and by the High Council of the Magistrate.
Article 70. The High Council of the Magistrate shall strive for the

good administration of justice, and decide for this purpose upon the nominations, placements, advancements, and the discipline of the magistrates.
Article 71. The High Council of the Magistrate shall be presided over

by the President of the Republic assisted by the President of the Supreme Court, Vice-President

27

Legislative authority shall be represented at the center of the High Council of the Magistrature by five Parliamentarians chosen by the President of the National Assembly from the different parties.
Article 72. The composition, organization and the operation of the

High Council of the Magistrate shall be fixed by an organic law.
II - THE SUPREME COURT Article 73. The Supreme Court shall be composed of three chambers;

the Judicial Chamber the Administrative Chamber the Accounting Chamber Each Chamber shall deliberate separately according to its area of competence. Decisions shall be invested with absolute authority over the thing judged.
Article 74. The Supreme Court shall be presided over by a professional

magistrate appointed by the President of the Republic upon a finding of aptitude established by the judicial body. The President of the Supreme Court shall be assisted by a vicepresident appointed under the same conditions.
Article 75. Magistrates who's aptitude is being considered shall have

at least 15 years of professional experience, at least 40 years of age and make a showing of recognized competence.
Article 76. Competencies of the Supreme Court and of each of its

Chambers shall be determined, as transitory title, by the laws in force at the moment of the promulgation of the present Constitution. However, electoral and referendatory competencies of the Administrative Chamber shall be transferred to the Constitutional Council upon the entry into force of the present Constitution. The President of the Supreme Court shall present each year a report of activities to the President of the Republic and the President of the National Assembly. He may, on this occasion, call the attention of 28

public authority to legislative or regulatory reforms which appear to it to conform to the general interest.
Article 77. An organic law shall fix the organization, composition,

competence and the operation of the Supreme Court.

III - THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
AND OTHER EXTRAORDINARY JURISDICTIONS I - THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE Article 78. The High Court of Justice shall be a non-permanent

extraordinary jurisdiction. It shall judge the President of the Republic in the case of violation of the oath or high treason. The President of the Republic shall be placed in accusation by Parliament deciding by a two thirds majority of its members, by public ballot. During this period, the decree of convocation of Parliament shall be extraordinarily made by the Prime Minister. The Presidents and Vice-Presidents of constituted bodies and the members of the Government shall be penally responsible before the High Court of Justice for acts accomplished in the exercise of their functions and qualified as crimes or misdemeanors at the moment when they were committed, as well as their accomplices and coauthors in the case of threat to the security of the State. In this case, the High Court of Justice shall be seated, either by the President of the Republic, or by the President of the National Assembly or by the procurer general of the Supreme Court acting officially or by convening all interested persons.
Article 79. The High Court of Justice shall be constrained, with the

exception of judgement of the President of the Republic, by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors as well as by the determination of penalties such as they result from the penal laws in force at the moment when the acts were committed.

29

Article 80. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of thirteen

members of which seven professional magistrates shall be designated by the High Council of the Magistrate and six members elected by Parliament at its center, in proportion to the members of parliamentary groups. The President and the Vice-President of the High Court of Justice shall be elected from among the resultant magistrates of the preceding paragraph by the group of members of this institution.
Article 81. The rules of operation of the High Court of Justice, the

procedure applicable before it and the definition of crimes ascribed to the President of the Republic shall be fixed by an organic law.
H - OTHER EXTRAORDINARY JURISDICTIONS Article 82. Other extraordinary jurisdictions shall be equally non-

permanent instances.
TITLE VI The Constitutional Court Article 83. The Constitutional Court shall be the highest jurisdiction

of the State in constitutional matters. It shall be the judge of the constitutionality of laws and it shall guaranty the fundamental rights of the human person and public liberties. It shall be the regulatory organ of the operation of institutions and of the activities of pubic authorities.
Article 84. The Constitutional court shall obligatorily decree upon:

the constitutionality of organic laws and laws before their promulgation, regulatory acts which touch upon the fundamental rights of the human person and public liberties; the rules of the national assembly, of the National Council of Communication and of the Economic and Social Council before their effectuation, regarding their conformity to the Constitution;

30

conflicts of attribution between the institutions of the State; the regularity of all elections and operations of referendum of which it shall proclaim the results. The Constitutional Court shall be convened, in the case of contestation of the validity of an election, by any voter, any candidate, any political party or the delegate of the Government under the conditions provided for by the organic law.
Article 85. Organic laws shall be submitted by the Prime Minister to

the Constitutional Court before their promulgation. The other categories of laws as well as regulatory acts may be deferred to the Constitutional Court, either by the President of the Republic, or by the Prime Minister, or by the President of the Supreme Court, or by any citizen or any moral person aggrieved by the contested law or act. The Constitutional Court shall decree, according to an adversarial procedure of which the processes shall be fixed by the organic law, in a period of one month. However, upon the demand of the government and in case of emergency, this delay shall be shortened to eight days. The review shall suspend the period of promulgation of the law or the application of the act. A provision declared unconstitutional shall not be promulgated or applied.
Article 86. Any accused may, by means of a process before an ordinary

tribunal, raise an exception of unconstitutionality when faced with a law or an act which does not recognize his fundamental rights. The judge on the bench shall consider the well-foundedness of the stated exception and, in the affirmative, shall convene the Constitutional Court by way of prejudicial exception. The Constitutional Court shall decree within a period of one month. If it declares the incriminatory law unconstitutional, this law shall cease to produce these effects from the moment of the decision.

31

The Parliament shall examine, during the course of the next session, within the scope of a procedure of remittal, the consequences deriving from the decision of non-conformity to the Constitution rendered by the Court. Article 87. International engagements, provided for in Articles 113 to 115 here-after shall be deferred, before their ratification, to the Constitutional Court, either by the President of the Republic, or by the Prime Minister, or by the President of the National Assembly, or by a tenth of the Deputies. The Constitutional Court shall verify, within a period of one month, if its provisions contain a clause contrary to the Constitution. However, at the demand of the government, if there is an emergency, this period shall be shortened to eight days. In the affirmative, these provisions shall not be ratified. Article 88. Outside of the other competencies provided by the Constitution, the Constitutional Court shall have the power of interpretation of the Constitution, at the demand of the President of the Republic, of the Prime Minister, of the President of the National Assembly, or of a tenth of the Deputies. Article 89. The Constitutional Court shall consist of nine (9) members which shall carry the title of Counsellors. The duration of the mandate of the Counsellors shall be seven (7) years renewable one time. The nine members of the Constitutional Court shall be chosen as follows: three appointed by the President of the Republic of which at least two shall be jurists; three appointed by the President of the National Assembly of which at least two shall be jurists; three magistrates chosen by the High Council of the Magistrate:

32

The Counsellors shall be principally chosen from among professors of law, lawyers and magistrates having at least 15 years of activity as well as qualified personalities which have honored the service of the State. The President of the Constitutional Court shall be elected by his peers. In the case of temporary incapacity, his interim shall be assured	 eldest Counsellor.
ie

In the case of death or the resignation of a member, the new member shall be named by the concerned nomination authority to complete the original mandate. The former Presidents of the Republic shall be honorary members of the Constitutional Court with consultative voice. Article 90. The functions of the members of the Constitutional Court shall be incompatible with any other public function or private or professional activity. The members of the Constitutional Court shall take an oath during the course of a solemn ceremony presided over by the President of the Republic, before the joined National Assembly and Supreme Court. They shall take the following oath, the left hand placed upon the Constitution and the right hand raised before the national flag: "I swear to conscientiously fulfill the duties of may charge in strict respect of the obligations of neutrality and of reserve, and to conduct myself as a dignified and loyal magistrate." Article 91. The Constitutional Court shall present a report of activities each year to the President of the Republic, to the President of the National Assembly and to the President of the Supreme Court, on which occasion it may call attention of public authorities to the effect of its decisions upon legislative and regulatory matters. Article 92. The decisions of the Constitutional Court shall not be susceptible to any review. They impose themselves upon public

33

authorities, upon all administrative and jurisdictional authorities and upon all physical and moral persons. Article 93. The rules of organization and operation of the Constitutional Court, as well as the procedure to be followed before it, shall be determined by an organic law.
1 I 1 LE VII

The National Council of Communication Article 94. Audiovisual and written communication shall be freicle in the Gabonese Republic, under the reservation of respect of public order, of liberty and dignity of citizens. Article 95. It shall be instituted for this effect a National Council of Communication charged to strive: for the respect of the expression of democracy and the freedom of the press in all that which arises in the territory; for the access of citizens to free communication; for equal treatment of all political parties and associations; for respect of rules concerning conditions of production, of programming and the diffusion of emissions relative to electoral campaigns; for the control of programs and of the regulation in force in the matter of communication, as well as rules of exploitation; for respect of the status of communications professionals; for the harmonization of programs between public stations of radio and television; for the policy of production of audiovisual and cinemagraphic works; for the promotion and the development of techniques of communication and instruction of personnel; for respect of the quotas of Gabonese programs diffused on the public and private radio and television stations; for control of the content and means of planning publicity emissions diffused by public and private radio and television stations. for control of conditions of operation of public and private enterprises; 34

for the protection of the infancy and the adolescence in the programming of emissions diffused by public and private enterprises of audiovisual communication; for the defense and the illustration of the Gabonese culture. Article 96. In case of violation of the law by interested parties, the National Council of Communication may address to them public observations and have appropriate sanctions applied. Article 97. Any conflict opposing the National Council of Communication to another public organism shall be resolved through the diligence of one of the parties by the Constitutional Court. Article 98. The National Council of Communication shall consist of nine members chosen as follows: three by the President of the Republic of which one shall be a communication specialist; three by the President of the National Assembly of which one shall be a communications specialist; and three elected by audiovisual communication professionals and the written press. Article 99. The members of the National Council of Communication shall have competence in the matter of communication, public administration, sciences, law, culture or arts, having a professional experience of at least fifteen years and be at least forty years of age. Article 100. The duration of the mandate of members of the National Council of Communication shall be five years renewable one time. In case of death or resignation of a member, the new member shall be appointed by the concerned nomination authority to complete the current mandate. Article 101. The President of the National Council of Communication shall be elected by his peers. In case of temporary vacancy, the oldest member shall assure the interim of the President.

35

Article 102. An organic law shall fix the organization of operation of

the National Council of Communication, as well as areas of incompatibility. TITLE VIII The Economic and Social Council
Article 103. The Economic and Social Council, under reserve of the

provisions of Articles 8, paragraph 3, 28 paragraph 1 and article 53 here-above shall have competence over all aspects of economic, social and cultural development: the general orientation of the country's economy; financial and budgetary policy; industrial policy; social and cultural policy; environmental policy.
Article 104. The Economic and Social Council shall participate in all

national interest commissions of an economic or social character. It shall compile and direct, with the participation of the different entities of which it is composed, to the attention of the President of the Republic, the annual summation of achievements, needs and problems of the civil society with explanations and propositions.
Article 105. The Economic and Social Council shall be charged to give

its advice upon all questions brought for its examination by the President of the Republic, the government, the National Assembly or any other public institution. The Economic and Social Council shall be obligatorily consulted on any budgetary act, any project of economic or social plan or program as well as on any legislative provisions of a fiscal, economic or social character.
Article 106. The Economic and Social Council may equally proceed

with the analysis of any problem of economic or social development. It shall submit its conclusions to the President of the Republic, to the government and the National Assembly. 36

Article 107. The Economic and Social Council may designate one of

its members, at the demand of the President of the Republic, of the Government or of the National Assembly, in order to expound before these organs the advice of the Council on the projects or propositions which are submitted to it. The Government and the Parliament shall have the obligation, when in session, to follow up on the advice and reports formulated by the Economic and Social Council within a maximum period of three months for the government and before the end of the current session for Parliament. The Economic and Social Council shall receive an official copy of laws, ordinances and decrees upon their promulgation. It shall follow the decisions of the Government relative to economic and social organization.
Article 108. Shall be members of the Economic and Social Council:

representatives of syndicates, socio-professional associations and groups, elected by their associations or groups of origin; high officials of the State in the economic and social domain; representatives of local units designated by their peers.
Article 109. The Economic and Social Council shall meet each year by

full right in two ordinary sessions of fifteen days each. The first session shall open the third Tuesday of February and the second, the first Tuesday of September. The opening of each session shall be delayed to the next day if the day provided for is not openable. The meetings of the Economic and Social Council shall be public.
Article 110. The President and the Vice-President of the Economic

and Social Council shall be elected at the center of the Council by their peers at the opening meeting of the first session for a mandate of four years renewable.

37

No member of the Economic and Social Council shall be observed, investigated, or judged for opinions expressed by him during meetings of the Council.
Article 111. The internal organization, rules of operation and of

designation of members of the Economic and Social Council shall be fixed by law.
TITLE IX Local Units Article 112. Local units of the Republic shall be created by law. They

shall only be modified or abolished after the advice of the interested councils and under the conditions fixed by law. They shall freely administer themselves by councils elected under the conditions provided by law, notably in that which concerns competencies and their resources.

TITLE X
International Treaties and Accords Article 113. The President of the Republic shall negotiate international

treaties and accords and ratify them by authorization of the National Assembly. The President of the Republic and the President of the National Assembly shall be informed of any negotiation concerning the conclusion of an international accord not submitted to ratification.
Article 114. Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties relative to

international organization, treaties which engage the finances of the State, those which are relative to the state of persons shall only be approved and ratified in virtu of a law. No amendment shall be receivable on this occasion. Treaties shall take effect only after having been regularly ratified and published.

38

No cession, no exchange, no junction of territory shall be effective without the consultation of the Gabonese people by way of referendum.
TITLE XI Cooperation and Association Accords Article 115. The Gabonese Republic shall sovereignly conclude accords

of cooperation or association with other States. She shall accept to create with them international organisms of common interest, coordination and free cooperation. TITLE XII
Amendment of the Constitution Article 116. The initiative of Amendment shall belong concurrently to

the President of the Republic, the Council of Ministers thereupon focused, and the members of Parliament. Any proposition of Amendment shall be filed with the Office of the National Assembly by at least a third of the Deputies. Any project or proposition of Amendment shall be submitted, for advice, to the Constitutional Court. The Amendment shall be adopted either by way of referendum, or by a two thirds majority of the members of the National Assembly. In this case, a qualified majority of two thirds of the ballots cast shall be required. Additionally, Amendment of the Constitution shall not be attempted or achieved, in case of interim of the Presidency of the Republic, by means of the emergency powers of Article 26 here-above or in case of effect upon territorial integrity.
Article 117. The Republican form of the State, as well and the pluralist

character of the democracy shall be intangible and shall not be the object of any Amendment. 39

TITLE XIII Temporary Provisions Article 118. The new institutions of the Republic provided by the present Constitution shall be put in place no later than a period of one year from its promulgation. The present President of the Republic shall remain in office until the initial duration of his mandate, in strict respect of the provisions of the present Constitution. Article 119. The present Constitution, adopted by the National Assembly shall abrogate that of May 28, 1990. Article 120. The present Constitution shall be published in the Official Journal and executed as law of the Republic. Executed at Libreville, March 26, 1991 By the President of the Republic, Chief of State El Hadj Omar Bongo The Prime Minister, Head of Government Casimir Oye-Mba The Minister of State, Minister of Justice, Keeper of the Seal Michel Anchouey

40

