CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Guatemala.-Guatemala,
December 12, 1879. 

We, the Representatives of the sovereign people of Guatemala, lawfully convoked for the purpose of enacting the fundamental law of the Republic, assembled in sufficient number, decree and sanction, the following Constitution:

TITLE I.-Of the Nation and its Inhabitants
ART. 1. Guatemala is a free, sovereign, and independent nation. It commits the exercise of sovereignty to the authorities established by the Constitution. 2. It will maintain and cultivate with the other Republic Central America intimate domestic and reciprocal relations; provided a Central American National Union shall be proposed stable, just, popular, and suitable plan, the Republic of Guatemala will be ready to reincorporate itself therein. 3. The supreme power of the nation is Republican, Democratic, and Representative, and its Administration is divided into Legislative, Executive, and Judicial Departments, and it shall be completely independent in its functions. 4. Guatemalans are native or naturalized. 5. The native subjects are (1.) all who are born or shall be born in the territory of the Republic, whatever may be the nationality of the father, with the exception of the children of Diplomatic Agents.

(2.) The sons of a Guatemalan father or the illegitimate children of a Guatemalan mother born abroad, from the date after which they shall reside in the Republic, and even without this condition, when conformably with the laws of the country of their birth, shall be entitled to choose their nationality and shall elect for Guatemala. 
6. Natives of the other Republics of Central America shall likewise be considered as Guatemalan subjects, by the fact of their being upon any part of Guatemalan territory, unless they declare to the proper authority their intention to retain their own nationality. 
7. Naturalized subjects are (1.) Spanish-Americans domiciled in the Republic, unless they choose to preserve their own nationality. (2.) Other foreigners who may have been naturalized in virtue of the previous laws. (3.) Those who obtain letters of naturalization in conformity with the law. 
8. Citizens are-(1.) Guatemalans who are full 21 years old, who have an income, trade, appointment, or profession which affords them the means of subsistence. (2.) All persons belonging to the Army, being full 18 years old.

9. The rights of citizenship are(1.) The electoral franchise. (2.) The right of voting for candidates public appointments which the law requires to be filled by election. 10. In cases in which the law exacts the quality of citizen for the exercise of any public function, such functions may be entrusted to foreigners possessing the qualifications required by law; such foreigners becoming in virtue of their acceptance of such offices naturalized subjects and citizens. 11. The quality of citizen is suspended, lost , and recovered in conformity with the law. 12. The obligations of Guatemalans are 1.) To serve and defend their country. (2.) To obey the laws, respect the authorities, and observe the police regulations. (3.) To contribute, in the manner laid down by law, to the public burdens. 
13. Foreigners are, from the moment of their arrival upon the territory of the Republic, strictly obliged to respect the authorities and observe the laws, and acquire a right to the protection afforded by the same. 14.* In no case can either Guatemalans or foreigners claim any indemnity from the Government for damage or prejudice inflicted on their persons or property by factions. 
15. Foreigners are obliged to observe the police arrangements and the regulations, and to pay the local imposts and the established taxes on account of trade, industry, profession, property, or possessions and those which may for the same reason be hereafter established, whether greater or less in amount than the previous ones. 

TITLE II.-Of the Guarantees.

16. The authorities of the Republic are instituted for the purpose of securing to the inhabitants the enjoyment of their rights which are liberty, equality, and the security for the person, honour, and property.
17. All power resides originally in the nation:
The functionaries are not proprietors, but depositaries of authority, subject to and never superior to the law, and always responsible for their official conduct. 

18. Elementary education is obligatory; that supported by the nation is secular and gratuitous. 

19. Every person is free to enter the territory of the Republic, to abide therein and to quit it, excepting in the cases which the law fixes. 20. Industry is free. The author or inventor has the rights of property in his work o invention, for the term specified by law; literary rights of property are, however, perpetual. 21. All persons may freely dispose of their property, provided always they do not infringe the law. Entails are, however, absolutely prohibited, and any foundations in mortmain except such as are intended for benevolent establishments. 22. The inhabitants of the Republic, whether native or foreign may address petitions to the authorities. Armed forces may not hold deliberations nor exercise the right of petition. 
23.* The inhabitants of the Republic have likewise free access to the tribunals of the country, to bring suits according to the form laid down by law. Foreigners cannot resort to diplomatic procedure, except in cases where justice has been denied. The delivery of a judgment unfavourable to such foreigner shall not in this sense be deemed a denial of justice. 

24. The exercise of all religions, without the pre-eminence of any, is guaranteed inside their places of worship; such free exercise, however, shall not extend to the commission of subversive acts or the performance of practices incompatible with peace and public order, nor confer any right to resist the fulfilment of civil and political obligations. 25. The right of association and of unarmed and peaceful assembly is guaranteed; but the establishment of conventual congregations and any kind of monastic institutions or associations is prohibited. 26. The expression of thought is free, by speech, by writing, and by the press without previous censorship. Any person abusing this right is responsible before the law. A jury shall take cognizance of the misdemeanours and offences of the press. 27. All the inhabitants of the Republic are free to give or to receive the education that may seem best to them in establishments not supported by national funds. 28. Property is inviolable: for the sake of the public interest and under legal sanction only, expropriation may be decreed; and in such case the owner, before his property shall have been occupied, shall receive its just value in current money. In case of war, the compensation shall not necessarily be in advance. 29. Any service, except such as has, in virtue of law or of a sentence in pursuance of law, to be rendered gratuitously, shall be justly remunerated. 30. No one shall be detained or arrested except for a crime or offence. The law fixes the cases and the formalities for proceeding to ition or arrest. 31. Any person arrested shall be examined within 48 hours; the detention cannot exceed five days; and the authority which has ordered it shall within this term authorize a warrant of imprisonment or order the release of the person detained. 32. No person shall be deprived of intercourse with others except in such cases and for such periods as the law determines; nor be subjected to restrictions which are not indispensable for his safe custody. 33. A warrant of commitment cannot be issued until a summary statement has been drawn up to the effect that an offence has been committed which is punishable by corporal or pecuniary penalty, -without legally valid reasons for believing the person in custody to be the offender.

34. The Constitution recognizes the right of habeas corpus or production of the person. 35. No one can be obliged in a criminal cause to give evidence against himself, against his consort, progenitors, descendants, or brothers and sisters. 36. The defence of the person and rights at law are inviolable, and no person shall be judged by special tribunals. 37. Every individual's correspondence and private papers are inviolable. The former can be detained and opened and the latter seized only by writ of the competent Judge, in the cases and with the formalities laid down by law. 38. Domicile is inviolable. The law fixes the formalities and the cases in which alone it may be entered by force. 39. If the national territory should be invaded or attacked, or the public tranquillity should be menaced for any reason, the President, in concert with the Council of Ministers, can suspend by decree the individual guarantees to which this title relates, specifying whether such suspension applies to the whole of the Republic or to one or more Departments of the same, and rendering an account of such action to the Assembly at its next session.

TITLE III.-Of the Legislative Power.
Section 1.-Organization of the Legislative Power. 
40. The Legislative Power resides in the National Assembly. 41. This Assembly shall assemble each year on the 1st of March even if it have not been summoned. Its ordinary sessions shall last two months, and can be prolonged for a month more. 42. The Assembly cannot hold sessions without the participation of an absolute majority of its members. 43. The Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session when convoked by the Executive Power or by the permanent Committee in such cases shall be able to deliberate only upon the subject to which have been the cause of the summons to assemble. 44. The Deputies from the day of their election shall enjoy, following prerogatives: (1.) Personal immunity from prosecution and trial unless the Assembly previously authorize such prosecution, declaring that there are grounds for instituting a trial. They may, however, be arrested in the case of being taken flagrante delicto. (2.) Irresponsibility for all their opinions, their Parliamentary initiative, and their manner of conducting their business in the discharge of their office. These prerogatives do not warrant arbitrary action or excessive individual initiative on the part of the representatives. The internal regulations determine the method to be observed in repressing abuses which may be committed. 45 The declaration referred to in the first clause of the preceding Article having been made, the accused are subject to the competent Judge, and are suspended from their legislative functions, and cannot exercise them except in case they are acquitted. If they should be condemned their seats shall be vacant, and writs for new elections will be ordered. 46. If the Assembly should not be in session, the permanent Commission shall declare whether or not there is justification for the prosecution of the Deputy. 47 Should any Deputy be taken in the commission of a crime he shall be immediately placed at the disposal of the Assembly, or, during its recess, of the permanent Commission 48 The Assembly shall be composed of a Deputy for every 20,000 inhabitants, or every fraction of that number in excess of 10,000. The law shall specify the method of holding the elections, but without modifying the principle of direct popular election. 49. The indispensable qualifications for a Deputy are, that he should be in the exercise of his rights of citizenship, and should be above 21 years of age. 50. Contractors for public works or services of whatever kind, paid for at the public cost, cannot be elected Deputies, nor persons who have claims pending, which result from contracts and relate to their personal interests. Secretaries Of State are likewise disqualified, and for the department or electoral district in which they exercise their functions, the  civil superiors, military commanders, Judges of First Instances, administrators of public revenue, and ministers of religion. 61. The Deputies shall remain in the exercise of their functions four years; half the Assembly shall be renewed, however, every two year's session years. With this intent, before the first constitutional year’s session is closed lots shall be drawn to determine the Deputies who shall retire at the expiry of the second years.

Section 2.-Attributes of the Legislative Power. 52. It devolves upon the Legislative Power(1.) To open and close ordinary and extraordinary sessions the (2.) To conduct the scrutiny of the votes in the election of people the by elected President of the Republic, and to proclaim elected by the people the citizen who shall have obtained an absolute majority of votes. (3.) To elect the President from among the three candidates who have obtained the greater number of suffrages in case of its happening that the election should have been made by popular voice owing to the absence of an absolute majority of votes. (4.) To appoint designates or nominees during the last sessions each year. (5.) To invest the President with possession, and to receive his legal declaration. *(6.) To accept or not, as it may deem expedient, the resignation of the President of the Republic should he wish to retire. (7.) To grant or withhold permission to the President of the Republic to quit the territory of Central America, and in such case to nominate a Deputy during his absence. 53. It also pertains to the Assembly to declare whether or not there is warranty for legally prosecuting the President of the Republic, the several Chief Ministers of State, the Councillors of State, Magistrates, the prosecutors in the higher Courts, and the Government attorneys. The law of responsibilities fixes the form of procedure and the tribunal which should take cognizance of the case.
 

54. The attributes of the Legislative Power arc likewise(1.) To decree, interpret, reform, and repeal the laws which should regulate all branches of the administration (2.) To fix each year the expenses of the public administration by passing or rejecting the estimate which it is incumbent upon the Executive Power to present. (3.) To decree the ordinary taxes or imposts required to covet the estimate of the expenses of administration, and the recognized credits. (4.) To approve or not the report which it is incumbent upon the Executive to present annually respecting the funds employed in the public administration, and also the unforeseen expenses which may have been necessary. (5.) To decree extraordinary taxes when necessity requires (6.) To authorize the Executive Power to conclude contracts and negotiate loans at home or abroad, and to guarantee lament out of the national revenue. (7.) To examine claims against the public treasury and assign funds for their satisfaction when allowed. (8.) To determine the standard weight and typo of the national money, and also to determine the system of weights and measures. (9.) To approve or disapprove, before they can be ratified, the Treaties and Conventions which the Executive shall conclude with other countries. (10.) To decree pensions and public honours for important services rendered to the nation. (11.) To authorize the issue by the Executive of such laws as from their extent cannot be drawn up by the Legislative Power, to whom the Executive shall give an account of them on the proper occasion. (12.) To grant extraordinary faculties to the Executive when required by necessity or the interests of the Republic, specifying in the Decree what such faculties are. (13.) To approve or disapprove acts which may have been done by the Executive Power in the exercise of the faculties which may have been granted to it. (14.) To appoint the President, magistrates, and Judges of the Courts of Justice. In the subsequent periods the election shall be directly popular. (15.) To confer the ranks of brigadier and general of division, on the motion of the Executive. (16.) To declare war and make peace. (17.) To decree general amnesties when required by the public convenience. 
55. It likewise devolves upon the Assembly- At the opening of its sessions to elect the President, Vice-President and other functionaries who compose the table, conformably to the internal regulations. (2.) To certify the elections of its respective members, and approve or reject their credentials. (3.) To admit or not the denunciations which may be presented, and other proceedings for fresh elections to fill vacancies which shall occur in the above way or from any other cause. (4.) To draw up rules for its internal regulation. (5.) To require the attendance of absent Deputies, and to correct the faults and omissions of those present. 

Section 3.-Of the Formation and Enactment of the law
56. The laws may originate in the Assembly, by the motion of one of its members, by the initiative of the Executive or of the Judicial Powers, on subjects within their competence.
57. The Assembly, in order to exercise the attributions mentioned in Articles 54 and 55, will submit the matter the matter in question to the discussion of the Chamber in three different sessions held on different days, and it shall not be voted until it shall have been considered sufficiently discussed in the third session. In all the other forms of proceeding the rules for the internal government shall be followed. 58. When a Bill has been passed it shall go to the Executive for sanction. 59. The President shall sanction and order to be promulgated the law voted by the Assembly, but should it be considered inexpedient he can, in concert with the Council of Ministers, refuse his sanction and return it to the Assembly within 10 days, and with such remarks as he may deem suitable. The Assembly can at once reconsider the Bill or leave it till the following year’s session, if the observations made by the Executive shall not have been accepted. In this latter case, if the Assembly shall ratify the Bill with two-thirds of the votes, the Executive shall sanction and promulgate the law. 60. If the Executive should not return the Bill after the term of 10 days reckoned from the time it was sent up, it shall be deemed sanctioned, and shall be promulgated as law. If the Assembly shall close its session before the expiry of the 10 days allowed for the return of the Bill, the Executive shall return it within the first eight days of the ordinary sessions of the following year. 61. The sanction of the Executive is not necessary for the regulations of the Assembly relative to its internal government, the certification of elections, the resignation of elected members, the declaration as to whether there are grounds or not for proceeding against the public functionaries in pursuance of Articles 44 and 53, and the other provisions laid down in Articles 44 and 53, and the other provisions laid down in Articles 52 and 55.

Section 4 .- Of the Permanent Commission. 
62. The Assembly before closing its sessions shall elect seven of its members to form the permanent Commission, and they shall at its first sitting appoint a chairman. 63. The attributions of the permanent Commission in the recess of the Assembly are (1.) To declare whether or not there is cause for proceeding against Deputies in the cases mentioned in Articles 44 and 53. (2.) To give course to matters which may have been pending in order that they may be considered; and, (3.) To summon an extraordinary session of the Assembly when required by the exigency of the situation. The permanent Commission shall assemble whenever summoned by the chairman. 

TITLE IV.-Of the .Executive and its Attributes. 
Section I.-Organization of the Executive. 61. A citizen, bearing the title of President of the Republic, exercises the Executive Power, and shall be elected directly by the people. 65. It is requisite in order to be elected President-(1.) To be a native of Guatemala, or of one of the other Republics of Central America. (2.) To be full 21 years of age. (3.) To be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; and (4.) To be a layman. 66. The term of Presidency shall be six years. 67. The President is responsible before the Assembly for his acts. 68. The President of the Republic shall deposit his mandate with the person chosen by the Assembly, when, with the permission of the latter, he intends to absent himself from the territory of Central America. 69. There shall be two Designates elected by the Assembly to replace the President of the Republic in their order of precedence, and in the ease specified by the Constitution. To be elected Designate, the same qualifications are required as for President of the Republic. In absolute default of the President of the Republic the Executive Power shall fall to the charge of the first Designate, and, failing him, to the second. The Designate in such case shall issue a summons for the election of President within eight days following such absolute default, it being understood that the choice shall not fall upon the same Designate.
70. The President of the Republic upon taking possession shall make the following solemn declaration: "I declare that I will make the following solemn declaration: of President, and observe and discharge with patriotism the office the Constitution of the Republic." 71. The President of the Republic shall have for the despatch of business the number of Secretaries determined by law. Their appointment and removal shall pertain to the President himself. 72. To be Secretary of State it is necessary to be above 21 years of age, and to be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship. 73. The Secretaries of State shall authorize in their respective departments the measures ordered by the President. All the orders and other provisions of the Executive Power shall be signed and communicated by the Secretary of the department to which they relate. 74. The responsibility of the Secretaries of State is joint that of the President for all measures authorized by the seal of the latter.

75. The Secretaries of State shall, during the early days of the ordinary sessions of the Assembly, lay before it a detailed report of the situation of affairs in their respective departments. 76. The Secretaries of State shall attend the sessions of the Assembly, and take part in its deliberations. It is incumbent upon them to supply to it all the information which may be asked, and to reply to the interpellations which may be addressed to them respecting the affairs of the administration, except those referring to diplomatic subjects and pending military operations.

Section 2.-Of the Duties and Attributes of the Executive Power
77. The duties and attributes of the Executive Power are- (1.) To defend the independence and honour of the nation and the inviolability of its territory. (2.) To observe and cause to be observed the Constitution and the other laws. (3.) To watch over the prompt and complete administration of justice. (4.) To watch over the preservation of public order. (5.) To furnish the functionaries of the judicial power with the aid and force necessary to carry out their decisions. (6.) To direct public instruction, found educational establishments, and regulate such as are maintained at public expense. Upon it also devolves the ultimate supervision over schools and other educational establishments, even when these are not maintained at the national expense. (7.) To provide for the collection and administration of the national revenue, and decree its employment conformably to law. (8.) To appoint Secretaries of State, accept their resignation, and, remove them from the service. (9.) To appoint Judges of First Instance out of three persons nominated by the Supreme Court of Justice. (10.) To appoint the civil and military functionaries; to move them from one point to another when requisite for the good of the public service. (11.) To confer military rank up to and including that of colonel. (12.) To direct, organize, and distribute the armed force as may be convenient. (13.) To levy the force which may be necessary to repel a foreign invasion, or to hinder or suppress internal rebellion. (14.) To appoint Ministers Plenipotentiary, Residents, Charges d' Affaires, and Consuls, for the service of the Republic abroad. (15.) To receive the Ministers and other Envoys of foreign nations, and to give the exequatur to the Commissions of Consuls. (10.) To issue passports to the Ministers and Envoys of other nations, and to withdraw the exequatur from the Commissions of Consuls in the cases specified by international law, (17.) To draw up the ordinances and regulations necessary to facilitate and insure the execution of the laws in all branches of the Administration. (18.) To suspend the guarantees, in concert with the Council of Ministers, when the public order requires. (19.) To submit Treaties which it may have concluded to the Assembly for its ratification. (20.) To summon extraordinary sessions of the Assembly for grave and urgent matters; and (21.) To sanction the laws and promulgate those legislative measures which do not require the sanction of the Executive. 78. The President of the Republic has the power of commuting the higher penalty in the penal scale to the one immediately inferior to it; and to grant pardons for political convenience may require it or the petitioner offences when public can refer in his favour to eminent services rendered to the nation. A law regulates the exercise of this faculty. 

Section 3.-Of the Council of State. 
79. The President of the Republic shall have a Council of State composed of the Departmental Secretaries and nine Councillors, five of whom shall be appointed by the Assembly and four by the President of the Republic himself. 80. The President of the Republic can appoint Councillors ad interim during the recess of the Assembly in order to fill vacancies which may happen. 81. In order to be chosen Councillor, it is necessary to be above 21 years of age, and to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship. 82. The Councillors shall continue two years in their functions. 83. The attributions of the Council are- (1.) To draw up rules for its internal regulation; and (2.) To give its opinion to the President of the Republic respecting all matters upon which he shall consult it. 84. The Councillors of State are responsible for the decisions which they may have adopted contrary to the Constitution and the other laws.

Title V.-Of the Judicial Power. 
85. The judicial power is exercised by the Judges power of applying the Republic; to them exclusively pertains the power of applying the laws in civil and criminal trials. 80. To be elected Magistrate or Attorney-General it is necessary to be in the enjoyment of the right of citizenship, to be full 21 years of age, and to be a layman. 87. The functionaries of the Superior Courts of Justice and the Judges of First Instance shall continue four years in the exercise of their functions. 88. It is likewise the exclusive attribution of the Courts to judge and enforce judgment. 89. The laws specify the order and formalities of the trials. 90. All inhabitants of the Republic shall be subject to the order of proceedings determined by the laws. 91. In no cause can there be more than three instances, and the same Judges cannot take cognizance in different instances. 92. The Judges, whatever may be their denomination or category, are personally responsible for any contravention of law, conformably with the responsibility of the judicial power. 93. The law constituting the judicial power shall lay the rest that relates to it.

TITLE VI of the Government of the Departments and Municipalities 
94. The law divides the national territory into departments its better administration.

95. The President of the Republic shall appoint for the government of each department a civil authority whose qualifications and attributions shall be fixed by law. 96. The law organizes the municipalities without altering the principle of direct popular elections, and specifies the faculties which pertain to them. 97. The municipalities can, with the sanction of the Government, establish the rates which they may deem necessary to carry out the objects for which they exist. 98. The Government, when it may deem expedient, or at the instance of the municipalities, may reform the ordinances of each locality, and give them to those who were previously without them.

TITLE VII.-Of the Reform of the Constitution.

99. The Assembly can, by two-thirds of its votes, allow the reform of the Constitution, specifying for such purpose the Article or Articles which require alteration. 100. Upon reform having been decreed, the Executive Power shall summon a constituent Assembly, which should be installed within the three months next following. In the summons shall be inserted the resolution mentioned in the preceding Article. 101. The Assembly shall be composed of a representative for every 15,000 inhabitants, the qualifications of the representative being the same as those of Deputy. 102. The ordinary Assembly, from the time it shall declare that the Constitution should be reformed, shall close its session and declare itself dissolved. 103. The reform having been effected, the election of Deputies for the ordinary Legislature shall be held. 104. This Constitution shall not lose its force and validity, even although by any rebellion its observance should be interrupted.

Transitory Provision. 1. The present Constitution shall commence to take effect from the 1st March, 1880. 2. General Don J. Rufino Barrios shall continue to exercise the supreme mandate of the Republic until the day upon which the President elect for the first constitutional period takes possession. 3. The Executive Power is empowered to summon the districts to elect Deputies to the Legislative Assembly, and a President for the said first constitutional period; and to promulgate the proper electoral laws upon the bases established by the Constitution. 4. The Legislative Assembly shall be installed on the 1st March, 1880; and the President elect shall take possession on the 15th of the same month and year. 5. The constitutional period for Magistrates and Attorney-General shall likewise commence on the 15th of March, 1880. Given in the Hall of Sessions, at Guatemala, December 11, 1879, the 58th year of Central American Independence.

National Palace, Guatemala, December 12, 1879.
Let it be carried out. 
J. RUFINO BARRIOS. 
A. UBICO, Secretary of State for Interior and Justice
J. M. BARRUNDIA, Secretary for State for War and for Finance
Manuel Herrera, Secretary of State for Fomento, provisionally in charge of Foreign Affairs
Delfino Sanchez, Secretary of State for Public Education

