GUATEMALA

CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

GUATEMALA
1982 - 1986

Constitutional Chronology, Comparative Analysis and Bibliography by GISBERT H. FLANZ English Translation of the 1985 Constitution by Peter B. Heller

Issued September 1986

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

© Copyright 1986 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

Law Digest Department

POLITICAL CON STI TUTION
of the

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMAL A
Decreed by the NATIONAL CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY on May 31, 1985

Publications of the Ministry of Interior Guatemala, Central America - 1985

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA

INVOKING THE NAME OF GOD, We, the representatives of the people of Guatemala, elected freely-and democratically, meeting in the National Constituent Assembly in order to organize the State juridically and legally; affirming the primacy of the individual as the subject and purpose of the social order; recognizing the family as the primary and fundamental basis of the society's, spiritual and moral values and the State as responsible for promoting the common good, the consolidation of the regime's legality, security, justice, equality, freedom, and peace; inspired by the ideals of our history and epitomizing our traditions and cultural legacy; decided to promote the complete implementation of Human Rights within a stable, permanent, and popular institutional order, one where the governed and the governors act with absolute loyalty to the law; SOLEMNLY DECREE, APPROVE, AND PROMULGATE THE FOLLOWING: POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA TITLE I The Human Person, Goals, and Duties of the State CHAPTER I Article 1.--Protection of the Person. The State of Guatemala is organized to protect the person and the family; its ultimate goal is the realization of the public good. Article 2.--Duties of the State. It is the duty of the State to guarantee to the inhabitants of the Republic life, liberty, justice, security, peace, and the individual's integral development. TITLE II Human Rights CHAPTER I Individual Rights Article 3.--Right to Life. The State guarantees and protects human life from the time of its conception as well as the integrity and security of the individual.

Article 4.--Liberty and Equality. In Guatemala, all individuals are free and equal in dignity and rights. Men and women, whatever their personal status, have equal opportunities and responsibilities. No individual can be subjected to servitude or other condition that undermines his dignity. Individuals must display brotherly behavior vis-a-vis each other. Article 5.--Freedom of Action. Any individual has the right to do whatever the law does not prohibit; he is not mandated to obey orders not based on the law or issued according to it. Neither can he be harassed or persecuted for his opinions or for acts that do not involve violation of same. Article 6.--Legal Detention. No individual may be arrested or detained except fora crime or misdemeanor, and by virtue of a warrant issued according to the law by a competent judicial authority. Cases of "flagrante delicto" or fleeing from justice are excepted. Prisoners will have to be made available to the competent judicial authority within a time limit not exceeding six hours and cannot be subject to any other authority. The official or agent of the authority which violates what is provided in this article will be sanctioned according to the law, and the courts will automatically initiate the appropriate proceedings. Article 7.--Notification of the Cause of Detention. Any individual detained will have to be notified immediately, orally or in writing, of the cause of his detention, the authority which ordered it, and the place where he is to be held. The same notification will have to be transmitted through the most rapid means to the individual whom the prisoner designates, and the authority will be responsible for the implementation of the notification. Article 8.--Rights of the Prisoner. A prisoner will have to be informed immediately of his rights in a form that will be understandable, and especially so that he may secure a defender who will be present at all police and judicial proceedings. The prisoner cannot be compelled to answer questions except before the competent judicial authority. Article 9.--Questions to Those Arrested or Imprisoned. The judicial authorities are the only ones competent to question those arrested or imprisoned. This proceeding will have to be applied within a time frame not exceeding 24 hours. Extrajudicial questions lack the force of a probationary term. Article 10.--Legal Detention Center. The individuals apprehended by the authority cannot be taken to places of detention, arrest, or imprisonment different from those which are legal and publicly designated for that purpose. The centers of detention, arerst, or provisional imprisonment will be different from those where the sentences are to be served. The authority and its agents who violate the provisions in the present article will be personally responsible.

Article 11.--Detention for Misdemeanors or Infractions. Individuals whose identity can be established through documents, the testimony of witnesses of substances or the authority itself cannot continue to be held for misdemeanors or infractions. In said cases, under the pain of appropriate sanctions, the authority will limit its duty to report the evidence to the competent judge and to inform the accused so that the latter may appear before same within the subsequent legal 48 hours. For that purpose, all the days of the year are legal as are the hours between 0800 and 1800 hours. Whoever disobeys the location provision will be sanctioned according to the law. The individual who cannot be identified according to the provisions in this article will be placed at the disposition of the nearest judicial authority within an hour following his arrest. Article 12.--Right to Defense. The defense of the individual and his rights are inviolable. No one can be sentenced or deprived of his rights without being summoned, heard, and tried in a legal procedure before a judge or a competent and preestablished court. No individual can be tried by special or secret courts nor through proceedings that are not legally pre-established. Article 13.--Causes of a Prison Record. A prison record cannot be filed without previous information on the perpetration of a crime and without the presentation of a sufficient rational motives to believe that the detained person has committed the crime or participated in it. The police authorities will not be able to present routinely before the mass media any individual who has not been previously indicted by a competent court. Article 14.--Presumption of Innocence and Publicity of the Trial. Any individual is innocent as long as he has not been declared to be judicially responsible in a proper final sentence. The individual held, the aggrieved party, the Public Ministry, and the lawyers who have been designated by the interested parties in oral or written form are entitled to know personally all the actions, documents, and criminal proceedings without any reservation whatever and immediately. Article 15.--Nonretroactivity of the Law. The law does not have retroactive effect, except in a criminal case when it favors the defendant. Article 16.--Self-incrimination and Evidence Against Blood Relations. In a criminal trial, no individual can be obliged to incriminate himself, his spouse, or other individual with whom he is legally affiliated, nor against blood relatives within the levels provided for by the law.

Article 17.--There is No Offense nor Penalt y without an Earlier Law. Those actions, or omissions that are not characterized as crimes or misdemeanors or sanctioned by a law preceding their perpetration are not punishable. There is no prison for debt. Article 18.--Death Penalty. There will be no death penalty In the following cases: a. Conviction based on circumstantial evidence; Women; b. Senior citizens above 70 years of age; c. d. Those convicted of political and common crimes connected with political matters; and e. Criminals whose extradiction has been granted under such conditions. All the pertinent legal resources, including that of appeal, are admissible 'in any trial involving the death sentence. Appeal will always be admissible for its proceedings. The sentence will be executed after all recourses will have been exhausted. The Congress of the Republic will be able to abolish the death sentence. Article 19.--Penal System. The penal system will have to try to rehabilitate socially and to re-educate the prisoners and meet the following minimum norms in the treatment of the prisoners: They must be treated as human beings; they must not be discriminated against for any reason whatever nor have cruel treatment, physical, moral, psychic torture, duress or harassment, be inflicted on them, nor can they be made to perform work incmpatible with their physical condition, actions undermining their dignity, or be subjected to extortion or scientific experimentation. b. They must serve their sentence in places designated for that purpose. The penal centers must be civilian and, have specialized personnel; and They are entitled to communicate, when they so request, with their kin, defense lawyer, religious counselor, physician, and where applicable, with the diplomatic or consular representative of their own citizenship.

c.

The infraction of any of the regulations established in this article entitles the detainee to petition the State to indemnify him for the harm caused, and the Supreme Court of Justice will order his immediate protection. The State will have to create and promote the conditions for the precise fulfillment of what is provided in this article. Article 20.--Minors. Minors who violate the law are not indictable. Their treatment must be directed toward an integral education proper to childhood and adolescence.

Minors whose conduct may violate criminal law will be placed in the care of specialized institutions and personnel. For no reason can they be incarcerated in penitentiaries or detention centers intended for adults. A specific law will regulate this manner. Article 21.--Sanctions for Officials and Public Employees. Officials, public employees, or other individuals who may give or execute orders against the provisions of the two articles above, in addition to the sanctions imposed on them by law will immediately be relieved of their positions if applicable and precluded from holding any position or public employment. The guard who uses inappropriate measures or weapons against an arrested person or prisoner will be held responsible in accordance with the Criminal Code. The crime committed in such circumstances is imprescriptible. Article 22.--Criminal and Police Records. Criminal and police records are not a cause for people to be restricted in the exercise of their rights which this Constitution and the laws of the Republic guarantee them, except when they are restrained by law or in a sentence without parole and for the time set in, same. Article 23.--Inviolability of the Home. The home is inviolable. No one can penetrate someone else's dwelling without the permission of the resident living there, except by a written order of a competent judge in which the reason of the proceeding is specified and never before 0600 nor after 1800 hours. Such a proceeding will always be carried out in the presence of the interested party or his representative. Article 24.--Inviolability of Correspondence, Documents, and Books. The correspondence of any individual, his documents, and books are inviolable. they can be inspected or seized only by virtue of a firm resolution decreed by a competent judge and with the legal formalities. The secrecy of correspondence and telephone, radio, and cablegram communications and other means of modern technology is guaranteed. The books, documents and records connected with the payment of taxes, rates, charges, and levies can be revised by the competent authority in accordance with the law. To disclose the amount of taxes paid, earnings, losses, expenses, and any other data referring to audited accounts to individuals or juridical persons, with the exception of general balances, whose publication is mandated by law, is punishable. Documents or information obtained ni violation of this article are not valid nor can they be used as evidence in courts. Article 25.--Register of Individuals and Vehicles. The register of individuals and vehicles can only be drawn up by units of the security forces when a justifying cause is established for it. For that purpose, the units of the security forces will have to appear wearing appropriate uniform and belong to the same sex

as the subjects requisitioned, it being necessary to retain respect for the dignity, privacy and decorum of individuals. Article 26.--Freedom of Movement. Any individual has freedom to enter, remain, transit, and exit from the national territory and change domiciles or residences, without other limits than those established by law. No Guatemalan citizen can be exiled or forbidden from entering the national territory or be denied a passport or other identification documents. Guatemalans can enter into or exit from their country without a visa. The law will determine the responsibilities incurred by those who violate this provision. Article 27.--Right of As y lum. Guatemala recognizes the right of asylum and grants it in accordance with international practice. Extradition is regulated by provisions in international treaties. The expulsion of Guatemalan citizens will not be initiated for political crimes. In no case will the latter be handed over to a foreign government, except for what is agreed upon in treaties and conventions regarding crimes of a genocidal nature or against international law. A political refugee will not be expelled from Guatemalan territory to the country seeking him. Article 28.--Right of Petition. The inhabitants of the Republic of Guatemala are entitled to direct, individually or collectively, petitions to the authority, which is obliged to implement them and solve them according to the law. In the administrative field, the deadline for deciding on petitions and notifying resolutions cannot exceed 30 days. In fiscal matters, to challenge administrative decisions in the proceedings that originate in exceptions or adjustments of any tax, the taxpayer will not be requested for any prior payment of tax or any guarantee whatever. Article 29.--Free Access to Courts and State Agencies. Any individual has free access to courts, State agencies and offices in order to exercise initiative and claim his rights in accordance with the law. Only foreigners can avail themselves of diplomatic channels in case of a denial of justice. The mere fact that a decision may be adverse to their interests is not to be considered as such. In any case, the legal resources established by the Guatemalan laws must have been exhausted. Article 30.--Publicity of Administrative Acts. All the acts of administration are public. The interested parties are entitled to obtain at any time reports, copies, reproductions, and certifications that request and the display of the proceedings that they may wish to consult, except when military or diplomatic

matters relating to national security or information supplied by individuals under the pledge of confidence is involved. Article 31.--Access to Archives and State Registers. Any individual has the right-to know what the archives, records, or any other form of State files contain about him and the purpose for which such data is used as well as their correction, rectification, and implementation. Registers and records of political affiliation, except those pertaining to the electoral authorities and political parties, are prohibited. Article 32.--Object of Summons. The appearance before an authority, official, or public employee is not mandatory if in the corresponding summons the purpose of the proceeding is not expressly mentioned. Article 33.--Right of Assembly and Demonstration. The right of peaceful assembly without the presence of weapons is recognized. The right of assembly and public demonstration cannot be restricted, limited, or restrained; and the law will regulate it with the sole purpose of guaranteeing the public order. Religious processions outside churches are permitted and regulated by law. For the exercise of these rights, prior notice by the organizers before the competent authority will suffice. Article 34.--Right of Association. The right of free association is recognized. No one is mandated to become associated or to become a member of self-defense or similar groups or associations. The case of professional associations is excepted. Article 35.--Freedom of Expression. The expression of thought through any mass medium without censorship or prior restraint is free. This constitutional right cannot be restrained by law or any governmental provision. Whoever enjoying this freedom should fail to respect private lives or morals will beh eld responsible in accordance with the law. Whoever may feel aggrieved has the right to publish his defense, clarifications, and rectifications. Those publications which contain denunciations, criticisms, or censure against officials or public employees for actions effected in the performance of their duties do not constitute a crime or misdemeanor. The officials and public employees will be able to request that a court of honor made up in the form determined by law should declare that the publication that affects them is based on inaccurate facts or that the charges made against them are unfounded. A court decision that vindicates the offended party must be published in the same organ where the offensive publication appeared.

The activity of the mass media is of public interest and in no case may the latter be expropriated. For misdemeanors or crimes regarding the freedom of expression, they cannot be closed, attached, interfered with, confiscated, or seized, nor can the operations of the enterprises, plants, equipments, machinery, and gear of the mass media be interrupted. Access to the sources of information is free and no authority can limit this right. The authorization, limitation or cancellation of the concessions granted by the State to individuals cannot be used as elements of pressure or duress to limit the exercise of the freedom of expression. A jury will have exclusive jurisdiction over crimes and misdemeanors to which this article refers. Everything relating to this constitutional right is regulated in the Constitutional Law of the Freedom of Expression. The owners of the mass communications media will have to provide social and economic coverage to their reporters through the purchase of life insurance. Article 36.--Freedom of Religion. The exercise of all religions is free. Any individual has the right to practice his religion or belief, both in public and in private, through education, worship, and observance, without other limits than the public order and the respect due to the dignity of the hierarchy and the faithful of other beliefs. Article 37.--Juridical Personality of the Churches. The juridical personality of the Catholic Church is recognized. The other churches, faiths, entities, and associations of religious character will secure the recognition of their juridical personality in accordance with the rules of their institution, and the Government will be unable to deny it unless for reasons of public order. The State will extend to the Catholic Church without any cost whatever titles of ownership to the real estate which it now holds peacefully for its own purposes whenever they formed part of the patrimony of the Catholic Church in the past. Property assigned to third parties nor those which the State has traditionally assigned to their services cannot be affected. The real estate of religious entities assigned to the church, education, and social welfare enjoy exemption from taxes, assessments, and levies. Article 38.--Owning and Bearing of Arms. The right to own weapons for personal use not forbidden by law in the individual's home is recognized. It will not be mandatory to hand them over except in cases ordered by a competent judge. The right to bear arms, regulated by the law, is recognized.

Article 39.--Private Property. Private property is guaranteed as a right inherent in the individual. Any person can freely dispose of his property according to the law. The State guarantees the exercise of this right and will have to create those conditions that enable the owner to use and enjoy his property in such a way as to achieve individual progress and national development in the interest of all Guatemalans. Article 40.--Expro priation. In specific cases, private property can be expropriated for reasons, of duly proven collective utility, social benefit, or public interest. Expropriation will have to be subject to the proceedings mentioned by the law, and the expropriated property will be appraised by experts taking their actual value into account. Compensation will have to be made in anticipation and in legal tender, unless another form of compensation is agreed upon with the interested party. Only in cases of war, public disaster, or serious disruption of law and order can there be occupation or interference with property or expropriation without prior compensation, but the latter will have to be done immediately following the end of the emergency. The law will establish the procedures to be followed with enemy property. The form of payment of compensations for the expropriation of idle land will be determined by law. In no case will the deadline to make such payment effective exceed 10 years. Article 41.--Protection of the Rights of Ownership. The right of ownership in any form cannot be restricted on account of political activity or crime. The confiscation of property and the imposition of confiscatory fines is prohibited. In no case can the fines exceed the value of the unpaid tax. Article 42.--The Right of the Author or Inventor. The right of an author and an inventor is recognized; those holding title to same will enjoy the exclusive ownership of their work or invention, in accordance with the law -and international treaties. Article 43.--Freedom of Industry, Trade, and Work. The freedom of industry, trade, and work is recognized, except for limitations which for social or national interest causes are imposed by law. Article 44.--Rights Inherent in the Human Person. The rights and guarantees granted by the Constitution do not exclude others which, even though they are not expressly mentioned in it, inhere in the human person. Social interest prevails over individual interest. Laws and administrative directives or any other decree that reduces, restricts, or distorts the rights guaranteed by the Constitution are void "ipso jure."

Article 45.--Action Against Violators and Legitimacy of Opposition. Action to-prosecute the violators of human rights is public and can be exercised through a simple denunciation, without any guarantee or formality whatever. The opposition of the people to protect and defend the rights and guarantees granted in the Constitution is legitimate. Article 46.--Preeminence of International Law. The general principle that in the field of human rights treaties and agreements approved and ratified by Guatemala have precedence over municipal law is established. CHAPTER II Social Rights SECTION ONE The Family Article 47.--Protection to the Family. The State guarantees the social, economic, and juridical protection of the family. It will promote its organization on the legal basis of marriage, the equal rights of spouses, responsible paternity, and the right of individuals to decide freely the number and spacing of their children. Article 48.--De facto Unions. The State recognizes de facto: unions and the law will regulate everything relative to it. Article 49.--Matrimony. The state of matrimony can be authorized by mayors, councilors, practicing notaries, and religious ministers empowered by the appropriate administrative authority. Article 50..-Equality among Children. All children are equal before the law and have the same rights. Any discrimination among them is punishable. Article 51.--Protection of Minors and the Elderly. The State will protect the physical, mental, and moral health of minors and the elderly. It will guarantee them their right to food, public health, education, security, and social insurance. Article 52.--Maternity. Motherhood enjoys the protection of the State, over which it will watch in a special way for the strict fulfillment of the rights and obligations to be derived from it.

Article 53.--The Disabled. The State guarantees the protection of the disabled and of those individuals who suffer from physical, psychic, or sensory limitations. Medical-social care to them as well as the promotion of policies and services that make their rehabilitation possible and their integral reincorporation in society is declared to be of national interest. The law will regulate this field and will create the technical organs and executors that may be necessary. Article 54.--Adoption. The State recognizes and protects adoption. The adopted child acquires the status of child of the adoptor. The protection of orphaned children and of abandoned children is declared to be of national interest. Article 55.--Obligation to Provide Food. Refusal to supply food in the form prescribed by law is punishable. Article 56.--Measures to Check the Causes of Family Disintegration. Measures against alcoholism, drug addiction, and other causes of family disintegration are declared to be of social interest. The State will have to take adequate measures of prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation to make said actions effective for the well-being of the individual, family, and society. SECTION TWO Culture Article 57.--Right to Culture. Every person has the right to particiapte freely in the cultural and artistic life of the community as well as benefit from the nation's scientific and technological progress. Article 58.--Cultural Identity. The right of individuals and communities to their cultural identity in keeping with their values, language, and customs is recognized. Article 59.--Protection and Research of the Culture. It is the primary obligation of the State to protect, promote, and disseminate the national culture; to issue the laws and provisions that encourage its enrichment, restoration, preservation, and recuperation; to promote and regulate its scientific research, as well as the creation and application of appropriate technology. Article 60.--Cultural Heritage. Paleontological, archeological, historical, and artistic assets and values of the country form the nation's cultural heritage and are under the protection of the State. Their transfer, export, or alteration, except in cases determined by the law, are prohibited.

Article 61.--Protection of the Cultural Heritage. The archeological sites, collections of monuments, and the Cultural Center of Guatemala will receive the special attention of the State with the purpose of preserving its characteristics and defending its historic value and cultural assets. The Tikal National Park, the Archeological Park of Quirigua, and Antigua Guatemala will be subject to a special conservation regime because they have been declared to be the legacy of mankind as well as those that will receive similar recognition. Article 62.--Protection of Traditional Art, Folklore, and Handicrafts. The expression national art, popular art, folklore, and native handicrafts and crafts must be the object of special protection by the State with the purpose of preserving their authenticity. The State will propitiate the opening of national and international markets for the free commercialization of the work of artists and craftsmen, promoting their production and adequate technification. Article 63.--Right to Creative Expression. The State guarantees free creative expression, supports and encourages the scientist, the intellectual, and the national artist, and promotes his training and professional and financial improvement. Article 64.--National Heritage. The conservation, protection, and improvement of the Nation's natural heritage is declared to be of national interest. The State will promote the creation of national parks, reservations, and natural sanctuaries which are alienable. A law will guarantee their protection and that of the fauna and flora to be found in them. Article 65.--Preservation and Promotion of Culture. The activity of the State regarding the preservation and promotion of culture and its manifestations will be under the administration of a specific entity with its own budget. SECTION III Native Communities Article 66.--Protection of Ethnic Groups. Guatemala is made up of various ethnic groups among which are native groups of Mayan descent. The State recognizes, respects, and promotes its form of life, customs, traditions, forms of social organization, the wearing of Indian dress by men and women, their languages, and dialects. Article 67.--Protection of Native Agricultural Lands and Cooperatives. The lands of the cooperatives, native communities, or any other forms of communal possession or collective of agrarian ownership, as well as the family heritage and popular housing will enjoy the special protection of the State, credit

assistance, and preferential technology which may guarantee their ownership and development in order to insure an improved quality of life to all inhabitants. The native communities and others which may own land that historically belongs to them and which they have traditionally administered in special form will maintain that system. Article 68.--Lands for Native Communities. Through special programs and adequate legislation, the State will provide State lands to the native communities that may need them for their development. Article 69.--Transfer of Workers and their Protection. Work operations that involve the transfer of workers outside of their communities will be the object of protection and legislation that may assure adequate conditions of health, security, and social planning preventing the payment of wages not adjusted to the law, the disintegration of those communities, and generally all discriminatory treatment. Article 70.--Specific Law. A law will regulate matters relating to this section. SECTION IV Education Article 71.--Right to Education. The freedom of education and educational standards is guaranteed. It is the obligation of the State to provide and facilitate education to its inhabitants without any discrimination whatever. The foundation and maintenance of cultural educational centers and museums is declared to be of public utility and need. Article 72.--Goals of Education. Education has as its primary need the integral development of the individual, the knowledge of reality, and national and universal culture. Education, instruction, social development, and the systematic teaching of the Constitution of the Republic and of human rights are declared to be of national interest. Article 73.--Freedom of Education and State Economic Assistance. The family is the source of education and parents are entitled to choose what is to be taught to their minor children. The State will be able to subsidize free private educational centers and the law will regulate issues relating to this matter. Private educational centers will operate under the inspection of the State. They are obligated to fill, at least, official study plans and programs. As cultural centers they will be exempted from all types of taxes and customs duties. Religious education is optional in public schools and can be given during regular hours without any discrimination.

The State will contribute to the maintenance of religious education without any discrimination. Article 74.--Obligatory Education. The inhabitants have the right and obligation to receive early, pre-primary, primary and basic education within the age limits set by the law. 'Education provided by the State is free. The State will provide and promote scholarships and educational credits. Scientific education, technology, and the humanities represent goals that the State will have to guide and develop on a permanent basis. The State will promote special education, diversified education, and extramural education. Article 75.--Improved Literacy. Improved literacy is delcared to be of national urgency and it is a social obligation to contribute to it. The State will organize it and promote it with all necessary resources. Article 76.--Educational System and Bilingual Education. The administration of the educational system will have to be decentralized and regionalized. In the schools established in regions with a predominantly native population, education will have to be provided preferentially in bilingual form. Article 77.--Obligations of Business Owners. The owners of industrial, agricultural, livestock, and commercial businesses are obliged to establish and maintain, in accordance with the law, schools, day care centers, and cultural centers for their workers and school population. Article 78.--Teaching Faculty. The State will promote the economic, social, and cultural improvement of the teaching faculty, including the right to a pension to enable the State to treat them appropriately. The rights acquired by the national teaching faculty are minimal and cannot be renounced. The law will regulate these matters. Article 79.--Agricultural Education. Agricultural education, apprenticeship, exploitation, marketing, and the mechanization of agricultural and livestock processing is declared to be of national interest. The National Central School of Agriculture is created as an autonomous decentralized entity with a juridical personality and its own customs. It is necessary to organize, direct, and develop plans of agricultural, livestock, and forestry study of the nation at the intermediate level. And it will be regulated by its own organic law, an amount no less than five percent of the regular budget of the Ministry of Agriculture to be allocated to it.

Article 80.--Promotion of Science and Technology. The State recognizes and promotes science and technology as fundamental bases of national development. The law will regulate the appropriate standards. Article 81.--Titles and Diplomas. Titles and diplomas whose issuance is the responsibility of the State will have full legal validity. The rights acquired for the exercise of the occupations accredited by said titles must be respected, and no provisions of any kind may be issued limiting or restricting these rights. SECTION V Universities Article 82.--Autonomy of the University of San Carlos de Guatemala. The University of San Carlos de Guatemala is an autonomous institution with juridical personality. As the only State university it alone directs, organizes, and develops" the State's higher education and the State's professional university education as well as the diffusion of culture in all its manifestations. It will promote by every means within its power research in every area of human knowledge and will cooperate in the study and solution of national problems. The University is guided by its Organic Law and the bylaws and regulations that it issues, the principle of representation of its tenured faculty, graduates, and students applying in the makeup of its administrative organs. Article 83.--Administration of the University of San Carlos de Guatemala. The administration of the University of San Carlos de Guatemala is made up of the Higher University Council consisting of the rector who chairs it; the deans of the faculties; a representative of the professional association, graduated from the University of San CArlos de Guatemala, representing each faculty; a full professor; and a student for each faculty. Article 84.---Budgetary Allocation for the University of San Carlos de Guatemala. The University of San Carlos de Guatemala is entitled to a specific budgetary allocation representing no less than five percent of the General State Budget of Ordinary Revenues, which should generate an adequate budgetary increase sufficient to cover the growth in the student population or the improvement of the academic level. Article 85.--Private Universities. The private universities which are independent institutions should organize and develop the nation's higher education with the purpose of promoting professional training, scientific research, cultural diffusion, and the study and solution of national problems.

When the operation of a private university is authorized, it will have juridical personality and freedom to establish its faculties and institutes, to develop its academic and teaching activities, as well as to elaborate its study plans and programs. Article 86.--Council of Higher Private Education. The Council of Higher Private Education will have as its functions to see to it that the academic level in private universities is maintained without undermining their independence and to authorize the creation of new universities; it is to be made up of two delegates from the University of San Carlos de Guatemala, two delegates from the private universities, and one delegate elected by the presidents of the professional colleges and who holds no position whatever in any university. There will be a rotating presidency. The law will regulate this matter. Article 87.--Recognition of Degrees, Titles, Diplomas, and Credentials. In Guatemala only degrees, titles, and diplomas granted by the legally established universities organized to function in the country will be recognized, except for what is provided in international treaties. The University of San Carlos de Guatemala is the only one entitled to pass on the credentials of professionals graduated from foreign universities and to set the preliminary requirements which have to be fulfilled for the purpose, as well as to recognize university-level titles and diplomas protected by international treaties. The titles granted by Central American universities will have complete validity in Guatemala when the basic centralization of study plans are met. Legal provisions granting privileges to the detriment of those exercising a titled profession or already approved legally to exercise it cannot be passed. Article 88.--Tax Exemptions and Deductions. The universities are exempt from the payment of all types of taxes, assessments, and levies without anye xception whatever. The gifts given to universities, cultural, or scientific institutions will be deductible from the net revenue prior to assessing income tax. The State can provide economic assistance to private universities for the fulfillment of its own ends. The University of San Carlos de Guatemala and the private universities cannot be the object of lawsuits, except in those cases where the private universities assume obligations through civil, mercantile, or labor contracts. Article 89.--Granting of Degrees, Titles, and Diplomas. Only those universities that are legally authorized can grant degrees and issue titles and graduation diplomas in higher education.

Article 90.--Professional Association. Membership in the association of university professionals is mandatory and will have as its purpose the moral, scientific, technical, and material improvement of the university professions and the control of their exercise. The professional associations, just like trade unions with a juridical character, will operate in accordance with the Law of Professional Association, and the bylaws of each association will be approved with the independence of the universities from which its members have graduated. They will contribute to the strengthening of the autonomy of the University of San Carlos de Guatemala and for the purposes and goals of all the universities of the country. In every matter relating to the improvement of the scientific and the cultural-technical level of the university professions, the country's universities will be able to require the participation of the professional associations. SECTION VI Sports Article 91.--Budgetary Allocation for Sports. It is the duty of the State to encourage and promote physical education and sports. For that purpose a specific allocation no smaller than three precent of the State's General Ordinary Revenues Budget will be set. Of this amount, 50 percent will be earmarked to the federated sports sector through its administrative organs in the form established by law; 25 percent to physical education, leisure, and school sports; and 25 percent to federated sports. Article 92.--Sports Autonomy. The autonomy of federated sports is recognized and guaranteed through its administrative organs, the Autonomous Sports Confederation of Guatemala and the Guatemalan Olympic Committee, which have a juridical character and their own heritage, being exempt from all types of taxes and assessments. SECTION VII Health, Security, and Social Assistance Article 93.--Right to Health. The right to health is a fundamental right of the human being without any discrimination. Article 94.--Obligation of the State Regarding Health and Social Assistance. The State will see to the health and social assistance of all its inhabitants. It will develop through its institutions preventive measures, promotion, recuperation, rehabilitation, coordination, and appropriate auxiliary measures in order to procure for them the most complete physical, mental, and social well-being.

Article 95.--Health, A Public Asset. The health of the nation's inhabitants is a public asset All persons and institutions are obliged to see to their conservation and restoration. Article 96.--Quality Control of Products. The State will control the quality of food products, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, and of everything that can affect the health and well-being of its inhabitants. It will see to the establishment and programming of priorities to health and the improvement of the conditions of the basic environmental guarantee of the communities that are least protected. Article 97.--Environment and Ecological Balance. The State, the municipalities, and the inhabitants of the national territory are obliged to promote social, economic, and technological development that would prevent the contamination of the environment and maintain the ecological balance. It will issue all the necessary regulations to guarantee that the use of the fauna, flora, land, and water may be realized rationally, obviating their depredation. Article 98.--Community Participation in Health Programs. The communities are entitled and have the obligation to actively participate in the planning, execution, and evaluation of health programs. Article 99.--Feeding and Nutrition. The State will see to it that the food and nutrition of the population meet the minimum health requirements. The specialized institutions of the State will have to coordinate their actions among themselves or with international organizations dedicated to public health to achieve an effective national food delivery system. Article 100.--Social Security. The State recognizes and guarantees the right to social security for the benefit of the Nation's inhabitants. Its system is instituted as a public function in national, unitary, and mandatory form. The State, the employers, and the workers covered by the system, with the sole exception of what is provided in Article 88 of this Constitution, have the obligation to help finance said system and the right to participate in its management, achieving its progressive improvement. The application of the system of social security is the responsibility of the Guatemalan Social Security Institute, which is an autonomous entity with a juridical character, patrimony, and its own functions; it enjoys a total exemption from taxes, levies and assessments, whether established or to be established. The Guatemalan Social Security Institute must cooperate with the public health institutions in coordinated manner.

The executive organism will allocate annually in the State's Revenues and Expenditures Budget a specific portion to cover the share that pertains to the State as such and as an employer, which cannot be transferred or cancelled during the fiscal year and will be set in accordance with the Institute's technical actuarial studies. Against the resolutions decreed in this respect, administrative and contentious-administrative recourses in accordance with the law are in effect. When services that the system must provide are involved, the labor and social insurance courts will have jurisdiction. SECTION VIII Work Article 101.--Right to Work. Work is a right and a social obligation of the individual. The labor system of the country must be organized in accordance with principles of social justice. Article 102.--Minimal Social Rights of Labor Legislation. Minimal social rights form the basis of work and the activity of courts and authorities: a. Right to the free choice of work and satisfactory economic conditions guaranteeing a dignified existence to the worker and his family; All work will be fairly remunerated, except when the law determines otherwise; Equal wages for equal work performed under equal conditions, productivity, and seniority; Obligation to pay the worker in legal tender. However; an agricultural worker can receive according to his choice food products up to 30 percent of his wages. In this case the employer will provide these in-kind products at a price no higher than their cost; Freedom from lien on wages in cases determined by law. Personal work implements cannot be subject to a lien for any reason. However, for the protection of the worker's family and by judicial order, it will be possible to retain and pay part of the wages to the claimant; Periodic fixing of the minimal wage in accordance with the law;

b. c. d.

e.

f.

The ordinary applicable workday cannot exceed eight hours of work a day or forty-four hours a week, equivalent to forty-eight hours for the exclusive purpose of the payment of wages. The ordinary applicable workday on the night shift cannot exceed six hours a day or thirty-six hours a week. The applicable mixed-shift workday cannot exceed seven hours a day or forty-two hours a week. Any work actually performed outside ordinary working hours constitutes overtime work and must be remunerated as such. The law will determine the very restricted emergency situations where the provisions relative to workdays are not applicable. Whoever by provision of the law, custom, or agreement with employers works less than forty-four hours a week, thirty-six hours in night work, or forty-two hours in mixed-schedule workdays will be entitled to collect an integral weekly wage. Effective work means the entire time that the worker remains under the orders or at the disposal of his employer; h. Right of the worker to a day of paid vacation for each ordinary work week or for any six consecutive workdays. Holidays recognized by law will also be remunerated. Right of the worker to fifteen working days of paid annual leave after each year of continuous service, with the exception of agricultural enterprise workers who will have the right to ten working days of vacation. Vacations will have to be effective and the employer cannot compensate such right in a different form, except when the employee is separated from his job; Obligation of the employer to grant every year a Christmas bonus representing no less than an entire month's pay or whatever is determined should the bonus be larger to those workers who may have worked for an uninterrupted year prior to the date of the payment. The law will regulate the form of pay. Those workers with less than one year's service will receive such Christmas bonus prorated to the time they have worked; Protection of the working woman and regulation of the conditions under which she must work. There should be no distinctions made between married and single women in terms of work. The law will regulate the protection of the working woman's maternity rights and from whom no work should be demanded that may require an effort putting her pregnancy into jeopardy. The working

i.

j.

k.

mother will enjoy a rest period paid on the basis of 100 percent of her salary during the thirty days prior to delivery and the subsequent forty-five days. During the time she is nursing her infant she will be entitled to two periods of special rest during her workday. Prenatal and postnatal rest periods will be expanded according to a woman's physical condition on the basis of a medical prescription; Minors under fourteen years of age cannot be employed in any type of work, with the exceptions established by the law. It is forbidden to employ minors in work incompatible with their physical capacity or that endanger their morals. Workers older than sixty years of age will be the object of treatment adequate to their age. Protection and promotion of work for the blind, the disabled, and individuals with physical, psychic, or nervous handicaps. Preference to Guatemalan workers over foreigners in similar conditions and in the percentages determined by law. In comparable circumstances, no Guatemalan worker can earn a lesser wage than a foreigner, be subjected to inferior conditions of employment, or obtain lesser economic benefits or other services. Fixing of the standards of mandatory performance for employers and emp loyee s in individual and collective labor contracts. Employers and employees will strive for the economic development of their enterprise for their common benefit; p. Obligation of the employer to pay indemnity of a month's wage for each year of continuous service when he lays off without justification or indirectly a worker as long as the law does not establish another more convenient system that would provide the worker with better compensation. For the purpose of computing contiuous service the date when the work relation will have been established, whatever the latter may be, will be taken into account; q. It is the obligation of the employer to provide to the spouse or partner, the minor disabled children of a worker who may die while in his service payment equivalent to a month's wage for each year worked. This compensation will be made in monthly payments and its amount will not be less than the latest wage received. by the worker.

If death should occur for a reason whose risk is entirely covered by the social security system, this obligation of the employer will cease. In case that this method should not cover the compensation integrally, the employer must pay the difference; Right of free trade unionization of the workers. This right can be exercised without any discrimination and without being subject to previous authorization whatever, it being merely necessary to fulfill the requirements established by the law. The workers cannot be dismissed for participating in the establishment of a trade union since they enjoy such a right from the time that they notify the General Inspectorate of Labor. Only native Guatemalans can become involved in the organization, management, and advising of trade unions. The cases of technical assistance by the government and what is provided in international treaties or intersyndical conventions authorized by the executive branch are excepted; s. The establishment of economic institutions and social insurance which, benefiting the workers, provide services of all types, especially for disability, retirement, and survivors' benefits; If the employer should not be able to prove a reasonable cause for the dismissal, he must pay the worker to compensate for damage and inconvenience a month's wage if the case should be settled in a court of first instance, two months' wages if the sentence is appealed, and if the legal process should last longer than two months the employer will have to pay fifty percent of the worker's wage for each month beyond that deadline, up to a maximum of six months in this case; and The State will participate in international or regional agreements and treaties relating to labor matters and which grant better protection or conditions to workers. In such cases what is established in said agreements and treaties will be considered as part of the minimal rights enjoyed by the workers of the Republic of Guatemala. Article 103.--Protection of the Labor Laws. The laws which regulate the relations between employers and workers are conciliatory, protective for the workers, and will involve all the pertinent economic and social factors. For agricultural work, the law will especially take into account their needs and the areas where the work is performed.

t.

u.

All disputes relative to work are the subject of specific jurisdiction. The law will establish the standards corresponding to that jurisdiction and the organs charged with putting them into practice. Article 104.--Right of Strike and To Work Stoppage. The right to strike and to work stoppage exercised in accordance with the law, after all conciliation procedures have been exhausted, is recognized. This right can be exercised only for reasons of an economic-social order. The laws will estabish those cases and situations where the strike and, work stoppage will not be allowed. Article 105.--Workers' Housing. Through specific entities, the State will support the planning and construction of housing projects, establishing adequate systems of financing that would make it possible to involve the different programs so that the workers may opt for adequate housing and meet health requirements. The owners of enterprises are obliged to make available to their workers in cases established by law the housing units that meet the above-mentioned requirements. Article 106.--Irrenunciability of Labor Rights. The rights assigned in this section are irrenunciable for the workers but can be improved through individual or collective bargaining and in the form set by the law. For this purpose the State will encourage and protect collective bargaining. Provisions that call for the renunciation, reduction, distortion, or limitation of rights recognized for the workers in the Constitution, in the law, in international treaties ratified by Guatemala, in regulations or other provisions relating to work will be void "ipso jure" and will not obligate the workers even though they may be included in a collective or individual labor contract or other document. In case of doubt on the interpretation or scope of legal provisions, regulations, or contracts in labor matters, the provisions will be interpreted in the manner most favorable for the workers. SECTION IX Workers of the State Article 107.--Workers of the State. Workers of the State are at the service of the public administration but never of a political party, group, organization, or any individual. Article 108.--Regime of State Workers. The relations of the State or its decentralized or autonomous entities with its workers are regulated by the Civil Service Law, with the exception of those regulated by the laws or provisions of said entities themselves.

The workers of the State or of its decentralized or autonomous entities which by law or custom receive budgetary appropriations exceeding those established in the Civil Service Law will retain that preferential treatment. Article 109.--Payroll Workers. The workers of the State and their decentralized or autonomous entities remunerated from payroll will be comparable in wages, services, and rights to the other workers of the State. Article 110.--Indemnification. When workers of the State are dismissed without reasonable cause they will receive the equivalent of a month's wage for each year of continuous service. In no case will this right exceed ten months' wagesArticle 111.--Regime of Decentralized Entities. The decentralized entities of the State, which perform economic functions similar to private enterprises, will be regulated in their working relations with the personnel at their service by ordinary labor laws as long as other acquired rights are not diminished. Article 112.--Prohibition of Holding More Than one Public Position. No individual may hold more than one position or remunerated public employment, with the exception of those who provide services in educational centers or social welfare institutions and as long as the schedules are compatible. Article 113.--Right to Opt for Position or Public Employment. Guatemalans have the right to opt for public employment or jobs and for securing same for which only capability, fitness, and honesty will be taken into account. Article 114.--Revision of Retirement Benefits. When a worker of the State benefiting from retirement returns to public employment, said retirement will halt immediately. However, on ending the new work relationship he has the right to opt for the revision of the procedure relating to the benefit consequent on the time served and the final wage received during the period of renewed employment. Depending on the possibilities of the State, the amounts allocated to retirement, pensions, and widows' and orphans' funds can be revised periodically. Article 115.--Free Coverage by the Guatemalan Social Security Institute to Retirees. Individuals who enjoy retirement, pension, or widows' and orphans' payments of the State or autonomous and decentralized entities are entitled to receive free of charge complete coverage of medical services by the Guatemalan Social Security Institute.

Article 116.--Regulation of the Strike by Workers of the State. The associations, groupings, and trade unions formed by the workers of the State or its decentralized and autonomous entities cannot participate in partisan political activities. The right of the workers of the State or its decentralized and autonomous entities to strike is recognized. This right can be exercised exclusively in the form provided by law in the matter and in no case can it affect the quality of essential public services. Article 117.--Option to the Regime of Pensioners. The workers of the decentralized or autonomous entities who are not subject to deductions for the pensioners' fund nor enjoy the corresponding benefits will be able to resort to this regime, and in such a case the respective agency will have to accept the solicitude of the interested party and order the one responsible to make the necessary deductions. SECTION X Economic and Social Regime Article 118.--Principles of the Economic and Social Regime. The economic and social regime of the Republic of Guatemala is based on principles of social justice. It is the obligation of the State to guide the national economy to use natural resources and human potential, to increase wealth, and to try to achieve full employment and the equitable distribution of the national income. Should it be necessary, the State will act by complementing private initiative and activity for the achievement of the stated purposes. Article 119.--Obligations of the State. The following are basic obligations of the State: a. To promote the Nation's economic development, stimulating initiative in agricultural, livestock, industrial, tourist, and other types of activity; To promote systematically administrative economic decentralization to achieve the country's adequate regional development; To adopt the means that may be necessary for the conservation, development and exploitation of natural resources in efficient form; d. To see to the raising of the standard of living of all of the country's inhabitants, securing the well-being of the family;

b.

To promote and protect the creation and operation of cooperatives, giving them the necessary technical and financial aid; f. To grant incentives according to the law to industrial enterprises that may be established in the interior of the Republic and which contribute to decentralization; To promote on a priority basis the construction of popular housing through systems of financing so that a larger numbe of Guatemalan families may have title to it. When resulting or cooperatively-held housing is involved, the system of land tenure may be different; To prevent the functioning of excessive practices leading to the concentration of assets and means of production at the expense of the collectivity; The protection of consumers and users when it comes to protecting the quality of domestic and export consumer products to guarantee their health, security, and legitimate economic interests;

g.

h.

i.

j To actively promote programs of rural development that tend to increase and diversify national production based on private property and the protection of family property. The peasant and artisan are entitled to receive technical and economic assistance; k. To protect the formation of capital, savings and investment; 1. To promote the ordered and efficient development of the country's domestic and foreign trade, fomenting markets for national products; m. To maintain within the framework of economic policy an appropriate relationship between public spending and national production; and To create conditions adequate to promote the investment of national and foreign capital.

n.

Article 120.--Role of Enterprises That Provide Public Services. In case of "force majeure" and for the strictly necessary time period, the State may intervene in enterprises that provide essential public services for the community should their operations be obstructed. Article 121.--Assets of the State. The following are assets of the State: a. Public land;

b.

The waters of the maritime zone that border the shores of its territory, the lakes, navigable rivers and their banks, secondary rivers, springs, and streams that delimit the international borders of the Republic, the waterfalls and headwaters to generate hydroelectric power, underground waters and others that are susceptible to regulation by law, and the waters not used by private parties to the extent and limit set by law. Assets which constitute the resources of the State, including those of the city, and of the decentralized or autonomous entities; The land maritime zone, the continental shelf and air space in the extension and form determined by the laws or international treaties ratified by Guatemala; The subsoil, hydrocarbon and mineral deposits, as well as any other organic or inorganic substances of the subsoil; Archeological monuments and relics;

c.

d.

e.

f.

. Fiscal and municipal revenues as well as those of a private character which the laws assign to the decentralized and autonomous entities; and h. Radioelectric frequencies. Article 122.--Territorial Reserves of the State. The State reserves for itself jurisdiction over a strip of land three kilometers in width along the ocean fronts, computed from the tidal high-water mark; of 200 meters width around the shores of lakes; of 100 meters on each bank of navigable rivers; and of 50 meters around sources and springs supplying water to populated places. The following are excepted from the stated reserves: a. b. Real estate located in urban areas; and Assets over which certain claims attach as noted in the Land Registry prior to March 1, 1956.

Foreigners will need authorization from the executive branch to acquire by way of property real estate included in the exceptions of the two categories mentioned above. When what are involved are properties declared as national monuments or when they are located among a set of monuments, the State will enjoy preferential right in any transfer of property.

Article 123.--Limitations in the Border Strips. Only nativeborn Guatemalans or communities whose members only the same privileges will be able to own and possess real estate in a stirp 15 kilometers wide along the borders, measured from the dividing line. Urban property and property whose title was registered prior to March 1, 1956, are excepted. Article 124.--Transfer of National Property. National property can only be transferred in the form set by law, which will determine the limitations and formalities to which the operation and its fiscal purposes must be subjected. The decentralized or autonomous entities will be regulated according to their laws and regulations. Article 125.--Exploitation of Natural Nonrenewable Resources. The technical and rational exploitation of hydrocarbons, minerals, and other nonrenewable natural resources is declared to be of public utility and need. The State will establish and propitiate its own conditions for their exploration, exploitation, and marketing. Article 126.--Reforestation. The country's reforestation and the conservation of forests is declared to be a matter of national urgency. The law will determine the form and requirements for the rational exploitation of forestry resources and their renewal, including the resins, rubber, wild forest botanical products and other similar products, and will promote their industrial use. The exploitation of all these resources will be exclusively the prerogative of Guatemalan citizens, individual or juridical. The forests and vegetation on the banks of rivers and lakes and in the vicinity of water fountains will enjoy special protection. Article 127.--Water Regime. All the waters belong to the public domain and are inalienable and imprescriptible. Their exploitation, use, and enjoyment are granted in the form established by law in accordance with the social interest. A specific law will regulate this matter. Article 128.--Exploitation of Waters, Lakes, and Rivers. The exploitation of the waters of lakes and rivers for agricultural, livestock, touristic, or any other purpose contributing to the development of the national economy is at the service of the community rather than of any specific individual, but the users are obliged to reforest the banks and corresponding trenches as well as to facilitate access roads. Article 129.--Electrification. The electrification of the country based on plans formulated by the State and the municipalities and in which the private sector can participate is declared to be a matter of national urgency.

Article 130.--Prohibition of Monopolies. Monopolies and privileges are prohibited. The State will limit the operation of enterprises that absorb or tend to absorb, at the expense of the national economy, production in one or another industrial branch or of an entire commercial or agricultural-livestock product. The laws will determine issues relating to this matter. The State will protect the market economy and prevent those associations which tend to restrict market freedom or to cause prejudice to consumers. Article 131.--Commercial Service Transportation. On account of its economic importance in the country's development, all commercial and tourist transportation services are recognized to be of public utility and therefore enjoy the protection of the State. These services may consist of ground, maritime, or air transportation and comprise vessels, vehicles, installations, and services. The land, air, and commercial port terminals are considered to be property of common public use and, like the transportation services, continue to be exclusively subject to the jurisdiction of the civilian authorities. The use of vessels, vehicles, and terminals, property of government agencies or of the Armed Forces, for commercial purposes is prohibited. This provision is not applicable to those decentralized State entities that provide transportation services. For the initiation and exploitation of any national or international transportation service, government authorization is necessary. For this purpose, once the appropriate legal requirements for the petitioner are fulfilled, the government authority will have to extend the authorization immediately. Article 132.--Currencv. It is the exclusive authority of the State to issue and regulate the currency as well as to formulate and realize the policies that tend to create and maintain exchange and credit conditions favorable to the orderly development of the national economy. The monetary, banking, and financial activities will be organized under the central banking system, which is responsible for all matters relative to the circulation of money and the public debt. The Monetary Board, to which the Bank of Guatemala, an autonomous entity with its own resources, is responsible will direct this system. This bank will be regulated by its Organic Law and the Monetary Law. The Monetary Board is composed of the following members. a. The President, who will also be president of the Bank of Guatemala and who is appointed by the President of the Republic for a period established by law; The ministers of Public Finance, Economy and Agriculture, Livestock and Food; A member elected by the Congress of the Republic;

b. c.

d. e.

A member elected by the business, industrial, and agricultural associations; A member elected by the chairmen of the boards of directors or executive boards of the private national banks; and A member elected by the Higher Council of the University of San Carlos de Guatemala.

f.

These last three members will hold their positions for a year. All the members of the Monetary Board will have alternates, except the President, who will be replaced by the Vice President and the Ministers of State, who will in turn be, replaced by their own respective deputy ministers. The Vice President of the Monetary Board and the Bank of Guatemala, who will also be, appointed by the President of the Republic, will be able to attend the meetings of the Monetary Board together with the president, to participate in discussions but without a vote, except when he replaces the President in his functions, in which case he will be entitled to vote. The President, Vice President and those appointed by the Higher University Council and the Congress of the Republic will have to be individuals of recognized integrity and notable background and competence in economic and financial matters. The acts and decisions of the Monetary Board are subject to administrative appeal and to the contentious-administrative and cassation courts. Article 133.--Monetary Board. The Monetary Board will be responsible for determining the monetary, exchange and credit policy of the country and will see to the liquidity and solvency of the national banking system, insuring the stability and strengthening of the private national banking system. The Office of the Superintendent of Banks, organized according to law, is the organ that will supervise and inspect banks, credit institutions, financial enterprises, financing and insurance entities, and the others provided by law. Article 134.--Decentralization and Autonomy. The municipality and the autonomous and decentralized entities act by delegation of the State. Autonomy, outside of the special cases contemplated in the Constitution of the Republic, will be granted exclusively when it is deemed indispensable for the greater efficiency of the entity and the most effective accomplishment of its goals. In order to create decentralized and autonomous entities, the favorable vote of two-thirds of the Congress of the Republic will be necessary.

The following are established to be the minimum obligations of the municipality and of every decentralized and autonomous entity: a. To coordinate its policy with the general policy of the State and, where appropriate, with the special policy of the appropriate department; . To maintain close coordination with the State's planning organ; c. To transmit to the executive branch and to the Congress of the Republic for information purposes its detailed ordinary and special budgets with the expression of programs, projects, activities, revenues, and expenditures. The University of San Carlos de Guatemala is excepted. Such transmittal will be for the purpose of approval, when the law so provides. d. To transmit to the same organs the minutes relating to its actions and the specific reports requested of them, the confidential nature of the operations of individuals at banks and financial institutions in general being protected; To provide the necessary facilities so that the organ charged with fiscal control may perform its functions broadly and effectively; and f. In all activities of an international nature, to be subjected to the policy outlined by the executive branch. When the functioning of a decentralized entity will be considered inapplicable, it will be eliminated by the favorable vote of two-thirds of Congress of the Republic. CHAPTER III Civic and Political Duties and Rights
Article 135.--Civic Duties and Rights. Besides those rights and duties assigned to other provisions of the Constitution and laws of the Republic, the following are rights and duties of Guatemalan citizens:

To serve and defend the homeland; To fulfill their obligations and see to the implementation of the Constitution of the Republic;

c. d. e. . .

To strive for the civic, cultural, moral, economic, and social development of Guatemalans; To contribute to public expenditures in the form prescribed by law; To obey the laws; To maintain appropriate respect for the authorities; and To perform military and social service in accordance with the law.

Article 136.--Political Duties and Rights. The following are rights and duties of the citizens: a. b. c. To be included in the Register of Citizens; To vote and and be elected; To see to the freedom and effectiveness of the vote and the integrity of the electoral process; To select public employment; e. To participate in political activities; and f. To defend the principle of the alternation in office rather than the re-election of the President of the Republic. Article 137.--Right of Petition in Political Matters. The right of petition in political matters belongs exclusively to Guatemalans. Any petition in this matter will have to be resolved and the party notified within a period not exceeding eight days. If the authority should not act within that deadline, the petition will be considered to have been denied and the interested party will then have the right to resort to the courts. CHAPTER IV Limitation of Constitutional Rights Article 138.--Limitation of Constitutional Rights. It is, the obligation of the State and the authorities to insure to the inhabitants of the Nation the complete enjoyment of their rights guaranteed by the Constitution. However, in case of invasion of the territory, serious disturbance of the peace, activities against the security of the State, or public calamity, the State can suspend the full applicability of the rights referred to in Articles 5, 6, 9, 26, 33, paragraph 1, of Article 35, paragraph 2, of Article 38, and paragraph 2 of Article 116.

On determining the existence of any of the situations indicated in the paragraph above, the President of the Republic will make the appropriate declaration by means of a decree dictated by the Council of Ministers and the provisions of the Law of Public Order will apply. In a state of emergency (estado de prevencion), such a formality will not be necessary. The a. b. c. d. decree will specify: The causes that justify it; The rights that cannot be fully upheld; The territory affected; and The time of its applicability.

Furthermore, the decree itself will summon the Congress so that, within three days, it may take cognizance of the document, ratify it, amend it, or disapprove it. Should the Congress be in session, it should take cognizance of it immediately. The effects of the decree cannot exceed thirty days on each occasion. If before the expiration of this deadline the causes motivating the decree should no longer apply, its effects will be terminated for this reason and any citizen will have the right to seek its amendment. Should the 30-day deadline be reached, the full restoration of rights will automatically occur unless a new decree in the same sense be ordered. Should Guatemala face an actual state of war, the decree will not be subject to the time limits mentioned in the previous paragraph. Once the causes that motivated the decree referred to in this article should no longer apply, any individual will have the right to infer the legal responsibilities consequent on the situation on account of the unnecessary acts and measures unauthorized by the Law of Public Order. Article 139.--Law of Public Order and States of Emergency. All matters relative to this subject are regulated in the Constitutional Law of Public Order. The Law of Public Order will not affect the functioning of the organs of the State, and its members will always enjoy the immunities and prerogatives that the law assigns to them; neither will it affect the functioning of political parties. The Law of Public order will establish the means and rights consequent on it in accordance with the following order: a. State of prevention; b. State of alarm; c. State of public disaster; d. State of siege; and e. State of war.

TITLE III The State CHAPTER I Article 140.--State of Guatemala. Guatemala is a free State, independent and sovereign, organized to guarantee to its inhabitants the enjoyment of their rights and liberties. Its system of government is republican, democratic, and representative. Article 141.--Sovereignty. Sovereignty is rooted in the people who delegate it for its exercise to the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial Organs. Subordination among them is prohibited. Article 142.--Concerning Sovereignty and Territory. The State exercises full sovereignty over the following: a. The national territory made up of its soil, subsoil, internal waters, and territorial sea to the extent set by law and the airspace over same; The zone contiguous to the sea adjacent to the territorial sea for the exercise of specific activities recognized by international law; and The natural and live resources of the seabed and ocean subsoil and those existing in the waters. 	 to the coast outside of the territorial sea and which constitute the exclusive economic zone to the extent set by law, in accordance with international practice.

b.

c.

Article 143.--Official Language. The official language o Guatemala is Spanish. Vernaculars form part of the cultural heritage of the Nation. CHAPTER II Nationality and Citizenship Article 144.--Nationality of Origin. Those born in the territory of the Republic of Guatemala, Guatemalan vessels, and aircraft, and the children of a Guatemalan father or mother born abroad are considered native Guatemalans. The offspring of diplomatic officials and of those who perform legally comparable duties are excepted. No native Guatemalan may be deprived of his citizenship.

Article 145.--Citizenship of Central Americans. Also to be considered native Guatemalans are born nationals of the republics making up the Central American Federation if they establish their domicile in Guatemala and declare before the competent authorities their wish to become Guatemalan citizens. In such a case they can retain their citizenship of origin without prejudice to what is established in Central American treaties or agreements. Article 146.--Naturalization. Those who obtain their naturalization in accordance with the law are considered Guatemalans. Naturalized Guatemalans have the same rights as native Guatemalans, except for the limitations established in this Constitution. Article 147.--Citizenship. Guatemalans above 18 years of age are Guatemalan citizens. Citizens will not have more limitations imposed on them than those established by this Constitution and the law. Article 148.--Suspension, Loss, and Retrieval of Citizenship. Citizenship may be suspended, lost, and retrieved in accordance with the provisions of the law. CHAPTER III International Relations of the State Article 149.--Concerning International Relations. Guatemala will regulate its relations with other states in accordance with the international principles, rules, and practices with the purpose of contributing to the maintenance of peace and freedom with respect to and in defense of human rights, the strengthening of the democratic processes and international institutions that may guarantee the mutual and equitable interest of the states. Article 150.--Concerning the Central American Community. Guatemala, as part of the Central American community, will maintain and cultivate relations of cooperation and solidarity with the other states making up the Central American Federation; will adopt adequate means to put into practice, in part or entirely, the poiltical or economic unity of Central America. The competent authorities are obligated to strengthen Central American integration on the basis of equity. Article 151.--Relations with Allied States. The State will maintain relations of friendship, solidarity, and cooperation with other states whose economic, social, and cultural development are analogous to thtose of Guatemala with the purpose of finding solutions appropriate to their common problems and of jointly formulating policies leading to the progress of the respective nations.

61

TITLE IV Public Power CHAPTER I Exercise of Public Power Article 152.--Public Power. Power emanates from the people. Its exercise is subject to the limitations noted by this Constitution and the law. No person, sector of the public, armed force, or political unit may arrogate its exercise. Article 153.--The Rule of Law. The rule of law extends to all individuals who live on the territory of the Republic. Article 154.--Public Function; Subjection to the Law. Officials are depositaries of authority, legally responsible for their official conduct, subject to the law and never above it. Officials and public employees are at the service of the State rather than of a political party. The public function cannot be delegated, except in the cases noted by law, and it cannot be exercised without a previous oath to uphold the Constitution. Article 155.--Responsibility for Violating the Law. When a dignitary, official, or worker of the State, in the exercise of his duties, violates the law at the expense of individuals, the State or the State institution which he serves will jointly be responsible for the damage or prejudice that may have been caused. The civil responsibility of officials and public employees can be deduced while prescription, whose term is 20 years, is not consummated. Criminal responsibility terminates in this case after the passage of twice the duration noted by the law for the prescription of the penalty. Neither Guatemalans nor foreigners can claim from the State indemnification for the damage or prejudice caused by the movement of armed forces or civilian disturbance. Article 156.--Lack of Force of Illegal Orders. No official or public employee, civilian or military, is obliged to perform manifestly illegal orders or those which involve the commission of an offense.

CHAPTER II The Legislative Organism SECTION I The Congress Article 157.--Legislative Power and the Election of Deputies. Legislative power belongs to the Congress of the Republic made up of deputies elected directly by the people in universal suffrage through the national list system and electoral districts. The law will establish the number of deputies assigned to each district-in proportion to the population and' the national list. Similarly, it will provide for the manner of filling vacancies and the-regime of incompatibilities to which deputies are subject Article 158.--Sessions of Congress. The Congress will meet without the need- for a call on January 15' each year. Its ordinary sessions will last as long as necessary. It will meet in special sessions when it is called by the Permanent Committee or . by the executive branch in order to take cognizance of the issues motivating the call into session. It will be able to take cognizance of other matters through the favorable vote of the absolute majority of the total number of deputies making it up. Twenty-five percent of the deputies or more are entitled to request the Permanent Committee to call the Congress into session for sufficient reasons of need or public convenience. If requested by at least half plus one of the total number of deputies, the Committee will have to call the Congress into session immediately. Article 159.--Majority for Resolutions. The resolutions of the Congress must be taken through the favorable vote of the absolute majority of the members making it up, except in those cases where the law requires a special number. Article 160.--Authorization to Deputies to Perform Other Duties. A deputy can hold the position of minister or official of the State or any other decentralized or- autonomous entity. In these cases permission must be granted to him for the period that his executive responsibilities last. During his temporary absence a deputy will be replaced by the appropriate alternate deputy Article 161.--Prerogatives of De puties. Deputies are representatives of the people and dignitaries of the Nation.' As a guarantee for the exercise of their functions they will enjoy, from the day they declare themselves elected, the following prerogatives:.

a. Personal immunity from arrest or trial, if the Congress should not authorize it beforehand and declare that probable cause exists, except in the case of "flagrante delicto" in which case the deputies will have to be placed immediately at the disposal of the Executive Board or Permanent Committee of the Congress for the purpose of the appropriate lawsuit; and They cannot be held responsible for their opinions, initiative, and the manner of handling public business in the performance of their job. All the organs of the State have the obligation to show deputies the consideration attaching to their high position. These prerogatives do not authorize arbitrariness, "ultra vires" behavior, or any type of action tending to undermine the principle of a single term for the President of the Republic. Only the Congress will be competent to judge and determine if there has been arbitrariness or "ultra vires" behavior and to impose the appropriate disciplinary sanctions. Considering the declaration to which paragraph (a) in this article refers, those accused are subject to the jurisdiction of the competent judge. If he should decree provisional prison for them, they are suspended from their functions as long as the incarceration decree is not revoked. In case of firm condemnatory sentence, the deputy's seat will remain unfilled. Article 162.--Qualifications for the Position of Deputy. To be elected deputy the candidate has to be a native Guatemalan and enjoy the use of his citizen rights. Deputies will have a five-year term and can be re-elected. Article 163.--Directorate and Permanent Committee. Each year the Congress will elect its Directorate. Before closing its period of ordinary sessions the Congress will elect its Permanent Committee chaired by the President of the Congress. The Committee will function while the Congress is not in session. The makeup and attributions of the Directorate and Permanent Committee will be set in the Internal Bylaws. Article 164.--Prohibitions and Compatibilities. The following cannot be deputies: a. The officials and employees of the executive and judicial organs and of the Court and Office of the Comptroller of Accounts, as well as the judges of the Supreme Electoral Court and the Director of the Register of Citizens;

Those performing teaching duties and professionals at the service of social welfare institutions are excepted from the above-mentioned prohibition; b. Contractors of public works or enterprises funded by the State or the municipality, their sponsors and those who, because of such projects or enterprises, have outstanding claims of their own; Relatives of the President of the Republic and of the Vice President up to the fourth level of consanguinity or second level of affinity; d. Those who, having been sentenced to a firm prison term, have not settled their responsibilities; Those who represent the interests of companies or individuals using public services; and f. Military personnel in active service. If at the time of his election or subsequently, the elected deputy should find himself falling under any of the prohibitions contained in this article, his seat will be declared vacant; however, outside the prohibitions in paragraphs '(a) and (e), he will be able to choose between the exercise of those functions or the position of deputy. The election of a deputy is void if he was an official exercising jurisdiction in the electoral district for which he was a candidate or if he had exercised jurisdiction three months prior to the date on which the election was held. The position of deputy is compatible with the performance of temporary or special diplomatic missions and with the representation of Guatemala in international congresses. SECTION II Powers of the Congress
Article 165.--Powers. The Congress will have the power to do

the following: a. Open and close its sessions; Receive the oath of office from the President and Vice President of the Republic, the president of the judicial branch, and hand over their responsibilities to them; c. Accept or otherwise the resignation of the President or the Vice President of the Republic. The Congress will confirm the authenticity of the respective resignation;

To hand over the presidency of the Republic to the Vice President in case of the definitive or temporary absence of the President; e. To grant approval or otherwise to the President or the Vice President of the Republic to be absent from the territory of Central America or to take temporary leave of their functions; To elect those officials who, in accordance with the Constitution and the law, must be appointed by the Congress; to accept or otherwise their resignation and elect the individuals who must replace them; To refuse to recognize the President of the Republic if, his constitutional term having expired, he continues in the exercise of his office. In such a case, the Armed Forces will automatically fall under the jurisdiction of the Congress. To declare whether it is appropriate or not to draw up a bill of particulars against the President or Vice President of the Republic, the president or judges of the Supreme Court of Justice; the Supreme Electoral Court, ministers or deputy ministers of State when these are entrusted with an official writ, the secretary general of the presidency, or the undersecretary replacing him, the Nation's attorney general, or deputies to the Congress;

f.

g.

h.

The basic questions must be addressed to the minister or ministers interpellated with forty-eight hours' notice. Neither the full Congress nor any authority will be able to limit the deputies to the Congress in their right to interpellate, qualify the questions, or restrict them. Any deputy can address additional questions tht he deems pertinent and related to the matter or matters underlying the interpellation and it is from the latter that a vote of no confidence may originate, which must be , petitioned by four deputies at least and carried out without delay in the same session or in one of the two immediately subsequent ones. Article 167.--Effects of the Interpellation. When an interpellation is made to a minister, the latter cannot absent himself from the country nor decline to answer in any form. If a vote of no confidence in a minister is taken, approved by no less than an absolute majority of the total number of deputies in Congress, the minister will immediately hand in his resignation. The President of the Republic can accept it. However, if he considers in the Council of Ministers that the censored act or acts are in line with the national interest and government policy, the interpellated party will be able to appeal to Congress within eight days following the date of the vote of no confidence. Should he not do it, he will be considered to be dismissed from his position and disqualified from exercising the duty of minister of state for a period of no less than six months. If the minister affected should appeal to the Congress after hearing the explanations presented and the matter discussed and following elaboration of the interpellation, a vote will be taken on the ratification of no confidence whose approval will call for the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies in Congress. Should the no confidence vote be ratified, the minister will be considered to be dismissed from his position immediately. When the vote of no confidence is passed against several ministers but not exceeding four in each case, the procedure will be the same. Article 168.--Assistance of Ministers, Officials, and Employees of the Congress. Ministers of State will be able to assist and take part in the vote in the sessions of the Congress of the Republic as well as its committees when they are invited and discuss matters relating to their branch. They will be able to have themselves represented by their deputy ministers. All the officials and public employees are obliged to punctually report to the Congress when the latter or its committees should deem it necessary. Article 169.--Call for Elections b y the Congress. It is the obligation of the Congress, or failing that of its Permanent Committee, to call for general elections without delay if, by the date indicated by law, the Supreme Electoral Court has not done it.

Article 170.--Specific Powers. The specific powers of the Congress are as follows: . To qualify the certifications that the Supreme Electoral Court will extend to the elected deputies; b To appoint and remove its administrative personnel. The relations of the legislative branch with its administrative, technical, and service personnel will be regulated by a specific law which will establish the system of classification, pay, discipline, and dismissals; The labor benefits of the personnel of the legislative branch that may be obtained by law, internal agreement, resolution, or custom cannot be reduced or distorted; c. To accept or otherwise the resignations that its members may present; To call the alternate deputies in case of death, resignation, voiding of the election, provisional approval, or impossibility of assisting the owners; and To elaborate and approve its budget for inclusion in that of the State. Article 171.--Other Powers of the Congress. It is also among the powers of the Congress to do the following: a. b. Decree, amend, and repeal the laws; Approve, amend, or disapprove, at the latest 30 days prior to its entering into effect, the State Budget of Revenues and Expenditures. The Executive will have to send the budget bill to the Congress with 120 days notice prior to the start of the fiscal year. If by the time the fiscal year begins the budget has not been approved by the Congress, the budget in effect in the previous fiscal year will again be applicable, subject to amendment or adjustment by the Congress; Decree ordinary and special taxes in accordance with the needs of the State and determine the bases of their collection; Approve or disapprove annually, entirely or in part, the previous report of the Office of the Comptroller of Accounts, the details and bases of all revenues and expenditures of the public finances that the executive should present it over the earlier fiscal year;

c.

d.

Decree public honors for major services lent to the Nation. In no case can the President or the Vice President of the Republic or any other official holding a position be granted same during the time of their tenure; f. Declare war and approve or disapprove peace treaties; g. Decree amnesty for political and related common crimes when public convenience demands it; h. i. Determine the value of the currency following the opinion of the Monetary Board; Contract, convert, consolidate, or effect other operations relative to the Monetary Board or external public debt. In all cases, the opinions of the executive and of the.Monetary Board will have to be heard; For the executive, the Central Bank or any other State entity to be able to conduct negotiations regarding loans or other forms of indebtedness at home or abroad the prior approval of the Congress will be necessary as is the case with issuing all types of obligations; j. Approve or disapprove bills relating to claims against the State on account of unrecognized credits to be submitted to its cognizance by the executive and to report special allowances for their settlement or amortization. To see to it that credits owed by the State and its institutions consequent on court judgments, be duly paid; Decree at the request of the executive organ reparations or indemnifications in case of international claim when there has been no recourse to arbitration or international judgment; 1. Approve before their ratification the treaties, agreements, or any international settlement when 1. 2. They affect the existing laws where this Constitution may require the same majority of votes; They affect the power of the Nation, establish the economic or political unity of Central America, whether partial or total, or attribute or transfer powers to organs, institutions, or mechanisms created within a concentrated juridical community to realize regional and common objectives in the Central American ambit;

They obligate the State financially in proportion that it exceeds one percent of the Ordinary Revenues Budget or when the amount of the obligation is indeterminate; . They constitute a pledge to submit any matter to international judicial or arbitration decision; 5. 6. They contain a general arbitration clause or one for submission to international jurisdiction; and They appoint investigation committes in specific matters of the public administration that may involve problems of national interest.

Article 172.--Qualified Majority. To approve before their ratification, with a vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies who make up the Congress, treaties, agreements, or any international settlement when a. They refer to the passage of foreign armed forces through the national territory or the temporary establishment of foreign military bases; and They affect or can affect the security of the State or put an end to a state of war. Article 173.--Referendum Procedure. Political decisions of special significance will have to be submitted to the referendum procedure involving all citizens. The referendum will be called by the Supreme Electoral Court on the initiative of the President of the Republic or the Congress of the Republic, which will determine precisely the question or questions- to be submitted to the citizens. SECTION III Formation and Sanction of the Law Article 174.--Initiation of Legislation. Deputies to the Congress, the executive branch, the Supreme Court of Justice, the University of San Carlos de Guatemala, and the Supreme Electoral Court have the right to initiate laws. Article 175.--Constitutional Hierarchy. No law can run counter to the provisions of the Constitution. The laws that violate or distort the constitutional mandates are void "ipso jure." The laws qualified as constitutional require, for their amendment, the vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies who make up Congress, following the favorable ruling of the Court of Constitutionality.

Article 176.--Introduction and Discussion. Once a bill is introduced, it will be discussed at three different sessions, held on different days, and it will not be possible to vote on the bill until it will be considered to have been sufficiently discussed at the third session. Those cases where the Congress declares a national emergency by a vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies making it up are excepted. In all the other cases, the procedure prescribed by the Internal Bylaws of the Congress is to be observed. Article 177.--Approval, Sanction, and Promulgation. Once a bill is approved, it will be sent to the executive for its approval and promulgation. Article 178.--Veto. Within 15 days of receiving the decree and the prior approval of the Council of Ministers, the President of the Republic will be able to send it to the Congress with the comments that he deems pertinent in his exercise of his right of veto. Bills cannot be vetoed in part. Should the executive branch not return the decree with 15 days from the date of its reception, it will be considered to have been approved and will have to be promulgated within the subsequent eight days. Should the Congress close its sessions before expiration of the deadline within which the veto can be exercised, the executive will have to return the decree within eight days of the regular sessions of the subsequent period. Article 179.--Legislative Primacy.. Once the decree is sent back to the Congress, the latter will be able to reconsider it or keep it for the subsequent period. If the observations made by the executive are not accepted and the Congress ratifies the bill by a vote of two-thirds of its members, the executive will necessarily have to approve and promulgate the decree within the eight subsequent days after receiving it. Should the executive not do so, the Congress will order its publication so that it may enter into effect as a law of the Republic. Article 180.--Entering into Force. The law enters into force across the national territory eight days following its integral Publication in the Official Gazette, unless the said law should expand or restrict the deadline mentioned above. Article 181.--Regulations of the Congress. The regulations of the Congress relative to its Internal Bylaws and the contents of Articles 165 and 170 of this Constitution do not require the executive's approval.

CHAPTER III The Executive Organism SECTION I President of the Republic Article 182.--The Presidency of the Republic and the Composition of the Executive Organism The President of the Republic is the Head of State, represents national unity, and the national interests of Guatemala. The President and Vice President of the Republic, ministers and deputy ministers of State, and subordinate officials make up the Executive Branch. Article 183.--Functions of the President of the Republic The following are functions of the President of the Republic: a. b. c. To execute and cause the execution of the Constitution and the laws; To provide for the defense and security of the Nation as well as the defense of the public order; To exercise the command of the Nation's armed forces as Commander in Chief of the Army, with all the related functions and powers; To exercise the superior command of the entire public force; To approve, promulgate, execute, and cause the execution of the laws, to dictate decrees authorized by the Constitution, as well as the agreements, regulations, and orders for the strict execution of the laws, without altering their spirit;

d. e.

. To dictate the provisions that may be necessary in cases of serious emergency or public catastrophe, it being his responsibility to give account to the Congress in its immediate sessions; g. h. to introduce bills in the Congress of the Republic; To exercise the right of veto concerning the laws issued by Congress, except in those cases where the approval of the executive may not be necessary in accordance with the Constitution; To introduce annually in the Congress of the Republic, at the start of its sessions, a written report on the general situation of the Republic and the actions of his administration completed during the previous year;

i.

j.

To submit annually to the Congress for its approval with no less than 20 days' notice from the start of the fiscal year through the Ministry of Public Finance the budget bill detailing the revenues and expenditures of the State. Should the Congress not be in session, it will have to hold special sessions to deal with the budget bill; To submit to the consideration of the Congress for its approval and prior to its ratification the international treaties and concessions concerning public services;

k.

1. To call the legislative branch into special sessions when the interests of the Republic mandate it; m. n. To coordinate through the Council of Ministers the development policy of the Nation; To chair the Council of Ministers and exercise the position of head of public administration officials and employees of the Executive Branch; To maintain the territorial integrity and dignity of the Nation; To direct foreign policy and international relations, hold, ratify, and denounce treaties and agreements in accordance with the Constitution; To receive diplomatic representatives as well as to issue and withdraw the validity of patents from licensees; To administer public finance in accordance with the law; To relieve from fines and surtaxes those taxpayers who may have incurred them for not settling their taxes within the legal deadlines or for acts or omissions in the administrative field; To appoint and remove all officials and public employees in accordance with the law; To approve retirement benefits, pensions, and widows' and orphans' assistance in accordance with the law; To confer decorations on Guatemalans and foreigners; and All the other functions assigned to him by this Constitution or the law.

o. p.

q. r. s.

t. u. v. w.

Article 184.--Election of the President and the Vice President of the Republic. The President and the Vice President will be elected by the people through universal suffrage and for a single term of five years.

If none of the candidates should secure an absolute majority, a runoff election will be held within a period no longer than 60 nor less than 45 days, counting from the first Sunday, between the candidates who have won the two highest relative number of votes. Article 185.--Requirements to Run for the Positions of President and Vice President of the Republic. Native Guatemalans who are citizens in good standing and are above 40 years of age can run for President or Vice President of the Republic. Article 186.--Prohibitions Against Running for the Positions of President or Vice President of the Republic. The following cannot run for the positions of President or Vice President of the Republic: a. The leader or the chiefs of a coup d'etat, armed revolution, or similar movement who have changed the constitutional order, or those who as a consequence of such events have assumed the leadership of the government; The individual exercising the position of President or Vice President of the Republic when elections are held for said position or who had exercised same for any duration within the presidential term when the elections are held; Relatives to the fourth degree of consanguinity and second degree of affiliation of the President or Vice President of the Republic, when the latter exercises the office of President and the kin of individuals referred to in the first paragraph of this article; An individual who may have been minister of State for any period during the six months prior to the election; Members of the armed forces, unless they have resigned or retired for at least five years before the date of the call for elections;

b.

c.

d. e.

. The ministers of any religion or cult; and g. The judges of the Supreme Electoral Court. Article 187.--Prohibition of Re-Election. The individual who has held for some time the position of President of the Republic through a popular election or who has replaced the President for more than two years is in no case eligible to hold the position. The re-election or extension of the presidential term by any means can be punished in accordance with the law. The power that he may try to wield under these circumstances will be void.

Article 188.--Call for Elections and the Assumption of Duties. The call for elections and the assumption of their duties by the President and the Vice President of the Republic will be regulated by the provisions established in the Law on Elections and Political Parties. Article 189.--Temporary or Definitive Impediment of the President of the Republic. In case of the temporary or definitive impediment of the President of the Republic, he will be replaced by the Vice President. If the impediment is definitive, the Vice President will assume the functions of the presidency until the terminatio of the constitutional term. In case of the definitive impediment of both, the individual appointed by the Congress of the Republic will complete the said term following the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies. SECTION II Vice President of the Republic Article 190.--Vice President of the Republic. The Vice President of the Republic will exercise the functions of President of the Republic in those cases and in the form established by the Constitution. He will be elected on the same ballot as the President of the Republic and in identical form and for the same term. The Vice President will have to have the same qualifications as the President of the Republic, will enjoy similar immunities, and will hold in the juridical order of the State the level immediately below the President. Article 191.--Duties of the Vice President. The following are the duties of the Vice President: a. b. To participate in the discussions of the Council of Ministers with a voice and vote; Upon appointment of the President of the Republic, to represent him with all the privileges that pertain to him, in official and protocol functions or in other functions; To cooperate with the President of the Republic with reference to the general policy of the government and to be jointly responsible for it; To participate, jointly with the President of the Republic, in the formualtion of foreign policy and international relations as well as to undertake diplomatic or other missions abroad; To chair the Council of Ministers in the absence of the President of the Republic;

c.

d.

e.

f. g. h.

To chair the advisory organs of the executive to be established by law; To coordinate the work of the ministers of state; and To exercise the other powers mentioned by the Constitution and the laws.

Article 192.--Impediment of the Vice President. In case of the definitive impediment of the Vice President of the Republic or the resignation of same, he will be replaced by the individual appointed by the Congress of the Republic, selecting him from a panel of three candidates proposed by the President of the Republic. In such cases, the replacement will function until the end of the term with equal functions and privileges. SECTION III Ministers of State Article 193.--Ministries. For expediting the business of the executive branch, ministries will be established by law with the powers and competence set by the latter. Article 194.--Functions of the Minister. Each ministry is headed by a minister of state who will have the following functions: a. To exercise jurisdiction over all the agencies of his ministry; . To appoint and remove the officials and employees of his department when it is appropriate for him to do so in accordance with the law; c. To countersign the decrees, agreements, and regulations issued by the President of the Republic when these relate to his office in order to validate them; To present to the President of the Republic the working plan of his department and an annual report of the work completed; To present on time annually to the President of the Republic the -budget bill of his ministry; To direct, regulate, solve, and inspect all the business related to his ministry; To participate in the discussions of the Council of Ministers and to countersign the decrees and agreements that he himself issues;

d.

e. f. g.

h.

To concur with the Congress of the Republic and to participate in the discussions in the business related to his department; and To see to the strict compliance with the laws; administrative integrity, and the appropriate investment of public funds in the business entrusted to his care.

i.

Article 195.--Council of Ministers and its Responsibility. The President and Vice President of the Republic and ministers of state, meeting in session, constitute the Council of Ministers which takes cognizance of the matters submitted to its consideration by the President of the Republic, who convokes it and chairs it The ministers are responsible for their actions, in accordance with this Constitution and the laws, even in cases where they perform duties by express order of the President. The ministers who approve them will be jointly responsible for the decisions of the Council of Ministers but not those who oppose these in their vote. Article 196.--Requirements to be Minister of State. The following are the requirements to be minister of state: a. b. c. Guatemalan citizenship; Enjoyment of citizenship rights; and Age above 30 years.

Article 197.--Disqualification for Ministers of State. The following individuals cannot be ministers of state: a. The relatives of the President or Vice President of the Republic, as well as those of other ministers of state, up to the fourth level of consanguinity and second level of affinity; Those individuals who, having been sentenced for debt, have not settled their responsibilities; Contractors of projects or enterprises paid out of State funds, its decentralized, autonomous, or semiautonomous entities, or of the municipality, its sponsors and whoever has claims pending for said business; Whoever represents or defends the interests of individuals or juridical persons using public services; and The ministers of any religion or cult.

b. c.

d.

e.

In no case can ministers act as the attorneys of individuals or juridical persons or oversee the business of individuals in any form whatsoever. Article 198.--Reports of Activities of Ministries The ministries are obligated to present to Congress annually, in the first ten days of February of each year, a report of the activities of their respective branches that will additionally have to contain the budgetary implementation of their particular ministries. Article 199.--Mandatory Need to Answer Interpellations. The ministers have the obligation to appear before the Congress with the purpose of answering the interpellations addressed to them. Article 200.--Vice Ministers of State. In each ministry of tate there will be a vice minister. The same qualifications-as for minister are required of a vice minister. For the creation of additional vice ministerial positions, the favorable opinion of the Council of Ministers will be necessary. Article 201.--Responsibility of the Ministers and Vice Ministers. The ministers and vice ministers of state are responsible for their actions, in accordance with what is prescribed in Article 195 of this Constitution and the provisions of the Law of Responsibilities. Article 202.--Secretaries of the Presidency. The President of the Republic will have the necessary number of secretaries. The powers of these will be determined by law. The general and private secretaries of the President of the Republic will have to meet the same requirements as those required for a minister and will enjoy the same prerogatives and immunities. CHAPTER IV The Judicial Organism SECTION I General Provisions Article 203.--Independence of the Judicial Branch and Power to Judge. Justice is administered in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the Republic. The power to judge and foster the execution of decisions belongs to the courts of justice. The other branches of the State will have to give to the courts the assistance they require for the execution of their decisions.

The magistrates and judges are independent in the exercise of their functions and are exclusively subjected to the Constitution of the Republic and the laws. Whoever attempts to undermine the independence of the judicial branch, in addition to the penalties set by the Penal Code, would be barred from exercising any public office. The jurisdictional function is exercised absolutely exclusively by the Supreme Court of Justice and the other courts established by law. No other authority will be able to intervene in the administration of justice. Article 204.--Essential Conditions for the Administration of Justice. In all their decisions or sentences, the courts of law will mandatorily observe the principle that the Constitution of the Republic has priority over any law or treaty. Article 205.--Guarantees of the Judicial Organism. The following are established as guarantees of the Judicial Organism: a. b. c. Functional independence; Financial independence; Invulnerability of the magistrates and judges of the first instance in their positions, except in cases established by law; and The selection of personnel.

d.

Article 206.--Right of Trial for Magistrates and Judges. Magistrates and judges enjoy the right of trial in the form determined by law. The Congress of the Republic is competent to declare if it is appropriate or not to issue a bill of particulars against the President of the Judicial Organism and the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. Competence in relation to other magistrates and judges belongs to the latter. Article 207.--Requirements for Qualifying as a Magistrate or Judge. Magistrates and judges must be native Guatemalans, of recognized integrity, enjoy their rights of citizenship, be lawyers belonging to the bar, except for the cases established by law regarding the latter requirement in connection with specific judges of private jurisdiction and lower-level judges. The law will set the number of magistrates, as well as the organization and operation of the courts and the procedures that they must observe, depending on the matter being treated. The function of magistrate or judge is incompatible with any other employment, with executive positions in labor unions and political parties, and with the status of minister of any religion.

The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice will take an oath before the Congress of the Republic, swearing to apply prompt and impartial justice. The other magistrates and judges will take their oath before the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 208.--Term of Magistrates and Judges. Magistrates, whatever their category, and judges of first instance will hold their positions for five years, with the possibility of the former being re-elected and the latter reappointed. During that term, they cannot be removed or suspended, except in the cases and through the processes provided by law. Article 209.--Appointment of Judges and Auxiliary Personnel. Judges, secretaries, and auxiliary personnel will be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice. Judicial careers are established. Entries, promotions, and upgradings in the profession will occur according to competitive examinations. A law will regulate this matter. Article 210.--Civil Service Law of the Judicial Organism. The work relations of the officials and employees of the judicial branch will be regulated by its Civil Service Law. Judges and magistrates cannot be dismissed, suspended, transferred, or retired, except for cause and with the guarantees provided by law. Article 211.--Appeals in All Proceedings. In no legal action will there be more than two appeals, and the magistrate or judge who has exercised jurisdiction in any of them will be barred from participation in another or at the appeals level in the same case without becoming liable. No court or authority can take cognizance of adjudicated actions, except in cases and forms of review determined by law. Article 212.--Specific Jurisdiction of the Courts. The common courts of law will take cognizance of all civil litigation in which the state, municipality, or any other decentralized or autonomous entity may act as a party. Article 213.--Budget of the Judicial Organism. It is in the power of the Supreme Court of Justice to draw up the budget of the branch. For that purpose, an amount no less than two percent of the State Budget of Ordinary Revenues is allocated to it, to be transferred to the judiciary's treasury every month, proportionately, and in anticipation by the appropriate organ. Funds derived from the administration of justice are exclusive. Their investment will be determined according to the law by the Supreme Court of Justice and the breakdown of the expenditures out of said funds will be published.

SECTION II The Supreme Court of Justice Article 214.--Composition of the Supreme Court of Justice. The Supreme Court of Justice is made up of nine judges including its president and will organize itself into the chambers determined by law. The President of the Judicial Organism is also that of the Supreme Court of Justice and his authority extends over the courts of all the Republic. In the case of the temporary disability of the President of the Judicial Organism or when in accordance with the law he is unable to act or take cognizance of given cases, the other judges of the Supreme Court of Justice will replace him, in the order of their election. Article 215.--Election of the Supreme Court of Justice. The judges of the Supreme Court of Justice will be elected by the Congress of the Republic for a period of six years as follows: a. b. Four judges are to be elected directly by the Congress of the Republic; Five judges are to be elected by the Congress of the Republic, selected from a panel of 30 candidates proposed by an Applicants' Committee made up of each of the deans of the faculties of law or juridical and social sciences of each university in the country; an equivalent number of members elected by the General Assembly of the Lawyers' and Notary Publics' Association of Guatemala; and a representative of the judicial branch appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice.

In the vote, both to make up the Applicants' Committee and to make up the panel of candidates, no representation whatever will be accepted. The judges of the Supreme Court of Justice will elect from among their members the president of same. Article 216.--Requirements for Judgeship on the Supreme Court of Justice. In order to be elected judge of the Supreme Court of Justice, besides the requirements mentioned in Article 207 of this Constitution, it is necessary that the candidate be over 40 years of age and that he will have completed one full term as judge in the Court of Appeals or other collegiate court with similar characteristics, or that he will have exercised the profession of lawyer for more than ten years.

SECTION III Court of Appeals and Other Courts Article 217.--Magistrates. To be a magistrate in the Court of Appeals, of collegiate courts, and of others that will be created in the same category, besides the requirements mentioned in Article 207, it is necessary that the candidate be over 35 years of age, that he will have been judge of the first instance or that he will have exercised the profession of lawyer for over five years. The magistrates to whom this article refers will be elected by the Congress of the Republic, selected from a panel of candidates proposed by the Supreme Court of Justice. This panel will have a number double that of the judges to be elected. Article 218.--Composition of the Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals is made up of the chambers determined by the Supreme Court of Justice, which will also determine its location and jurisdiction. Article 219.--Military Courts. Military courts will take cognizance of crimes or misdemeanors committed by the members of the armed forces of Guatemala. No civilian can be judged by military courts. Article 220.--Courts of Accounts. The judicial function in the field of accounts will be exercised by the judges of the first instance and by the Court of Accounts of the Second Instance. Against the sentences and final decisions of accounts putting an end to the process in cases involving major amounts, recourse to the Court of Cassation is possible. Such appeal is inadmissible in economic-coactive proceedings. Article 221.--The Contentious-Administrative Court. The function of this court is to control the legality of the public administration and it has the powers to take cognizance of cases of litigation through actions or decisions of the administration and of the decentralized and autonomous entities of the State as well as of the cases of litigation deriving from administrative contracts and concessions. To start an action in this court, no prior payment or deposit whatsoever will be necessary. However, the law can establish specific situations where the petitioner will have to pay interest at the going rate on taxes that he has challenged or contested and whose payment to the tax authorities was delayed because of the appeal. Against the resolutions and decrees, the recourse of cassation is possible. Article 222.--Alternate Judges. Alternate judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Court of Appeals, and other collegiate courts will be elected in the same form as the holders of judgeships and from the same list.

TITLE V Structure and Organization of the State CHAPTER I Electoral Political Regime Article 223.--Freedom to Form and Operate Political Organizations. The State guarantees the free formation and operation of political organizations, and these will be limited only insofar as the Constitution and the law will determine. Everything relative to the exercise of suffrage, political rights, political organizations, electoral authorities and organs, and the electoral process will be regulated by the constitutional law in the matter. CHAPTER II Administrative Regime Article 224.--Administrative Division. For the purpose of its administration, the territory of the Republic is divided into departments and the latter into municipalities. The administration will be decentralized and development regions will be established with economic, social, and cultural criteria that can be constituted by one or more departments to provide a rationalized impetus to the country's integral development. However, when this is convenient to the interests of the Nation, the Congress will be able to modify the country's administrative organization, establishing a regime of regions, departments, and municipalities, or any other system, without ° undermining the municipal authority. Article 225.--National Council of Urban and Rural Development. For the organization and coordination of the public administration, the National Council of Urban and Rural Development is created, coordinated by the President of the Republic and structured in the form that the law establishes. This Council will have as its duty to formulate urban and rural development policies as well as that of territorial ordering. Article 226.--Regional Council of Urban and Rural Development. The regions which are established according to law will have a Regional Council of Urban and Rural Development, chaired by a representative of the President of the Republic and made up of the governors of the departmetns which form the region, by a representative of the municipal corporations of each one of the departments included in same, and by representatives of the public and private entities established by law. The presidents of these councils will be ex officio members of the National Council of Urban and Rural Development.

Article 227.--Governors. The government of the departments shall be headed by a governor appointed by the President of the Republic who will have to possess the same qualifications as a minister of state, and enjoy the same immunities as the latter. To quality for appointment, he will have to have been domiciled for the five years prior to his appointment in the department. Article 228.--Departmental Council. In each department there will be a Departmental Council to be chaired by the governor. it will be made up by the mayors of all the municipalities and representatives of the organized public and private sectors with the purpose of promoting the department's development. Article 229.--Financial Contribution of the Central Government to the Departments, The regional and departmental councils shall be entitled to the necessary financial support for their operations from the Central Government. Article 230.--General Registry of Property. The General Registry of Property will have to be organized so that in each department or region determined specifically by the law, a specific registry of property and the respective fiscal cadaster may be established. Article-231.--Metropolitan Region. As capital of the Republic and its area of urban influence, Guatemala City will constitute the metropolitan region, integrating into the correspondong Regional Development Council. Matters relative to the territorial jurisdiction, administrative organization, and financial participation of the Central Government will be determined by the law in the matter. CHAPTER III Regime of Control and Supervision Article 232.--Office of the Comp troller General of Accounts. The Office of the Comptroller General of Accounts is a decentralized technical institution with control functions relating to revenues, expenditures, and in general all the fiscal interests of the State organs, municipalities, decentralized and autonomous entities, as well as of any individual who may receive State funds or undertake public collections. Also subject to this control are the contractors of public works and any other individual who, through the delegation of the State, should invest or administer public funds. Its organization, functioning, and powers will be determined by law.

Article 233.--Election of the Comptroller General of Accounts. The head of the Office of the Comptroller General of Accounts will be elected for a term of four years by the Congress of the Republic by an absolute majority of the total number of deputies. He can only be removed by the Congress of the Republic in cases of negligence, crime, or incompetence. He will make a report of his management to the Congress of the Republic whenever requested to do so and routinely twice a year. He will enjoy similar immunities as the judges of the Court of Appeals. In no case can the Comptroller General of Accounts be re-elected. Article 234.--Qualifications of the Comptroller General of Accounts. To be Comptroller General of Accounts it is necessary that the official be a Guatemalan citizen over 40 years of age, of recognized integrity and professional prestige, that he enjoy his citizenship rights, that he not be involved in a lawsuit pertaining to financial matters, and that he has previously exercised his profession for at least ten years. Article 235.--Powers of the Comptroller General of Accounts. The Comptroller General of Accounts has the power to appoint and remove officials and employees of the various agencies of the Office of the Comptroller General of Accounts and to appoint auditors in matters of his competence, all of this in accordance with the Law of Civil Service. Article 236.--Legal Recourses. Against the acts and resolutions of the Office of the Comptroller General of Accounts, the judicial and administrative recourses provided by law may be used. CHAPTER IV Financial Regime Article 237.--General State Budget of Revenues and Expenditures. The General State Budget of Revenues and Expenditures, approved for each fiscal year in accordance with what is established in this Constitution, will include the estimate of all revenues to be secured and expenditures to be made. A unified budget is mandatory and its structure is programmatic. All the State's revenues represent a common indivisible fund slated exclusively to cover its expenditures. The agencies and the decentralized and autonomous entities can have budgets and exclusive funds when the law so provides. Their budgets will be sent annually to the executive branch and to the Congress of the Republic for their information and inclusion into the general budget and will additionally be subject to the control and supervision of the appropriate organs of the State.

Every extraordinary expenditure will have to be approved by the Congress of the Republic as an extension of the General State Budget of Revenues. and Expenditures, and its approval will have to meet the same requirements as those set for the approval of the ordinary budget. Article 238.--Organic Budget Law. The Organic Budget Law will regulate the following: a. The formulation, execution, and liquidation of the General State Budget of Revenues and Expenditures and the standards which this Constitution uses for discussion and approval; In those cases where funds may be transferred within the total allocated for each organ, agency, decentralized or autonomous entity, the transfer of items will have to be reported immediately to the Congress of the Republic and the Office of the Comptroller General of Accounts; The use of savings and the investment of any possible surplus and revenues; The standards and regulations to which all matters relative to the domestic and foreign public debt, their amortization and settlement, is subjected; The measures of control and supervision over entities that have exclusive funds, as regards the approval and execution of their budget; and The form of remuneration of all officials and public employees, including those of the decentralized entities. It will regulate specifically those cases where some officials, exceptionally and for the sake of the public service, collect representation expenses . Any-other forms of remuneration are prohibited, and whoever authorizes them will be personally responsible; g. The manner of verifying public expenditures and the cases highly qualified and approved by the Congress of the Republic in which unverified expenditures of a confidential nature may originate; and Forms of collecting public revenues. Article 239.--Principle of Legality. It is exclusively up to the Congress of the Republic to decree ordinary and special taxes, assessments, and special taxes in accordance with the needs of the State and in accordance with equity and fiscal equity as well as how to determine the bases of collection, especially the following:

b.

. .

e.

f.

.

The circumstances of the taxable relationship; The exemptions;

. d. e. f.

The taxpayer and unified responsibility; The taxable base and the type of taxation; The deductions, credits, reductions, and surtaxes; and The violations and tax sanctions.

The provisions, hierarchically inferior to the law, which contradict or distort the legal standards regulating the . bases of tax collection, are "ipso jure" void. The regulatory provisions cannot modify said bases and will regulate matters relative to the administrative collection of taxes and to establish the procedures facilitating their collection. Article 240.--Source of Investments and Expenditures of the State. Any law which involves the investments and expenditures of the State must indicate the source from which the funds slated to cover them will originate. Article 241.--Rendering of Accounts of the State. The Executive Organism will annually present to the Congress of the Republic the rendering of accounts of the State The competent minister will formulate the statement of account of the annual budget and will bring it to the attention of the Office of the Comptroller General of Accounts within the first three months of each year. Once the statement of account is received, the Office of Comptroller General of Accounts will issue a report and will issue an opinion within no more than two months, which report he must transmit to the Congress of the Republic, which will approve or disapprove the statement of account. In case of disapproval, the Congress of the Republic will have to request the appropriate reports or explanations and if punishable. cause is found, the major one would be certified to the Public Ministry. Once the statement of account of the budget is approved, a summary of the financial situation of the State will be published in the Official Gazette. The agencies and decentralized or autonomous entities of the State having their own budget will present to the Congress of the Republic in the same form and within the same period the corresponding statement of account to satisfy the principle of unity in the control of the State's revenues and expenditures.

Article 242--Guarantee Fund. With the purpose of financing economic and social development programs realized by the nonprofit organizations of the private sector, legally recognized in the country, the State will constitute a specific guarantee fund from its own resources, decentralized or autonomous entities, private contributions or international origin. A law will regulate this matter. Article 243.--Principle of Ability to Pa y . The taxation system must be fair and equitable. For that purpose the tax laws will be based on the principle of ability to pay. Confiscatory taxes and double or multiple domestic taxation are prohibited. There is double or multiple taxation when the same taxable event impacting on the same taxpayer burdens him two or more times, is levied by one or more taxing authorities, or for the same contingency or tax period. When the present Constitution is promulgated, cases of double or multiple taxation will have to be eliminated gradually in order' not to hinder the tax authorities. CHAPTER V The Armed Forces Article 244.--Integrations Organization, and Goals of the Armed Forces. The Armed Forces of Guatemala are an institution destined to maintain the independence, sovereignty, and honor of Guatemala, its territorial integrity, peace, and internal and external security. They are unique and indivisible, essentially professional, apolitical, loyal, and not deliberative. They are made up of ground, air and naval forces. Their organization is hierarchical and based on the principles of discipline -and obedience. Article 245.--Prohibitions of Illegal Armed Groups. The organization and functioning of armed groups unregulated by the laws of the Republic and its regulations is punishable. Article 246.--Duties and Powers of the President over the Armed Forces. The President of the Republic is the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and will convey his orders through the general officer or colonel or his equivalent in the Navy who holds the position of Minister of National Defense. In that capacity he has the powers mentioned in the law and especially the following: a. To decree mobilization and demobilization; and

b. To approve the promotions of officers in the Armed Forces of Guatemala in time of peace and war as well as to confer military decorations and honors in the cases and forms established by the Constitutive Law of the Armed Forces and other laws and military regulations. He may, likewise, approve special pensions. Article 247.--Requirements to be an Officer in the Armed Forces. To be an officer in the Armed Forces of Guatemala, the candidate must be a native Guatemalan and never to have adopted a foreign citizenship. Article 248.--Prohibitions. The members of the Armed Forces on active duty cannot exercise their right of suffrage nor the right of petition in the political field. Neither can they exercise the right of petition collectively. Article 249.--Cooperation of the Armed Forces. The- Armed Forces will lend their cooperation in emergency situations or public disasters. Article 250.--Legal Regime of the Armed Forces. The Armed Forces of Guatemala are managed according to the provisions of the Constitution, their Constituent Law, and other laws and military regulations. CHAPTER VI The Public Ministry Article 251.--The Public Ministry. The Public Ministry is an auxiliary institution of the public administration and the courts with autonomous functions whose principal goals are to see to the strict fulfillment of the country's laws and to represent the State. Its organizatino and functioning will be regulated by its organic law. Article 252.--The Attorney General and Head of the Public Ministry. The Attorney General of the Nation shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, who will also be able to remove him on account of a duly established cause. to be the Attorney General of the Nation, the candidate must be a lawyer belonging to the bar and have the same qualifications as are needed for a judgeship on the Supreme Court of Justice. The Attorney General of the Nation and the head of the Public Ministry have a term of five years and enjoy the same privileges and immunities as the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice.

CHAPTER VII Municipal Regime Article 253.--Municipal Autonomy. The municipalities of the Republic of Guatemala are autonomous institutions. Among other functions it is incumbent on them to: a. b. c. Elect their own authorities; Obtain and dispose of their resources; and Provide local public services, the territorial division of their jurisdiction, and the fulfillment of their own goals.

For the necessary implementation they will issue the appropriate orders and regulations. Article 254.--Municipal Government. The municipal government shall be administered by a corporation, which is to be made up of the mayor, representatives, and councilmen, all of them elected directly and popularly in each municipality in the form-and for the period established by the laws in the matter. Article 255.--Economic Resources of the Municipality. Municipal corporations will have to procure the economic strengthening of their respective municipalities in order to be able to realize the projects and lend those services that may be necessary for them. The collection of resources will have to be adjusted to the principle established in Article 239 of this Constitution, to the law and the needs of the municipalities. Article 256.--Classification of the Municipalities. The law will classify the municipalities into categories, with reference to, the demographic conditions of the municipality, its ecoomic capability, its political-administrative importance, its cultural development, and other circumstances of interest for the municipality. Article 257.--Budget for Projects of Municipal Infrastructure. - The Executive Organism will see to it that every year, out of the General State Budget of Ordinary Revenues, eight percent of same is earmarked and transferred to the country[s municipalities through the National Council of Urban and Rural Development. This percentage has to be distributed in the form that the law determines and earmarked exclusively to infrastructural projects and public services that can improve the income and quality of life of the inhabitants who, on account of their number, cannot be funded by the municipalities themselves.

Article 258.--Right of Mayors to Trial. Mayors cannot be arrested or tried without a prior finding of cause by the competent judicial authority, except in cases of "flagrante delicto." Article 259.--Municipal Affairs Court. For the execution of their orders and the fulfillment of their decisions, municipalities will be able to create, in accordance with the law, their Municipal Affairs Court and their Police Corps in accordance with their resources and needs, entities which will function under the direct orders of the mayor. Article 260.--Privileges and Guarantees of Municipal Assets. Assets, revenues, assessments, and taxes are the exclusive property of the municipality and will enjoy the same guarantees and privileges as property of the State. Article 261.--Prohibitions Against Exemption from Taxes or Municipal Assessments. No organism of the State is empowered to exempt from taxes or municipal assessments natural or juridical persons, except the municipalities themselves and this according to the provisions of this Constitution. Article 262.--Law of Municipal Service. The relations of the officials and employees of the municipalities will be regulated by the Law of Municipal Servic. TITLE VI Constitutional Guarantees and Defense of the Constitutional Order CHAPTER I Habeas Corpus (Exhicion personal) Article 263.--Right to Habeas Corpus. Whoever finds himself illegally imprisoned, detained, or restrained in any other way in the enjoyment of his individual freedom, who is threatened with the loss of same, or suffers ill-treatment, even when his imprisonment or detention is based on the law, has the right to petition for an immediate hearing before the courts of justice for the purpose of retrieving his liberty, guaranteeing him his release, bringing his ill-treatment to an end, or terminating the constraint to which he has been subjected. Should the court decree the freeing of the individual illegaly confined, the latter will be released at the same hearing and place. When it is so petitioned or the judge or court deems it pertinent, the requested habeas corpus will occur at the location where the detained person is being held, without previous warning or notification.

The habeas corpus of the detainee in whose favor it may have been requested is unavoidable. Article 264.--Responsibilities of the Violators. The authorities which order the concealment of the prisoner or which refuse to present him at the appropriate court or which in any form evade this guarantee as well as the executive agents will be guilty of the offense of abduction and will be sanctioned in accordance with the law. If as a result of the proceedings pursued the individual benefiting from habeas corpus cannot be located, the court having jurisdiction will order immediately an investigation of the case until it is totally cleared up. CHAPTER II Amparo Article 265.--Proceeding of Amparo. Amparo is instituted for the purpose of protecting individuals against the threats of violations of their giths or to restore the rule of same should the violation have occurred. There is no area which is not subject to amparo, and it will always proceed whenever the acts, resoltuions, provisions, or laws of authority should imply a threat, restraint, or violation of the rights which the Constitution and the laws guarantee. CHAPTER III Unconstitutionality of the Laws Article 266.--Unconstitutionality of the Laws in Concrete Cases. In concrete cases, in every process of whatever competence or jurisdiction, in any instance and in appeals and even before sentence is decreed, the parties will be able to press as an action, demurrer, or incident the total or partial unconstitutionality of a law. The court will have to make a determination in that respect. Article 267.--Unconstitutionality of the Laws of General Character. Actions against the laws, regulations or provisions of a general character which contain a partial or total abasence of constitutionality will be heard directly by the Tribunal or Court of Constitutionality.

CHAPTER IV The Court of Constitutionality Article 268.--Essential Function of the Court of Constitutionalit y . The Court of Constitutionality is a permanent court of exclusive jurisdiction whose essential function is the defense of the constitutional order. It acts as a collegiate court with independence from the other organisms of the State and exercises specific functions assigned to it by the Constitution and the law in the matter. The economic independence of the Court of Constitutionality will be guaranteed through a percentage of the revenues appropriate to the Judicial Organism. Article 269.--Organization of the Court of Constitutionality. The Court of Constitutionality consists of five tenured judges each of whom will have his respective alternate. When it is seized with matters of unconstitutionality against the Supreme Court of Justice, the Congress of the Republic, or the President or the Vice President of the Republic, the number of its members will be raised to seven, the other two judges being selected by lot from among the alternates. The judges have a tenure of five years and shall be appointed in the following manner: a. b. c. d. e. One judge by the plenary Supreme Court of Justice; One judge by the plenary Congress of the Republic; One judge by the President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers; One judge by the Higher University Council of the University of San Carlos de Guatemala; and One judge by the Assembly of the Bar Association.

Simultaneously with the appointment of the judge, that of the respective alternate will occur before the Congress of the Republic. The installation of the Court of Constitutionality will become effective 90 days after that of the Congress of the Republic. Article 270.--Requirements of the Judges of the Court of Constitutionality. In order to be a judge of the Court of Constitutionality, he must meet the following requirements: a. b. c. Be a native Guatemalan; Be a lawyer belonging to the Bar Association; Be of recognized integrity; and

d. Have at least 15 years of professional experience. The judges of the Court of Constitutionality will enjoy the same privileges and immunities as the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 271.--Presidency of the Court of Constitutionality. The Presidency of the Court of Constitutionality will be filled by the same tenured judges on a rotating basis changing every year, beginning with the eldest member, and following in descending order of age. Article 272.--Functions of the Court of Constitutionality. The Court of Constitutionality has the following functions; To take cognizance in each instance of the charges brought against the laws or provisions of a general character, challenges of partial or total unconstitutionality; To take cognizance in each instance in its status of Extraordinary Tribunal of Amparo, in amparo actions brought against the Congress of the Republic, the Supreme Court of Justice, the President or the Vice President of the Republic; To-take cognizance on appeal of all amparos brought before any of the courts of justice. If the appeal were against an amparo decision of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Court of Constitutionality will be expanded by two members in the form anticipated in Article 268; d. To take cognizance on appeal of all the challenges against the laws charged with being unconstitutional in specific cases, in any trial, on appeal, or in the cases contemplated by the law in the matter; To issue an opinion on the constitutionality of treaties, agreements, and bills at the request of any organisms of the State; To take cognizance and solve issues relating to any jurisdictional conflict in the area of constitutionality To compile the doctrine and constitutional principles that are established with the purpose of resolving them through amparo and of unconstitutionality of the laws, keeping up to date the jurisprudential journal or gazette; To issue an opinion on the unconstitutionality of laws vetoed by the Executive alleging unconstitutionality;

e.

f. g.

h.

i. To act, render opinions (opinar), dictate, or take cognizance of those matters under its competence established in the Constitution of the Republic. CHAPTER V Commission and Commissioner [Procurador] of Human Rights Article 273.--Human Rights Commission and Comissioner of the Commission. The Congress of the Republic will appoint a Commission of Human Rights made up of a deputy for each political party represented during its term. Ths Commission will propose to the Congress three candidates for the election of an Commissioner [Procurador] who will have to meet the requirements of a judge of the Supreme Court of Justice and will enjoy the same immunities and privileges as the deputies to Congress. The law will regulate the powers of the Commission of Human Rights and of the Commissioner as they pertain to this article. Article 274.--Commissioner of Human Rights. The Commissioner of Human Rights is a commissioner of the Congress of the Republic for the defense of Human Rights guaranteed by the Constitution. He will have the powers to supervise the administration, will have a term of five years, and will make an annual report to the full Congress with which he will have dealings through the Commission of Human Rights. Article 275.--Powers of the Commissioner of Human Rights. The Commissioner of Human Rights has the following powers: a. b. c. To promote the adequate functioning and speeding up of government administration in the area of Human Rights; To investigate and denounce administrative behavior that is detrimental to the interests of persons; To investigate every type of denunciation that may be brought by any person regarding the violations of Human Rights; To recommend privately or publicly to officials that they modify their administrative behavior to which objections are raised; To issue public censure for acts or behavior running counter to Constitutional rights; To promote actions or resources, judicial or administrative, in those cases which demand it; and The other functions and powers assigned to him by law.

d.

e. f. g.

The Commissioner of Human Rights, routinely or on challenge, will act with due diligence so that, during the regime of exception, fundamental rights whose application may not have been expressly restrained may be fully guaranteed. For the fulfillment of his functions, every day and all hours are considered working hours. CHAPTER VI Law of Amparo, Habeas Corpus [ExhibiciOn Personal] and Constitutionality Article 276.--Constitutional Law in the Matter. A constitutional law will develop matters relative to amparo, habeas corpus, and the constitutionality of the laws.

TITLE VII Amendments to the Constitution SINGLE CHAPTER Amendments to the Constitution Article 277.--Initiative. The following have the power to propose amendments to the Constitution: a. b. c. d. The President of the Republic in the Council o Ministers; Ten or more deputies to the Congress of the Republic; The Court of Constitutionality; and The people through a petition addressed to the Congress of the Republic by no fewer than 5,000 citizens duly listed in the Citizens' Register.

In any of the cases above, the Congress of the Republic must address without delay whatsoever the issue raised. Article 278.--National Constituent Assembly. In order to amend the latter or any article contained in Chapter I of Title II of this Constitution, it is indispensable that the Congress of the Republic, with the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members composing it, should call a National Constituent Assembly. In the summoning decree, the article or articles to be amended shall be specified and shall be communicated to the Supreme Electoral Court so that it may determine tht edate when the elections would be held within the maximum deadline of 120 days, proceeding in other respects in accordance with the Constitutional Electoral Law.

Article 279.--Deputies to the National Constituent Assembly. The National Constituent Assembly and the Congress of the Republic will be able to function simultaneously. The characteristics required to be deputy to the National Constituent Assembly are the same as those that are required to be deputy to the Congress, and the constituent deputies shall enjoy equal immunities and privileges. It will not be possible to be simultaneously deputy to the National Constituent Assembly and to the Congress of the Republic. The elections of deputies to the National Constituent Assembly, the number . of deputies to be elected, and the other questions relating to the electoral process will be regulated in an equal form as the elections. to the Congress of the Republic. Article 280.--Amendments by the Congress and Referendum [consulta popular]. For any other constitutional amendment, it will be necessary that the Congress. of the Republic approve it with an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies. Amendments will not enter into effect unless they are ratified-through a referendum referred to in Article 173 of this Constitution. If the result of the referendum were to ratify the amendment, the latter will enter into effect 60 days after the Supreme Electoral Court annnounced the result of the vote. Article 281.--Articles Not Subject to Amendment. In no case can Articles 140, 141, 165 (paragraph g), 186, and 187 be amended, nor can any question relating to the republican form of government, to the principle of the non-reelectibility for another -term of the President of the Republic be raised in any form. 'Neither may the effectiveness or application of the articles that provide for alternating the tenure of the President of the Republic be suspended or their content changed or modified in any other way. TITLE VIII Transitory and Final Provisions SINGLE CHAPTER Transitory and Final Provisions Article 1.--Civil Service Law of the Legislative Organism. The law specifies that the relations of the legislative branch with its personnel should be regulated within 30 days following the installation of said organism.

Article 2.--Minor Decisions. No municipal authority shall perform judicial functions so that within a deadline no greater than two years from the effective date of this Constitution, minor cases will have to be severed form the municipalities of the country and the Judicial organism shall appoint the specific authorities, regionalizing and appointing judges where appropriate. Within this deadline, they will have to dictate the laws and other provisions necessary for the appropriate fulfillment-of this article. Article 3.--Retention of Citizenship. Whoever has secured Guatemalan citizenship, as a native or through naturalization, shall retain it and enjoy all its rights. The Congress of the Republic will pass a law relative to citizenship with all possible speed. Article 4.--De facto Government. The Government of the Reublic,organized in accordance with the Fundamental Charter of Government and its amendments, will retain its functions until the individual elected to be President of the Republic assumes his duties. The Fundamental -Charter of Government contained in Decree-Law 24-82 of April 27, 1982,36-82 of June 9, 1982, 87-83 of August 8, 1983, and other amendments will continue to be in effect until the time when this Constitution comes into force. Article 5.--General Elections. On November 3,'1985, general elections will be held for President and Vice President of the Republic, for deputies to the Congress of the Republic, and for municipal corporations across the country, in accordance with what is established by the specific Electoral Law issued by the Head of State for the holding of the said general elections. If appropriate, a second election will be held for President and Vice President of the Republic on December 8, 1985, in accordance with the same law. The Supreme Electoral Court will organize said elections and will make the definitive determination of its results, proclaiming the names of the elected citizens. Article 6.--Congress of the Republic. The National Constituent Assembly will hand over their duties to the deputies declared elected by the Supreme Electoral Court on January 14, 1986. The deputies elected to the Congress of the Republic will hold preparatory sessions so that on the same occasion when they take possession of their duties, the Executive Committee [Junta Directiva] of the Congress of the Republic made up in the form established by this Constitution may also assume its responsibilities.

Article 7.--Dissolution of the National Constituent Assembly. Once the mandate to hand over their duties to the deputies elected to the Congress of the Republic is carried out and the Congress is organized, on January 14, 1986, the National Constituent Assembly of the Republic of Guatemala elected on July 1, 1984, will have completed its functions and its mandate having expired on the same day, it will proceed with its dissolution. Prior to its dissolution, it will examine its accounts and approve them. Article 8.--Presidency of the Republic. The Congress of the Republic, once installed in accordance with the laws in effect, is obligated to give possession of his duties to the individual declared elected as President of the Republic by the Supreme Electoral Court. It shall do this in a solemn session that shall be held at the latest at 1600 hours on January 14, 1986. At the same event, the Congress of the Republic will hand over his duties to the individual declared elected by the Supreme Electoral Court as Vice President of the Republic. In the preparatory sessions of the Congress of the Republic, it will plan and organize the necessary ceremony. Article 9.--Municipalities. The elected municipal corporations will take possession of their duties and will initiate the period for which they were elected on January 15, 1986. The Congress of the Republic will have to promulgate a new Municipal Code, the Law of Municipal Service, the Preliminary Law of Regionalization, and a Municipal Tax Code, conforming to the constitutional injunctions, no later than within a year from the installation of the Congress. Article 10.--Supreme Court of Justice. The judges of the Supreme Court of Justice and other officials whose appointment is the responsibility of the Congress of the Republic on this occasion will be appointed and take possession of their duties in the period between January 15, 1986 and February 14, 1986. Its mandate will end on the dates established in this Constitution and the Civil Service Law of the Judicial Organism. Six months after taking possession of their duties, the members of the Supreme Court of Justice, using their legal initiative, will have to send to the Congress of the Republic the draft law concerning the organization of the Judicial Organism. Article 11.--Executive Organism. During the first year after this Constitution enters into effect, the President of the Republic, in the exercise of his legislative initiative, will have to send to the Congress of the Republic the draft law concerning the Executive Organism.

Article 12.--Budget. Beginning with the entering into effect of the Constitution, the Government of the Republic will be able to submit to the cognizance of the Congress of the Republic the General State Budget of Revenues and Expenditures put into effect by the previous government. Without amendment, it will continue its effectiveness during fiscal 1986. Article 13.--Allocation for Improving Literacy. One percent of the General Ordinary State Budget of Revenues is allocated to eradicate illiteracy among the economically active population during the first three governments based on this Constitution, an allocation that will be deducted in these periods from the percentage established in Article 91 of this Constitution. Article 14.--National Committee To Improve Literacy. The approval of the budget and of programs to improve literacy, and the control and supervision of its development will be the responsibility of a National Committee To Improve Literacy made up by the public and private sectors, half plus one of whose members will be from the public sector. A Law of Improved Literacy will be issued by the Congress of the Republic in the six months following the entering into effect of this Constitution. Article 15.--Integration of Peten. The promotion and economic development of the Department of Peten for its effective integration into the national economy is declared to be of national urgency. The law will determine the measures and activities that would promote such a goal. Article 16.--Decree-Laws. The juridical validity of the decree-laws originating from the Government of the Republic beginning on March 23, 1982, as well as all the administrative and executive measures realized in accordance with the law beginning on said date is recognized. Article 17.--Funding of Political Parties. Political parties will receive funding beginning with the general elections of November 3, 1985, a matter that will be regulated by the Constitutional Electoral Law. Article 18.--Circularization of the Constitution. During the year following its entering into effect, this Constitution will be broadly circularized in the Quiche, Mam, Cakchiquel, and Kekchi languages. Article 19.--Belize [Belice]. The Executive will have the power to take those measures that would tend to solve the situation of the rights of Guatemala with respect to Belize, in accordance with the national interests. Any definitive agreement will have to be submitted by the Congress of the Republic to the referendum procedure provided in Article 173 of the Constitution. The Government of Guatemala will promote social, economic, and cultural relations with the population of Belize.

For the purposes of citizenship, the natives of Belize are subjected to the regime which this Constitution establishes for the natives of Central American countries. Article 20.--Headings. The headings (epigraphs) that precede the articles of this Constitution do not have interpretive validity and cannot be quoted with respect to the content and scope of constitutional provisions. Article 21.--Implementation of the Constitution. The present Political Constitution-of the Republic of Guatemala will enter into force on January 14, 1986, on the installation of the Congress of the Republic and will not lose its validity and effectiveness regardless of any temporary interruptions resulting from situations involving violence. The present article and Articles 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 17, and 20 of the transitory and final provisions of this Constitution are excepted from the date of implementation of this Constitution. Those will go into effect on June 1, 1985. Article 22.-'-Repeal. All the Constitutions of the Republic of Guatemala and constitutional amendments decreed prior to the present Constitution are repealed, as are any laws and provisions that may have had the same effects. Signed in the Sessions Hall of the National Constituent Assembly in Guatemala City on the thirty-first of May, nineteen hundred and eighty-five. ROBERTO CARPIO NICOLLE, Alternate President, Deputy for the National List HECTOR ARAGON QUINONEZ, Alternate President, Deputy for the Metropolitan District REMIRO DE LEON CARPIO, Alternate President, Deputy for the National List GERMAN SCHEEL MONTES, First Secretary, Deputy for Quetzaltenango JUAN ALBERTO SALGUERO CAMBARA, Second Secretary, Deputy for Jutiapa TOMAS AYUSO PANTOJA, Third Secretary, Deputy for Retalhuleu ANTONIO ARENALES FORNO, Fourth Secretary, Deputy for the Metropolitan District

JULIO LOWENTHAL FONCES, Fifth Secretary, Deputy for the National List AIDA CECILIA MEJIA DE RODRIGUEZ, Sixth Secretary, Deputy for the National List CARLOS ARMANDO SOTO GOMEZ, Deputy for the National List ALFONSO ALONSO BARILLAS, Deputy for the National List JOSE FRANCISCO LOPEZ VIDAURRE, Deputy for the National List ROBERT ADOLFO VALLE VALDIZAN, Deputy for the National List JORGE SKINNER-KLEE, Deputy for the National List TELESFORO GUERRA CAHN, Deputy for the National List FERNANDO LINARES BELTRANENA, Deputy for the National List MARIO TARACENA DIAZ-SOL, Deputy for the National List CARLOS ROBERTO MOLINA MENCOS, Deputy for the National List ROBERTO JUAN CORDON SCHWANK, Deputy for the National List RUDY FUENTES SANDOVAL, Deputy for the National List DANILO ESTUARDO PARRINELLO BLANCO, Deputy for the National List RAFAEL ARRIAGA MARTINEZ, Deputy for the National List AQUILES FAILLACE MORAN, Deputy for the National List ALEJANDRO MALDONADO AGUIRRE, Deputy for the National List

GRACIELA EUNICE LIMA SCHAUL, Deputy for the National List JOSE ADAN HERRERA LOPEZ, Deputy for the National List RENE ARENAS GUTIERREZ, Deputy for the National List LUIS ALFONSO LOPEZ, Deputy for the National List PEDRO ADOLFO MURILLO DELGADO, Deputy for the Metropolitan District JOSE ALFREDO GARCIA SIEKAVIZZA, Deputy for the Metropolitan District LUIS ALFONSO CABRERA HIDALGO, Deputy for the Metropolitan District ANA CATALINA SOBERANIS REYES, Deputy for the Metropolitan District CARLOS ALFONSO GONZALEZ QUEZADA, Deputy for the Metropolitan District GABRIEL LARIOS OCHAITA, Deputy for the Municipalities of Guatemala RICHARD ALLAN SHAW ARRIVILLAGA, Deputy for the Municipalities of Guatemala CARLOS BENJAMIN ESCOBEDO RODRIGUEZ, Deputy for the Municipalities of Guatemala EDGAR DE LEON VARGAS, Deputy for the Municipalities of Guatemala VICTOR HUGO GODOY MORALES, Deputy for the Municipalities of Guatemala JOSE FRANCISCO GA CIA BAUER, Deputy for Sacatelpeguez JOSE AMANDO VIDES TOBAR, Deputy for SaCatepeguez ANDRES COYOTE PATAL, Deputy for Chimaltenango JOSE ADALBERTO GONZALEZ LOPEZ, Deputy for Chimaltenango

EDGAR FRANCISCO GUDIEL LEMUS, Deputy for El Progreso JULIO CESAR PIVARAL Y PIVARAL, Deputy for El Progreso WALTERIO DIAZ LOZANO, Deputy for Escuintla CESAR DE PAZ DE LEON, Deputy for Escuintla JOAQUIN ARTURO LOPEZ ROCA, Deputy for Escuintla MARCO ANTONIO ROJAS DE YAPAN, Deputy for Santa Rosa EDGAR ROLANDO FIGUEREDO ARA, Deputy for Santa Rosa WENCESLAO BAUDILIO ORDONEZ MOGOLLON, Deputy for Solola RAFAEL TELLEZ GARCIA, Deputy for Solola GILBERTO RECINOS FIGUEROA, Deputy for Quetzaltenango MIGUEL ANGEL VALLE TOBAR, Deputy for Quetzaltenango MAURICIO QUIXTAN, Deputy for Quetzaltenango MILTON ARNOLDO AGUIRRE FAJARDO, Deputy for Zacapa ELDER VARGAS . ESTRADA, Deputy for Zacapa BOANERGES ELIXALEN VILLEDE MOSCOSO, Deputy for Chiquimula JUAN CESAR GARCIA PORTILLO, Deputy for Chiquimula JOSE SALVADOR CUTZ SOCH, Deputy for Totonicapan FERMIN GOMEZ, Deputy for Totonicapan

ELIAN DARIO ACUNA ALVARADO, Deputy for Suchitepequez CAMILO RODAS AYALA, Deputy for Suchitepequez MARCO VINICIO CONDE CARPIO, Deputy for Retalhuleu MIGUEL ANGEL PONCIANO CASTILLO, Deputy for San Marcos JORGE RENE GONZALEZ ARGUETA, Deputy for San Marcos VICTOR HUGO MIRANDA GODINEZ, Deputy for San Marcos OSBERTO MOISES OROZCO GODINEZ, Deputy for San Marcos RAMON ALVAREZ CAMPOLLO, Deputy for San Marcos OCTAVIO ROBERTO HERRERA SOSA, Deputy for Huehuetenango OSCAR LORENZO GARCIA, Deputy for Huehuetenango ABEL MARIA ORDONEZ MARTINEZ, Deputy for Huehuetenango MAURO FILIBERTO GUZMAN MORALES, Deputy for Huehuetenango JORGE ANTONIO REYNA CASTILLO, Deputy for Baja Verapaz ELDER GABRIEL SESAM PEREZ, Deputy for Baja Verapaz FRANCISCO CASTELLANOS LOPEZ, Deputy for Peten GUILLERMO PELLECER ROBLES, Deputy for Peten CARLOS ENRIQUE ARCHILA MARROQUIN, Deputy for Izabal AMILCAR OLIVERIO SOLIS GALVAN, Deputy for Izabal

NERY DANILO SANDOVAL SANDOVAL, Deputy for Jutiapa JOSE ROBERTO ALEJOS CAMBARA, -Deputy for Jutiapa JOSE RAUL SANDOVAL PORTILLO, Deputy for Jalapa ROLANDO AGAPITO SANDOVAL SANDOVAL, Deputy for Jalapa EDGAR ARNOLDO LOPEZ STRAUB, Deputy for Quiche
SILVERIO DE LEON LOPEZ, Deputy for Quiche

JOSE FRANCISCO MONROY GALINDO, Deputy for Quiche FRANCISCO WALDEMAR HIDALGO PONCE, Deputy for Alta Verapaz ERIC MILTON QUIM CHEN, Deputy for Alta Verapaz OLIVERIO GARCIA RODAS, Deputy for Alta Verapaz

