CONSTITUTIONS

of
NATIONS
VOLUME IV – THE AMERICAS in two parts
by

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Formerly Ambassador of the United States of America to Australia, Secretary-General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the San Francisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author Of INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONSTHEIR CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS (Martinus Nijhoff , The Hague; and Justice House, New York, 2nd Ed., 1961), A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams, 1942), UNITED NATIONS GOVERNMENT (Putnams, 1945), and co-author of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

REVISED THIRD EDITION
In four Volumes Prepared by Dorothy Peaslee Xydis Formerly officer in the Secretariat of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

0 1970 by Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, Netherlands All rights reserved, including the right to translate or to reproduce this book or parts thereof in any form

PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS

CONSTITUTION of the REPUBLIC OF GUATEVIALA I
September 15, 1965 Invoking the protection of God, for the Greatness and good of our homeland, with faith in the principles of the democratic system of government, we, as representatives of the Guatemalan people, meeting in a National Constituent Assembly, carrying out the special mandate for which we were elected and exercising the sovereign powers with which we are vested, do solemnly decree and ratify the following
CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC

TITLE I THE NATION, THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 1. Guatemala is a free, sovereign, and independent nation, established for the purpose of guaranteeing to its inhabitants the enjoyment of freedom, security and justice. Its system of government is republican, democratic and representative. It delegates its sovereignty to the legislative, executive and judicial branches, which are not subordinate one to the other. No person, group, or entity may usurp the sovereignty of the nation. Art. 2. Guatemala, as a part of the Central American community, shall maintain and cultivate fraternal relations of co-operation and solidarity with the other states that formed the Federation and, loyal to the patriotic ideal which inspired it, shall take all just and peaceful measures that may lead to a full or partial realization of the union of Central America.

Art. 3. Guatemala exercises full sovereignty and dominion over its territory which includes soil, subsoil, continental shelf, territorial waters, and the space above these, and the natural resources and wealth exisitng therein, without prejudice to free navigation by sea and air in conformity with law and the provisions of international treaties and agreements. Art. 4. Spanish is the official language.

CHAPTER II. NATIONALITY

Art. 5. The following are native Guatemalans:

1. Persons born in Guatemalan territory or on board Guatemalan vessels and aircraft, whether of a Guatemalan father or mother, of unidentified parents or of parents of nationality unknown. 2. Persons born in Guatemala of foreign parents if either of them is domiciled in the Republic. Persons born in Guatemala of transient alien parents if upon reaching their majority, they establish domicile in Guatemala and declare their desire to be Guatemalans. Children of diplomatic representatives or of persons holding comparable posts by domestic or international law are excepted. 3. Persons born outside the territory of the Republic of a native Guatemalan father and mother in the following cases: (a) If they establish domicile in the country; (b) If under the laws of the place of their birth, the foreign nationality of their birthplace is not attributed to them; (c) If, having the right to choose, they opt for Guatemalan nationality. 4. Persons born outside the territory of the Republic of a native Guatemalan father or mother or those to whom this status corresponds, if they establish a domicile in Guatemala and opt for Guatemalan nationality; and those included, in the cases referred to in (b) and (c) of the preceding section. 5. Persons born abroad of a Guatemalan father or mother who are outside the national territory by reason of rendering services to the Republic. To opt for Guatemalan nationality implies a renunciation of any other nationality, except a Central American nationality, which condition must be expressly recorded. Art. 6. Native-born nationals of the other Republics that constituted the Federation of Central America are also considered to be native Guatemalans provided they acquire domicile in Guatemala and declare their desire to be Guatemalans before the appropriate authority. In this event, they may preserve their nationality of origin. The preceding paragraph is without prejudice to whatever may be established in bilateral or multilateral Central American agreements.

Art. 7. The following are Guatemalans by naturalization: 1. Aliens who have obtained a naturalization certificate in accordance with the law. 2. Aliens who, having had their domicile and residence in Guatemala for the period of time established by law, obtain a naturalization certificate. 3. A female alien married to a Guatemalan, who chooses Guatemalan nationality, or one who, in accordance with the laws of her country, loses her nationality by reason of marriage. 4. A male alien married to a Guatemalan woman, with two or more years of residence when he chooses Guatemalan nationality, provided that the domicile of the spouses is established in Guatemala. 5. Alien minors adopted by a Guatemalan, who shall have the right to opt for the nationality of origin corresponding to them within one year after attaining majority. 6. Minor children of a naturalized Guatemalan, born abroad, who shall have the right of option indicated in the preceding section, upon attaining majority. 7. Spaniards and Latin Americans by birth who are domiciled in the country and declare their desire to be Guatemalans before a competent authority. Naturalized Guatemalans shall be subject to no limitations other than those deriving from this Constitution and those applicable by law to all Guatemalans. Art. 8. Persons to whom Guatemalan nationality is granted must expressly renounce any other nationality and take an oath of allegiance to Guatemala and obedience to the Constitution. Art. 9. Guatemalan nationality is lost : 1. By naturalization in a foreign country, except in a Central American country. 2. If a naturalized Guatemalan resides for three or more consecutive years outside the territory of Central America, except in cases of force majeure and those provided for by law or by international treaties. 3. If a naturalized Guatemalan commits the crime of treason against the country; or by repudiating the status of Guatemalan in any authentic document or public instrument or by voluntary use of a foreign passport. 4. By revocation of the naturalization, by due process of law. Legal defenses may be interposed against the decision. Art. 10. Guatemalan nationality may be recovered: 1. By native Guatemalans who lost it by naturalization in a foreign country, if they establish domicile in Guatemala, except where the naturalization was acquired by marriage. 2. By persons who, having had the right to choose, opted for a nation-

ality other than Guatemalan, if they establish domicile in Guatemala and declare their desire to be Guatemalans. 3. By dissolution of marriage bonds when naturalization in a foreign country has resulted from marriage, provided that the person concerned declares his desire to recover Guatemalan nationality; and even without such declaration, if the foreign nationality has been lost through dissolution of the marriage. Art. 11. The following are obligations of Guatemalan citizens: 1. To serve and defend the country. 2. To comply with the Constitution and see to it that the Constitution is complied with. 3. To work for the civic, cultural, moral, economic and social development of the nation. 4. To contribute toward public expenses in the manner prescribed by law. 5. To obey the laws and regulations. 6. To respect the authorities. 7. To render military service in accordance with the law. Art. 12. The law shall regulate all matters relating to naturalization procedures.
CHAPTER III. CITIZENSHIP

Art. 13. The following are citizens: All Guatemalans, men and women, over eighteen years of age. Art. 14. The following rights and duties are inherent in citizenship: 1. To vote and to be elected to office. 2. To hold public office. 3. To safeguard the freedom and effectiveness of suffrage and the honesty of electoral procedures. 4. To defend the principle of rotation and non-reelection in the office of the presidency of the Republic, in any manner that it may be exercised, as an invariable rule in the political system of the state. 5. To register in the register of voters. 6. To vote, except when this is optional. Art. 15. Citizenship is suspended: 1. By a final sentence of conviction, issued in criminal proceedings. 2. By judicial interdiction. Art. 16. Suspension of citizenship terminates: 1. On completion of the sentence imposed. 2. By amnesty or full pardon. Art. 17. Citizenship is lost: 1. Through the loss of Guatemalan nationality. 2. Through voluntary services to states at war with Guatemala or to

the allies of such nations, provided such services imply treason to the nation. Art. 18. Citizenship is restored: 1. On the completion of two years after Guatemalan nationality has been recovered. 2. By government order or judicial decision in those cases specified by law.
CHAPTER IV. SUFFRAGE

Art. 19. Suffrage is universal and secret, compulsory for voters who can read and write and optional for illiterate voters. Art. 20. All Guatemalans who enjoy the rights of citizenship and are inscribed in the electoral register are voters. Art. 21. The following shall be punished in accordance with criminal law: 1. Those who prevent or try to prevent citizens from registering as voters or from exercising their right of suffrage. 2. Those who compel or try to compel persons to vote in a certain way. 3. Those who by any coercive means compel or try to compel illiterates to go to the polls. Art. 22. All persons prohibited by this Constitution from participating in active politics, and officials of the state and of its decentralized autonomous or semiautonomous agencies, who violate freedom of suffrage, shall be barred for three years from holding public office or employment, in addition to any other penalties prescribed by law. Art. 23. From the moment a candidate is nominated, he enjoys personal immunity, and may be arrested and tried only if it is found that there are grounds for a case against him. Exception to the foregoing is made in case of a crime detected in the act of commission. The Electoral Law shall determine who is competent to make the decision, as the case may be. Art. 24. Minorities that are numerically determinable shall be entitled to representation on all bodies chosen by popular election. The law shall regulate the technical system that is to be adopted. Art. 25. The law shall prescribe rules for the exercise of suffrage in order to guarantee its freedom and honesty, so that it may constitute a true expression of the popular will. Art. 26. Provisions amending the Electoral Law, adopted after an election has been called and before the result is known or the persons elected have assumed office, shall not be applicable to that election.

CHAPTER V. POLITICAL PARTIES

Art. 27. The state guarantees the free formation and functioning of political parties that have democratic standards and principles. The formation of parties or entities is prohibited if they advocate the communist ideology or if their doctrinary tendency, methods of action, or international connections threaten the sovereignty of the state or the foundations of the democratic organization of Guatemala. Art. 28. Only entities formed by a minimum of fifty thousand members with rights of citizenship and inscribed in the electoral register may be registered as political parties. At least twenty percent must be able to read and write. Art. 29. Legally registered political parties have the status of institutions of public law. The law shall prescribe rules for their organization and functioning. Art. 30. Only political parties referred to in the preceding article may nominate candidates for the offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic and of titular and alternate deputies to Congress. Art. 31. The state shall give no economic or financial aid nor preferential treatment to any political party; but it may grant to all of them such facilities as are provided in the Electoral Law. Art. 32. Action taken to force a person to join a political party against his will, to remain in one or to resign, is punishable. If the one responsible is a public official or employee of a municipality or a state agency, his citizenship rights shall be suspended and he shall be barred from holding public office for such time as the law may specify. Art. 33. Any activity in favor of the reelection of the person occupying the presidency of the Republic, or in any other way intended to prolong the term fixed by the Constitution for that office, or of violating the principle of rotation and non-reelection for the presidency, is subject to punishment.
CHAPTER VI. ELECTORAL AUTHORITIES

Art. 34. There is hereby created the Electoral Register and the Electoral Councils, with autonomous functions and jurisdiction throughout the Republic. Art. 35. The Electoral Register as a permanent administrative organ shall be headed by a director appointed by the executive authority for a term of four years.
Art. 36. The Electoral Council shall take cognizance of all acts and

procedures relating to electoral matters. Its functions are temporary and its membership shall consist of : 1. The director of the Electoral Register, who shall be chairman.

2. One titular member and one alternate designated by each of the political parties legally registered as of the date the election concerned is called and which obtained at least fifteen percent of the total valid votes cast at the last general election. 3. One titular member and one alternate selected by the Congress of the Republic by lot from among its membership with the exception of its officers. 4. One titular member and one alternate designated by the Council of State from among its members, excepting the Vice-President of the Republic. The members of the Council must be appointed at least one month in advance of the date of the call. If this is not done, it shall be formed immediately by those who were members for the immediately preceding election. Art. 37. The powers of the director of the Electoral Register are: 1. To organize, promote, and supervise the functioning of the Electoral Register. 2. To take cognizance of and resolve all questions concerning the registration, functioning and cancellation of political parties, according to law. 3. To investigate and resolve all acts that are denounced and impose the penalties provided for by law in such matters. 4. To serve as the highest administrative authority over the other electoral authorities. 5. To appoint and remove the electoral officials and employees specified by law. 6. To answer requests for advice that are presented. 7. To swear in and instal the members of the Electoral Council. 8. To convoke the Electoral Council at least fifteen days prior to the date for which an election is called. Art. 38. The powers of the Electoral Council are: 1. To prepare and make known the rules to be observed in exercising suffrage. 2. To organize the general elections and others provided for in the Electoral Law. 3. To see that the electoral process is honest and impartial. 4. To count the votes and judge the validity of elections, except those for President and Vice-President of the Republic. 5. To investigate, in conformity with the law, questions raised concerning election matters and, in resolving them in sole instance, to impose appropriate penalties. 6. To act as the highest electoral authority during the electoral process. 7. To answer requests for advice concerning the proper application of the law and regulations issued during the pre-election and post-election periods.

8. To take before the courts of justice cases of offenses and wrongs of which it has knowledge in connection with the electoral process. 9. To dissolve itself upon completion of the pertinent electoral process. Art. 39. The director of the Register and the serving members of the Electoral Council must have the same qualifications and are entitled to the same privileges and immunities as those of Deputies to the Congress of the Republic. Art. 40. There is no recourse against decisions of the Register and Electoral Council other than revision and ampare before the divisions of the Court of Appeals in the capital. Art. 41. Every election shall be carried out in a single day. Elections shall be general for President and Vice-President of the Republic, for titular and alternate Deputies, and for members of municipal bodies in the Central District and capitals of departments. Art. 42. The agencies of the state, within their competence, are obligated to furnish the electoral authorities with any assistance requested for fulfilling the functions and duties established in the Constitution and by law. TITLE II CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES
CHAPTER I. INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES

Art. 43. In Guatemala all human beings are free and equal in dignity and rights. The state guarantees as rights inherent in the human person: life, corporeal integrity, dignity, personal security and that of his property. No person may be subjected to servitude or to any other condition that impairs his dignity or respect. Any discrimination because of race, color, sex, religion, birth, economic or social position or political opinions is prohibited. Art. 44. The free exercise of the rights established by the Constitution is guaranteed with no limitations other than those deriving from the necessity of maintaining the public and social order. Art. 45. Every person has the right to do whatever the law does not prohibit. No person is required to comply with or obey orders or mandates which are not based on law. No person may be persecuted or molested for his opinions or for acts which do not involve an infraction of the law. Any act that hinders or restricts Guatemalans from exercising their rights and fulfilling their duties as citizens is punishable, with the exception of restrictions established by the Constitution.

Art. 46. No person may be arrested or imprisoned except for a crime or misdemeanor and by virtue of a writ or warrant issued pursuant to law by the appropriate judicial authority. A prior warrant shall not be necessary when a person is discovered in the act of committing a crime or in the case of a fugitive from justice. Persons under arrest must be immediately placed at the disposal of the judicial authority and confined in places of temporary detention separate from those provided for the purpose of serving a sentence. Art. 47. Persons whose identity and trustworthiness can be established by means of documents, through testimony of persons of known standing, or by the appropriate authority must not be detained for minor offenses or for infractions of regulations. In such cases the authority involved, under pain of appropriate sanction, must limit his action to informing the proper judge of the act committed and to warning the offender to appear before the court within the following forty-eight business hours. Those who disobey the summons shall be punished in accordance with the law. Persons who are unable to identify themselves in accordance with the foregoing paragraph shall be placed at the disposal of the proper judge for judgment within one business hour after the time of arrest. The hours from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. every day of the year shall be considered business hours for this purpose. Art. 48. A law has no retroactive effect, except in criminal matters when favorable to the guilty party. Art. 49. Actions or omissions which are not crimes or misdemeanors punishable by a law enacted prior to their perpetration are not punishable. Any individual or group action of a communist or anarchist nature or contrary to democracy is punishable. The law shall govern matters relating to this class of crimes. There shall be no imprisonment for debt. The penalty of confinamiento (confinement to a certain place with freedom to move about therein but under the surveillance of the authorities) may not be imposed. Art. 50. No person may be compelled in a criminal case to testify against himself, against his spouse, or against relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. Art. 51. Every person arrested shall be interrogated within forty-eight hours. At the time of this questioning, the reason for the detention, the name of the accuser or denouncer, and any other facts necessary for a knowledge of the alleged punishable act are to be made known. From the time of this proceeding, the accused may avail himself of legal counsel, who shall have the right to be present at the hearing and to visit the defendant at any time during office hours. Preventive arrest may not exceed five days. Within this period an order

of imprisonment must be issued or the arrested person must be set free. A judge who prolongs this period will be held responsible. Any authority, prison head or employee who holds or orders the holding of a person incommunicado shall be removed from his position, without prejudice to the imposition of other penalties prescribed by law. Art. 52. No writ of imprisonment may be issued unless preceded by information that a crime has been committed and unless there are sufficient grounds for belief that the person under arrest has committed it or participated in it. Art. 53. Defense of one's person and of one's rights is inviolable. No one may be tried by a commission or by special courts. No one may be sentenced without having been charged, heard, and convicted in a legal trial held before competent and previously established courts or authorities, at which the essential formalities and guarantees have been observed; likewise, no one may be temporarily deprived of his rights except by virtue of proceedings which meet the same requirements. Art. 54. The death penalty shall be considered extraordinary. It may not be imposed on the basis of presumptions, nor shall it apply to women or minors, to persons over seventy years of age, to persons guilty of political crimes, or to persons whose extradition has been granted under that condition. All existing legal recourses are admissible against a sentence imposing the death penalty, including cassation and clemency (gracia). These two recourses shall not be admissible in the event of invasion of the territory, siege of a fort or city, or mobilization for war. The penalty is to be carried out after all recourses have been exhausted. Art. 55. The prison system shall encourage the reform and social readjustment of prisoners. Imprisonment is to be carried out only in establishments intended for the serving of sentences. Places of detention or for the serving of sentences are civilian centers. No arrested or imprisoned person shall be prevented from satisfying his natural functions. Nor shall physical or moral torture, cruel treatment, infamous punishment or acts, hardships, or coercion be inflicted, nor shall a person be compelled to perform work prejudicial to his health or incompatible with his physical constitution or his dignity, nor may he be made the victim of extortion. Minors must not be regarded as criminals and may never be sent to jails or establishments intended for adults, but should be attended to in suitable institutions under the care of qualified persons, for the purpose of obtaining a full education, medical and social assistance and their adjustment to society. The treatment of maladjusted minors and unprotected children shall be covered by a special law. Institutions suitable for carrying out the provisions of this article shall be established.

Art. 56. Public officials or employees who give orders contrary to the foregoing article, and subordinates who carry out such orders, shall be removed from their posts, be permanently barred from holding any public office or employment and shall receive the pertinent legal punishment. Heads of prisons and places of detention shall be responsible, as authors thereof, for any act of torture, cruel treatment, or infamous punishment in.. flicted on criminals or inmates in the establishment of which they are in charge, and even when it appears that a subordinate was directly responsible, they shall be punished as accomplices or concealers, unless immediately after the act became known they took the necessary steps to prevent or stop it and initiated proceedings against the authors. A guard who makes use of arms unnecessarily against an inmate or prisoner shall be held liable under criminal law. The action deriving from an offense committed under these circumstances is imprescriptible. Art. 57. The domicile is inviolable. No one may enter another person's home without permission of the occupant, except on the written order of a competent judge and never before 6 A.M. or after 6 P.M. The law shall set forth the formal requirements and excepted cases in which a home may broken into and whether on such an occasion documents and effects may be examined. Such examination shall always take place in the presence of the party concerned, his agent, or a member of the family of legal age, or in the absence thereof, in the presence of two witnesses who reside in the place and who have a reputation for being honest. Art. 58. The correspondence and private papers and books of any person are inviolable. They may be examined or seized only by virtue of an order issued by a competent judge in accordance with the law. By written order of a competent judge and in specific cases, authorities concerned with tax supervision also may examine and seize private papers and books that relate to the payment of taxes; in all cases the seizure or examination must take place in the presence of the party concerned or his agent, or in their absence, in the presence of a relative of legal age or of two reputable witnesses who are residents of the place. It is a punishable offense to reveal the amount or the source of funds from which taxes are derived, as well as profits, losses, costs, or any other data relating to taxpaying individuals or enterprises or to their accounting systems. Illegally seized documents and violated correspondence shall not be admissible in a trial. Art. 59. All persons are free to enter, remain in, travel through and leave the territory of the Republic except for the limitations established by law. No person may be compelled to change his residence or domicile except by order of a competent authority in accordance with the requirements prescribed by law. Art. 60. No Guatemalan may be expatriated, prohibited from entering

the territory of the Republic, or denied a passport or other documents of identification. Guatemalans may enter and leave the country without fulfilling visa requirements. The law shall determine the responsibility of those who violate this provision. Art. 61. Guatemala recognizes the right of asylum and extends it to political refugees who seek protection under its flag, provided they respect the sovereignty and the laws of the state. Extradition of political offenders is prohibited and in no case shall an attempt be made to extradite Guatemalans who for political reasons take refuge in a foreign country. No Guatemalan shall be handed over to a foreign government for trial or punishment except for crimes covered by international treaties in force in Guatemala. Extradition is also prohibited of persons accused of common crimes connected with political crimes. Whenever expulsion of a political refugee is ordered, he shall not be handed over to the country whose government pursues him. Art. 62. The inhabitants of the Republic have the right to address petitions, individually or collectively, to the authorities, and the latter are obligated to act upon them according to law without delay and to communicate their decisions to the persons concerned. Petitions regarding political matters may be made only by Guatemalans and must be acted upon within a period of not more than eight days. If the authority does not render a decision within that period the petition shall be deemed to have been denied and the interested party may have recourse to legal remedies. Petitions of other kinds addressed to administrative authorities must be acted upon within a period of not more than thirty days after pertinent administrative proceedings have been concluded. If this is not done the petitioner may have recourse to amparo in order to fix a final period for decision by the authority concerned. The Armed Forces may neither debate nor exercise the rights of petition and suffrage. Art. 63. The right of peaceful assembly without arms is recognized. The right of assembly and of public demonstration may not be restricted, limited, or restrained and the law shall regulate these rights for the sole purpose of guaranteeing public order. Religious processions outside of churches are permitted and are governed by law. Art. 64. The inhabitants of the Republic have the right to associate freely for the various objectives of human life, for the purpose of promoting, exercising and protecting their rights and interests, especially those established by the Constitution.

The organization or operation of groups that function in accordance with or subordinate to international organizations advocating the communist ideology or any other totalitarian system is prohibited. Art. 65. Thoughts may be freely expressed without prior censorship. Any person who abuses this right by acting with a disregard for private life or morality shall be held responsible before the law. Denunciation, criticism, or censure directed against public officials or employees for strictly official acts committed in the course of their duties do not constitute the offenses of libel and slander. Persons who deem themselves offended are entitled to have their defenses and corrections published. Public officials and employees may demand that a court of honor, set up as prescribed by law, declare that the publication that affects them is based on incorrect information or that the charges made against them are unfounded. A decision that vindicates the person offended must be published in the same organ of the press in which the offensive publication appeared. Public officials or employees may not be members of that court. Printing shops, radio-broadcasting and television stations and any other media of expression may not be confiscated or seized, attached, or closed, or their work interrupted, because of any crime or misdemeanor in the expression of thought. A jury shall have exclusive jurisdiction over crimes and misdemeanors to which this article refers and a law of a constitutional nature shall determine all matters relating to this right. Art. 66. The profession of any religion is guaranteed. Every person has the right to practice his religion or belief in public or in private, through instruction, worship, and observance, limited only by peace, good morals, public order and the respect due to the country's symbols. Religious associations and groups are prohibited from participating in partisan politics and ministers of faiths from campaigning. Art. 67. The Catholic Church and all other faiths are recognized as juridical persons and they may acquire, possess, and dispose of property, provided such property is intended for religious purposes, social welfare or education. Such property is entitled to exemption from taxes, assessments and excises. The legal capacity of churches shall be determined by the rules of their own organization or constitutive bases. The state shall issue to the Catholic Church deeds of ownership in real property which it now peacefully possesses for its own purposes. Property recorded in the name of third persons or of the state for its services may not be affected. Art. 68. The right to bear arms is to be regulated by law. It is not a

crime or misdemeanor to have arms for personal use in the home if they do not come under legal prohibitions. Art. 69. Ownership of private property is guaranteed. The state has the obligation to ensure to a property owner the conditions necessary for the development and utilization of his property. The law shall specify the rights and obligations of a property owner. Property rights may not be restricted in any way by reason of a political offense. Confiscation of property, and confiscatory and excessive fines are prohibited. Fines may not exceed the value of an unpaid tax. Art. 70. Any person may freely dispose of his property according to law. Entailments (vinculaciones) are absolutely prohibited. In the economic regime of matrimony or of a de facto union, each spouse or cohabitant may freely dispose of property that is recorded in his or her name in public registers, save for any limitations expressly entered in each record. In all cases the spouses or cohabitants are liable to each other for the disposition that is made of common property. Art. 71. In special cases private property may be expropriated for reasons of the collective good, benefit, or public interest, duly proved. The expropriation must be carried out in accordance with proceedings prescribed by law and the property affected shall be appraised by experts on the basis of its actual value. In appraising the value of a property all elements, circumstances and conditions that determine its real price are to be taken into account, without depending exclusively on official statements or registers or preexisting documents. The compensation must be paid in advance in currency of legal tender, unless some other form is agreed upon. Only in the event of war, public disaster, or serious disturbance of the peace may property be occupied or seized, or expropriated without prior compensation, but this must be made effective immediately after the emergency has ended. The property of states at war with Guatemala or of their nationals may be expropriated, occupied, or seized without the formalities required under the foregoing paragraph. This subject shall be regulated by a law. No compensation of any kind may be demanded for the establishment of servitudes for public utility, except as compensation for damages actually caused to property. In the case of expropriation of land for the construction of roads or highways, the compensation need not be paid in advance. The law shall prescribe the procedure and form of payment. For the carrying out of national electrification projects any area of the affected property that is indispensable may be occupied, but the amount of the assessed valuation must be previously deposited in a banking institution by the authority in charge of the matter, in conformity with the law.

Art. 72. An inventor enjoys exclusive ownership of his work or invention for a period not to exceed fifteen years and providing that he first meets the requirements established by law. Authors enjoy the ownership of their works in accordance with the law and international treaties. Art. 73. Freedom of industry, commerce, and labor is recognized save for the limitations imposed by laws for social reasons or the national interest, which prescribe whatever may be necessary for a greater stimulus and increase of production. Art. 74. Every person has free access to the courts for the purpose of exercising his rights of action in accordance with the law. Foreigners may have recourse to diplomatic channels only in the event of a denial of justice. The mere fact that a decision may be adverse to their interests is not to be considered as such. In any case the legal recourses established by Guatemalan laws must have been exhausted. Art. 75. All acts of the administration are public and interested parties have the right at any time to obtain information and copies requested and exhibition of documents they wish to consult, with the exception of diplomatic or military matters or data furnished by private individuals under a guarantee of secrecy. Art. 76. Answer to a summons issued by any authority, officials, or public employee shall not be obligatory unless its purpose is specifically stated. Art. 77. The rights and guarantees granted by the Constitution do not exclude others which, although not expressly indicated therein, are inherent in the human person. Laws and governmental orders or those of any other kind that regulate the exercise of rights guaranteed by the Constitution shall be null and void ipso jure if they diminish, restrict, or distort such rights. Art. 78. Action for the prosecution of violations of rights and guarantees set forth in this title is public and may be brought by a simple denunciation without bond and without formality of any kind. Adequate resistance for the protection of the rights and guarantees set forth in the Constitution is legitimate.

CHAPTER II. HABEAS CORPUS AND AMPARO

Art. 79. Any person who finds himself illegally imprisoned, detained, or restrained in any other way in the enjoyment of his individual liberty, who is threatened by the loss of it, or suffers grievances even when his imprisonment or detention is based on law, has the right to request an immediate hearing before the courts of justice, whether for the purpose of

obtaining the restitution of his liberty, for bringing the grievances to an end, or for terminating the constraint to which he is subject. If the court orders the release of the illegally confined person, he is free at that moment and at that place. When it is so requested or when the judge or court deems it appropriate, the hearing shall be held at the place where the detained person is situated without prior advice or notification to the parties. The personal appearance of a detained person in whose favor a writ of habeas corpus has been claimed is imperative. Authorities who order the concealment of the detained person or who refuse to present him to the proper court, or who in any other way frustrate this guarantee, as well as agents who carry out such an order, shall be considered to have committed the crime of abduction and will be subject to punishment in accordance with the law. Art. 80. Every person has the right to petition for amparo in the following cases: 1. In order that his enjoyment of the rights and guarantees established by the Constitution may be maintained or restored. 2. In specific cases, to obtain a ruling that a law, a regulation or a decision or act of an authority is not binding on the petitioner because it contravenes or restricts any of the rights guaranteed by the Constitution. 3. In specific cases, to obtain a ruling that an order or resolution which is not purely a legislative act of the Congress of the Republic does not apply to the petitioner because it violates a constitutional right. 4. In all other cases expressly set forth in the Constitution. In administrative matters the amparo action shall be in order whenever an authority, illegally or by abuse of power, issues a regulation, order, decision, or measure which causes a grievance or reasonable fear thereof, or which demands of the petitioner unreasonable requirements, provided there is no administrative recourse with suspensive effect against the challenged regulation or action, or the grievance cannot be remedied by any legal means of defense. Art. 81. The amparo action may not be initiated: 1. In matters of judicial concern, in respect of the parties and persons intervening therein. However, when sentence has not been passed, amparo may be resorted to against an infraction in procedure by the Supreme Court of Justice, in matters submitted to it for hearing. 2. Against decisions rendered on an appeal for amparo. 3. Against acts consented to by the aggrieved party. 4. Against health measures and orders issued for the purpose of preventing or averting public disasters. Art. 82. A declaration granting amparo shall have the following effects: 1. To suspend, in respect to the petitioner, the challenged law, regu-

lation, decision or act of an authority, and when pertinent, reestablishment of the affected legal situation or ending of the measure that was ordered. 2. In the case referred to in paragraph three of Article 62, if the authority does not rule within the period fixed by the Court of Amparo: (a) The interested party may appeal to the immediately superior authority or when pertinent to the Contentious-Administrative Court, for a decision to be rendered; and (b) If there is no superior authority or if from the nature of the matter it cannot be appealed through contentious-administrative channels, the official responsible shall be removed from office ipso facto on the day following expiration of the period fixed by the Court of Amparo, except in the case of an elected official, in which case he shall be liable for damages of any kind. 3. If the challenged act has been performed in such a way that it cannot be remedied or if its effects have ceased, the decision of the Court of Amparo shall so state and shall order that the pertinent civil and criminal liabilities be determined. Art. 83. In matters involving amparo, judicial interpretation shall always be broad in scope. Courts may not fail to entertain an appeal nor to rule on the grounds for it without incurring responsibility therefor, except in the cases referred to in the first paragraph of section 1 of Article 81. Judges who sit in amparo proceedings have the option of dispensing with evidence in cases in which in their opinion it is unnecessary. Whenever it is not clearly established what court shall have jurisdiction, the Supreme Court of Justice shall determine this without incidental proceedings. Art. 84. Habeas corpus and amparo shall be initiated through specific appeals. A constitutional law shall regulate the form and requirements thereof and shall determine what courts shall have jurisdiction, as well as all other aspects relating thereto, in accordance with the principles established by the Constitution. The recourse of personal appearance may be sought by the interested party or by any other person, without being subject to requisites of any kind. Any act which impedes, restricts, or in any way obstructs the exercise of these recourses or the application of the legal provisions which guarantee them is punishable. The decision rendered thereon may not give rise to a defense of res judicata.

TITLE III SOCIAL GUARANTEES
CHAPTER I. THE FAMILY

Art. 85. The state shall enact such laws and regulations as are necessary for the protection of the family as a fundamental element of society and shall see that the obligations deriving therefrom are fulfilled. It shall promote the organization of the family on the legal basis of matrimony. This act shall be authorized by such officials as are specified by law. In addition, it may be authorized by ministers of religion so empowered by the appropriate administrative authority. Maternity, childhood, old age, and disability shall be given special protection. Art. 86. A law shall determine what protection is to be given women and children in a de facto union and the form of obtaining its recognition. All children are equal before the law and have identical rights. The law shall establish the means of proof in investigating paternity. Art. 87. The state shall look after the physical, mental, and moral health of minors; it shall enact laws and create institutions necessary for their protection and education. Social welfare centers established and financed by private entities are declared to be of public benefit and shall be entitled to support from the state. Laws for the protection of minors are matters of public order. Adoption as an institution for the benefit of minors is established. Adopted children acquire the legal status of children of their adoptive parents. Art. 88. The law shall determine what family property is unattachable and shall set up a preferential tax scale for large families. The state shall promote the homestead (propiedad-hogar) for the benefit of Guatemalan families. Art. 89. It is a punishable offense to refuse to pay an allowance for food of minor or incompetent children, destitute parents, disabled spouse. or brothers and sisters when the person who has this duty is capable of doing so or when he avoids complying with this obligation in any way. Art. 90. The campaign against alcoholism and the fight against any other factor tending toward disintegration of the family are declared to be matters of social interest.

CHAPTER II. CULTURE

Art. 91. It is a primary duty of the state to promote and extend culture in all its aspects. The principal purposes of education are the full development of the personality, its physical and spiritual improvement, strengthening of the individual responsibility of the citizen, civic progress of the people, an increase of patriotism and respect for human rights. Art. 92. The family is the source of education, and parents have the right to choose the education to be given to their minor children. The foundation and maintenance of public and private education establishments and cultural centers, and the economic, social, and cultural improvement of the teaching profession are declared to be matters of public benefit and need. The training of teachers is a primary function of the state. Art. 93. Freedom of instruction and of teaching criteria is guaranteed. Religious instruction in official establishments is optional. In both these and in private establishments it may be given during regular hours. Civic, moral, and religious education is declared to be of the national interest. The state may contribute to the support of the latter without discrimination of any kind. Art. 94. Elementary education is compulsory for all inhabitants of the country within the age limits fixed by law. Such education supplied by the state is free. Art. 95. Private educational centers shall be subject to state inspection and they must at least meet the requirements of official plans and programs in order that the credits they grant shall be valid. As cultural centers they shall be entitled to tax exemptions determined by law. Art. 96. The literacy campaign aimed at giving basic education to the people is declared to be a matter of national urgency. It is a social obligation to contribute to the literacy campaign. The state must organize this and encourage it with all necessary resources. Art. 97. Industrial and agricultural enterprises located outside urban centers, and the owners of rural property, are required to establish and finance, in accordance with the law, schools for their population of school age which will provide a minimum education according to special programs. Art. 98. Every person has the right to an education. Technical training and professional education is open to all on equal terms. The state shall maintain and increase centers for basic education and diversified studies, as well as institutions designed to raise the cultural level of the nation; it shall grant scholarships for the training or specialiation of students and professionals who because of their vocation and apacity are deserving of such assistance; it shall promote physical eduation and support all kinds of sports. Art. 99. The University of San Carlos of Guatemala is an autonomous

institution with juridical personality. It shall organize, direct, and develop public higher learning and university professional education in the nation. It shall encourage with all the means at its disposal scientific and philosophical research and the advance of culture; and it shall co-operate in the study and solution of national problems. A special appropriation of not less than two and a half percent of the budget of ordinary revenues shall be allocated to the University of San Carlos of Guatemala for the accomplishment of its purposes and to pay for its support, development, and progress. This appropriation may be increased by other revenues that the state may designate. Art. 100. The University of San Carlos shall be governed by the Superior University Council composed of the rector, its faculty deans, one representative of the professional association or associations corresponding to each faculty, and one full professor and one student from each faculty. Art. 101. There shall be no official recognition of degrees, titles, and diplomas other than those granted or recognized by the University of San Carlos of Guatemala and those issued by private universities legally organized. and authorized to operate, except as provided in international treaties. The University of San Carlos of Guatemala is the only institution authorized to decide upon the acceptance of professionals graduated from foreign universities or colleges and to determine the prior requirements that must be met in that regard, as well as the granting of recognition to certificates of studies, degrees, and diplomas of university status covered by international treaties. Degrees issued by Central American universities and colleges shall be fully valid in Guatemala when the basic unification of study plans is achieved. Degrees and diplomas which do not have university status and for the issuance of which the state is responsible shall have legal validity. Diplomas and certificates of aptitude which have been issued according to law are fully recognized. No legal provisions may be enacted that grant privileges to the detriment of anyone who practices a profession by reason of a degree or who has been legally authorized to practice such a profession. Art. 102. Existing private universities are recognized and others may be established in order to contribute to the development of higher learning and professional education in the nation, as well as to scientific research, the advance of culture, and to the study and solution of national problems. The Superior Council of Private Education has the function of approving the organization of private universities, on the advice of the University of San Carlos of Guatemala; and the executive, by agreement of the President of the Republic and Council of Ministers, shall approve the bylaws and authorize the functioning of such institutions. After a private university has been authorized to function, it shall have juridical personality and freedom to carry out its academic and teaching activities and to develop its study plans and programs.

The Superior Council of Private Education shall exercise supervision over the private universities. It is composed of the Minister of Education, as presiding officer; two delegates from the University of San Carlos of Guatemala; two delegates for all the private universities; and two delegates who do not hold a position in any university, appointed by the presidents of the professional associations. This Council will be selected in the manner and at the time prescribed by law. If the entities obligated to make the respective appointments fail to do so, the designation will be made by the Minister of Education. Art. 103. The University of San Carlos of Guatemala and the private universities are exempted from all taxes, assessments and excises. The state, when its resources permit, may give economic assistance to the private universities for fulfilling their purposes. Art. 104. The law shall regulate all matters relating to the organization and functioning of the universities. Art. 105. It is compulsory for professionals to join their professional associations, for the purpose of the moral and material advancement of the university professions and the control of their practice. Professional associations shall be attached to the University of San Carlos of Guatemala, which shall have exclusive authority to approve their bylaws. Art. 106. Archeological and anthropological research is declared to be of national interest. The state shall provide the necessary means and resources, so that, under its supervision, the universities, national and international, and government or private entities, may accomplish these aims. Art. 107. All of the archeological, historic, and artistic wealth in the country is a part of the cultural heritage of the nation and shall be under the protection of the state. The exportation or transformation thereof is prohibited, except as provided for by law. The state shall oversee the restoration and conservation of national monuments. The city of Antigua Guatemala, because of its character as a national and American monument, shall merit the special attention of the state in order to preserve its characteristics and safeguard its cultural treasures. Art. 108. It is a duty of the state to see to the conservation of the natural beauty of the country. The national parks are inalienable. The law shall provide for their protection and that of the flora and fauna existing therein. Art. 109. The typical craftsmanship and home industries of the nation shall enjoy special protection on the part of the state with a view to preserving their authenticity and they shall enjoy the credit facilities necessary to promote their production and distribution. National art and folklore in all their aspects shall receive the same protection and shall be cultivated in public and private educational centers. Art. 110. The state shall promote a policy aimed at the social and

economic betterment of indigenous groups through their integration into the national culture.
CHAPTER III. LABOR

Art. 111. Labor is a social obligation and everyone has a right to it. Vagrancy is a punishable offense. The labor system of the country must be organized in accordance with principles of social justice. Art. 112. In order to develop sources of labor and to stimulate the creation of all kinds of productive activity, the state shall give adequate protection to capital and to private enterprise, increase credit institutions, and make use of all means at its disposal to combat unemployment. Art. 113. The laws governing relations between capital and labor are conciliatory; they shall deal with all pertinent economic and social factors involved, and they serve as guardians of workers. With respect to agricultural labor, the law shall especially take into account the needs and the places where it is performed. Disputes relating to labor shall be subject to special jurisdiction. The law shall establish the appropriate standards for this jurisdiction and the organs charged with putting them into practice. Art. 114. The principles of social justice on which labor legislation is based are: 1. All service or work which is not to be performed gratuituously by virtue of a law or sentence shall receive equitable remuneration. 2. Equal wages for equal work rendered under equal conditions, efficiency, and seniority. 3. The right to choose work freely and under satisfactory economic conditions that guarantee a decent existence for the worker and his family. 4. A periodic fixing of the minimum wage by a hearing held in advance between workers and employers; and the establishment of norms and means to make this effective according to the kind of work, the peculiar features of the region, the feasibility of increasing productivity and the vital needs of the worker in the material, moral, and cultural spheres, whereby he may fulfil his duties to his family. 5. Regular effective daytime working hours cannot exceed eight hours a day nor forty-eight hours a week. The regular effective nighttime working day may not exceed six hours a day nor thirty-six hours a week. The regular effective mixed working day may not exceed seven hours a day nor forty-two hours a week. All effective work performed outside regular hours constitutes overtime and must be remunerated as such. The law shall determine the exceptional situations, which shall be very few, in which the provisions relating to working hours are not applicable.

Anyone who because of a provision of law, by custom, or by agreement with an employer works less than forty-eight hours a week shall have the right to receive full weekly wages. Effective work is defined as the entire time during which a worker remains under the orders or at the disposal of his employer. 6. The right of a worker to a paid day of rest for each regular week of work or six consecutive days of labor. Holidays recognized by law shall also be paid. 7. The right of a worker to an annual paid vacation after each year of service. Vacations must actually be taken and the employer may not comply with the requirements of this right in any other manner, except when the labor relationship has ceased after the right was acquired. 8. Protection for working women and regulation of the conditions under which their services are rendered. No distinctions may be made between married and single women in the matter of labor. The law shall regulate the protection to be given maternity in the case of women workers from whom no work may be demanded requiring efforts that might endanger their pregnancy. A working mother shall be entitled to mandatory leave with payment of one hundred percent of wages during the thirty days preceding childbirth and forty-five days thereafter. During the nursing period she shall be entitled to two special rest periods during working hours. The prenatal and postnatal leave periods shall be extended if warranted by the physical condition of the woman according to medical prescription. 9. Minors under fourteen years of age may not be employed in any kind of work, save for exceptions established by law. The employment of minors in work beyond their physical capacity or which endangers their moral training is prohibited. Workers over sixty years of age shall be given treatment suitable for their age. 10. The establishment of economic and social security systems for the benefit of workers. 11. Obligation of the employer to indemnify a worker dismissed without just cause or indirectly, with one month's wages for each continuous year of service, until the law establishes a more feasible system granting greater benefits. In computing continuous service, account is to be taken of the date on which the labor relationship began regardless of when it was. 12. The right of workers and employers freely to organize for the exclusive purposes of economic protection and social betterment. These organizations and their directors, as such, may not take part in partisan politics. Only Guatemalans defined as such in Article 5 of this Constitution may participate in the organization. direction, or counseling of labor unions.

Exception is made in cases of technical governmental assistance and of provisions in international treaties or inter-union agreements authorized by the executive organ. 13. Non-attachability of wages in those cases specified by law. Personal working tools may not be attached for any reason. However, for the protection of a worker's family and by judicial order, a part of the wages may be withheld and delivered to the person entitled to them. 14. The right to strike and lock out, exercised in accordance with the law and as a last resort when all other attempts at conciliation have failed. These rights may be exercised only for reasons of an economic or social nature. The law shall determine those cases in which a strike or lockout shall not be permitted. 15. Preference to Guatemalan workers under equal conditions and in the percentages specified by law. Under equal circumstances, no Guatemalan may earn less wages or salary than a foreigner. 16. Fixing of rules for the compulsory fulfilment of individual and collective contracts by employers and workers. 17. The obligation to pay a worker in legal tender. However, a farm worker, by choice, may receive food supplies up to thirty percent of his wages. In such cases the employer must furnish these products at a price no greater than their cost. 18. Obligation of the employer to give, in the first two weeks of December of each year, a bonus (aguinaldo) which shall not be less than fifty percent of the monthly salary, or an amount already established if larger, to those workers who have worked an uninterrupted year prior to the date of giving the bonus. The law shall regulate the cases of financial inability to give it. The bonus shall be given on a proportional basis to workers who served less than a year. This provision shall be applied for farm workers in accordance with a law to be enacted that will consider exceptional cases. 19. Obligation of the employer to grant to the spouse or cohabitant, and the minor or disabled children of a worker who dies while in his employ, compensation equivalent to one month's wages or salary for each year of work. This compensation is to be paid in monthly installments and the amount shall not be less than the last wage or salary received by the worker. A widow shall have this right as long as she does not remarry. If the death resulted from a cause that is fully covered by social security, this obligation of the employer is ended. In case the system does not cover the compensation in full the employer must pay the difference. Art. 115. The state shall see that housing for workers is adequate and meets necessary health conditions. It shall foster the construction of homes and the establishment of group settlements for workers. Art. 116. The rights affirmed in this chapter constitute minimum

guarantees that cannot be renounced by workers, and they may be increased by individual or collective contracts in the manner prescribed by law. Consequently, provisions that imply a reduction or denial of rights granted to a worker in the Constitution, in a law, in regulations, or in other provisions relating to labor, shall be ipso jure null and void and not binding on workers even when set forth in a labor agreement or other document.
CHAPTER IV. PUBLIC EMPLOYEES

Art. 117. The relations between the state and its decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies and their workers shall be governed by special laws which shall have as their objective the greatest efficiency in public service and stability for qualified workers. The institutions indicated above that are not maintained from government funds and that engage in economic pursuits similar to those of private enterprise shall be governed, in respect of their personnel and services, by their laws and regulations and, supplemental thereto, by the Labor Code. Art. 118. Only ability and honesty shall be used as standards for filling positions. No person may fill more than one paid public position or employment, with the exception of those who perform services in educational centers or welfare institutions, provided the working hours are compatible. Art. 119. Associations formed by government workers may not participate in partisan political activities. A strike by government workers is prohibited. Art. 120. The Civil Service Law shall establish a technical, harmonious, efficient, and dynamic system for the public administration; it shall be applied progressively. This law shall not cover agencies, offices, or branches of the government which by the nature of their functions should be subject to special regulations. Art. 121. The rights and guarantees set forth in this chapter are declared to be a minimum. Those acquired previously by workers in the government and its decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous institutions may not be diminished or denied in any way. Laws or administrative regulations which counteract these standards shall be ipso jure null and void. In the granting of benefits the principle of equality of rights between workers who receive budgetary salaries and those remunerated from payrolls shall be upheld. Art. 122. Public employees may be dismissed only for legally proven crime, negligence, ineptitude, misconduct, or manifest incompetence.

CHAPTER V. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL

REGIME

Art. 123. The economic and social regime has as its aim the achievement of a dignified existence for human beings and the development of the nation. Art. 124. Free enterprise is recognized and the state must support it and encourage it so that it may contribute to the economic and social development of the country. Art. 125. In this regard the fundamental duties of the state are: 1. To promote agricultural, livestock, industrial, and other aetivities. 2. To adopt measures that may be necessary for the conservation, development, and utilization of the natural resources. 3. To seek to raise the standard of living of the inhabitants of the country. 4. To encourage and protect the establishment and functioning of co-operatives and provide them with necessary technical and financial assistance. 5. To encourage savings and the establishment of provident systems. 6. To sponsor the construction of housing so that a greater number of Guatemalans may own their homes. 7. To promote research, experimentation, and dissemination of knowledge in agriculture and stock raising. Art. 126. The state shall promote the agricultural and livestock development of the country, to which end it shall encourage and support agricultural and livestock enterprises that exploit the land rationally and contribute to economic and social progress. Likewise, it shall carry out programs of agrarian transformation and reform, by providing rural workers, and small and medium farmers with the necessary means to raise their standard of living and to increase and diversify domestic production. These programs shall be regulated by a law on the subject which shall be based on the following fundamental principles: 1. Non-interference with lands being utilized rationally and those considered necessary and suitable for expansion of the enterprise concerned. 2. Distribution of lands to be owned by the holders, to an area and under special conditions established by law. 3. Imperative obligation of the state to provide and distribute public lands suitable for farm settlements, within the system of private property. 4. Immediate opening of means of communication with an aim to opening up for agricultural and livestock development all regions of the country appropriate for that purpose. 5. A preferred obligation of the institutions entrusted with national agricultural and livestock development to furnish co-ordinated technical assistance, adequate credit, and training for farm workers and small and medium farmers so as to achieve a rational and economically productive

exploitation of the land, as well as the marketing and distribution of products. 6. Idle lands that are workable but not cultivated may be taxed or expropriated. The law shall determine the amount of tax in accordance with the various topographical and climatic conditions, quality of the soil, location, and facilities for exploitation. In addition, it shall fix a reasonable period of time for an owner to put his land into production, taking the aforementioned conditions into account. When that period expires, expropriation may be initiated without the need for a declaration of utility and necessity, making an appraisal in accordance with the provisions of Article 71 of this Constitution. 7. When expropriation is undertaken for agrarian purposes, payment of the corresponding compensation may be deferred up to a period no greater than ten years, according to the amount thereof. The respective bonds, with an adequate maturity date, shall bear interest as determined by law. 8. Cultivated woodlands, regardless of their area, and forest reserves, under conditions prescribed by a law on the subject, shall not be considered to be idle lands. 9. Preferential protection to farm workers, and to small and medium farmers under a rural policy designed to give them lands, housing, education, health, and anything that will permit them to raise their standard of living and that of their families. Art. 127. Issuance of the currency and its regulation so as to create monetary, exchange, and credit conditions favorable to the development of the national economy is an exclusive power of the state. To the same end the state shall encourage the creation and strengthening of private and state banking and financial institutions which may be deemed necessary to aid in the development of economic activities and to see to their liquidity and solvency. Monetary, banking, and financial activities shall be organized within a central banking system. A state decentralized, autonomous agency shall govern this system. The financial institutions of the state shall be governed by their specific laws. Art. 128. The state may, for reasons of force majeure and for the time strictly necessary, intervene in enterprises supplying essential public services to the community whenever their operation is hindered. Art. 129. The following belong to the nation: 1. The public domain. 2. The waters of the maritime zone adjacent to the coasts of its territory, the lakes, navigable or passable rivers and the banks thereof; rivers, watersheds, and streams which serve as the international boundary of the Republic; waterfalls and sources of water for hydroelectric use and waters not availed of by individuals, to an area and for a period fixed by law.

3. The assets of the state and of municipalities and of decentralized, autonomous or semiautonomous agencies. 4. The maritime and land zone, the continental shelf, and the air space above, to an area and in the manner laid down by law or ratified international treaties. 5. The subsoil, deposits of hydrocarbons and minerals and any other organic or inorganic substance in the subsoil. 6. Monuments and archeological relics. 7. The fiscal and municipal revenues, as well as those which are allotted by law exclusively to the decentralized, autonomous or semiautonomous agencies. Art. 130. The nation reserves dominion over a strip of land three kilometers in width along the ocean fronts, counting from the line of high tide; of two hundred meters width along the shores of lakes; of one hundred meters along each bank of navigable rivers; and of fifty meters around springs and sources of waters which flow to cities and populated plaecs. The following are excepted from the reserves indicated : 1. Real property located in urban districts. 2. Property over which rights were recorded in the property register prior to February 9. 1894. 3. Property over which rights are recorded in the same register dated prior to March 1, 1956, provided the state is not in possession thereof. Foreigners shall require authorization from the executive to acquire ownership of real property included in exceptions (2) and (3), the state having a right of priority in every case. Art. 131. Only Guatemalans enumerated in Article 5 of this Constitution, or companies whose members meet the same qualifications, may become owners or possessors of real property located within a strip fifty kilometers in width along the frontiers, measured from the dividing line. Exception is made of urban property and rights recorded prior to March 1, 1956. Art. 132. National property may be alienated only in the manner prescribed by law, which shall fix the limitations and formalities to which the operation and fiscal objectives shall be subjected. For the decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies this matter shall be governed by their special laws and regulations. Art. 133. Municipal lands and the property of communities shall enjoy special protection from the state, which shall supervise the exploitation and utilization thereof. Municipal property may be alienated only for the same reasons and in the same manner as national property. The property and the administration of the assets of indigenous communities and groups, as well as other rural communities, shall be governed by special tutelary laws.

Art. 134. The technical and rational exploitation of hydrocarbons, minerals, and other natural resources are declared to be of public utility and necessity. Rights to the exploitation of hydrocarbons and minerals shall be acquired in conformity with the law, for a period of not more than forty years, with the right of extension for another twenty years. Art. 135. The forestation and reforestation of the country and the conservation of forests is declared to be a matter of national urgency and social interest. The law shall prescribe the forms and requisites for the national exploitation of forest resources, including resins, gums, and other similar products, and it shall encourage their industrialization. In the exploitation of such resources, when public forests are concerned, preference shall be given, under equal circumstances, to Guatemalan individual or collective enterprises. The transmission or transfer of these rights shall be regulated by law and may not be carried out without authorization by the executive, on recommendation of the Council of State. In making such contracts or granting concessions to which this article refers, public bids must first be obtained. Art. 136. The use and appropriation of streams of water for domestic purposes, the generation of motive power, irrigation, or for conducting agricultural or industrial activities by private individuals is recognized and guaranteed. Waters belonging to the nation may not be acquired in ownership, except when intended for urban services. Waters available for use by the community shall be governed by appropriate legislation under which they will serve purposes of social benefit. Art. 137. Every campaign intended to improve the food supply and the health of the people is a matter of national interest and urgency. It is a duty of the state to sponsor and to aid in the financing and technical development of health and welfare programs, on its own initiative or in collaboration with international organizations. The state shall support and assist private individuals who undertake health, welfare or social betterment projects, and it shall give special protection to persons who need this because of their physical or mental condition. Art. 138. The state shall encourage, guide, and direct the process of community development in order to attain the voluntary participation of the population in national progress. Art. 139. Electrification of the country on the basis of plans formulated by the state is declared to be of national urgency. Art. 140. Monopolies are prohibited. The state shall limit the functioning of enterprises that absorb or tend to absorb, to the prejudice of the

national economy, the production of one or more branches of industry or of a commercial or agricultural activity. Art. 141. The right to social security for the benefit of the inhabitants of the Republic is recognized. The system is established as nationwide, unitary, and compulsory, to be administered by a self-operating decentralized agency, with juridical personality, in accordance with a special law and regulations. The state, employers, and workers have the obligation to contribute to its financing and to strive for its progressive improvement. The executive branch shall appropriate annually in the general budget of revenues and expenditures, a specific item to cover the quota of the government in its obligation as such and as an employer under the social security system. This item, which may not be transferred during a fiscal period, shall be fixed in accordance with appropriate technical studies. The agency entrusted with administering the social security system may, at its discretion, contract with other institutions or persons for services to be rendered under the law. Administrative and contentious-administrative remedies may be resorted to against decisions rendered on this subject, in accordance with the law. Matters involving benefits that should be granted by the agency in charge are to be referred to the labor courts. Art. 142. Municipalities and the decentralized, autonomous and semiautonomous agencies act for the state by delegation. Autonomy, other than those special cases indicated in the Constitution, will be granted by Congress by an affirmative vote of two thirds of the total membership, when deemed necessary for the greater efficiency of an agency and better fulfillment of its aims. The minimum obligations of a municipality and of every decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous agency are the following: 1. To coordinate their activities with the general policy of the state, without detriment to the essential aims for which the agency was established. 2. To transmit as information to the executive branch their regular and special budgets. Such transmittal shall be for purposes of approval when this is prescribed by law. 3. To transmit to the executive branch reports of their labors and special reports when so required. Exception is made of reports on the operations of private persons with banks and financial institutions, the secrecy of which is guaranteed. 4. To offer the necessary facilities to the office entrusted with fiscal control so that it may fully and effectively carry out its functions. The inspection and supervision of banks and other financial institutions shall be in charge of specific control agencies prescribed by law.

The state decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous agencies and municipalities shall be governed by their special laws.

TITLE IV
SOLE CHAPTER. THE PUBLIC POWER

Art. 143. Exercise of the public power is subject to the provisions contained in the Constitution and the laws. Art. 144. The rule of law extends to all persons found within the territory of the Republic, with the exception of limitations established in the Constitution, in international treaties, and by provisions of general international law accepted by Guatemala. Art. 145. The public officials are the depositaries of the authority, legally responsible for their official conduct; they are subject to, and are never above, the law. Public officials and employees are in the service of the state and not of any political party. The public function cannot be delegated except in those cases specified by law, and it may not be exercised without first taking an oath of loyalty to the Constitution. Art. 146. No civilian or military official or employee is obligated to carry out orders that are manifestly illegal or that imply the commission of a crime. Art. 147. The authorities are obligated to take action to protect persons and their rights without delay and any omission in the fulfillment of this duty renders anyone who has been derelict responsible therefor. Art. 148. If a public official or employee violates the law to the prejudice of individuals, in the performance of his duties, the state or the state institution in which he serves shall be subsidiarily liable for damages that may have been incurred. Neither Guatemalans nor foreigners may claim compensation from the state for damages caused by armed movements or civilian disturbances. Art. 149. The civil liability of public officials or employees for any transgression committed in the performance of their duties may be claimed as long as this has not been terminated by prescription, the period for which shall be twenty years. Criminal liability, in such cases, may be claimed during the course of double the period of time indicated for prescription by criminal law. In both cases the prescription period shall begin to run from the time the public official or employee has ceased to hold the position in which he incurred the liability. There is no prescription for crimes perpetrated by

public officials or employees, when by wrongful action or omission and for political motives, they caused the death of one or more persons. Art. 150. In cases of emergency or serious disturbance of the peace, and also during the periods that the conditions referred to in Article 153 are in effect, the public services may be militarized. Art. 151. It is a duty of the authorities to maintain the inhabitants of the Republic in the full enjoyment of the rights guaranteed by the Constitution. However, in cases of invasion of the territory, serious disturbance of the peace, public disaster, or of activities against the security of the state, the President of the Republic by a decree issued in Council of Ministers, may restrict the guarantees contained in Articles 45, 46, 51, 57, 58, 59, 63, 64, first paragraph of 65, 68, 75, 76, and the second paragraph of 78, to the extent strictly necessary in each case, and the Law on Public Order shall be immediately applicable. The decree shall specify : 1. The reasons that justify it. 2. The guarantee or guarantees that are restricted. 3. The territory affected. 4. The time it shall be in force. The same decree shall convoke Congress to meet within three days to ratify, modify or disapprove of the decree. If Congress is in session it must take such action immediately. The state of prevention does not need the approval of Congress and it shall not be in force for more than fifteen days. Art. 152. The decree may not be in force for more than thirty days. If before the expiration of this period the motives for its issuance have disappeared, it shall be immediately repealed, and for this purpose any citizen has the right to initiate such action. If on the contrary, the motives persist, a new decree in the same purport may be issued and the same formalities are to be observed. Whenever the Republic finds itself in a state of war, the decree is not subject to the time limitations indicated in the first paragraph. Art. 153. The Law on Public Order shall establish the measures to be taken, in accordance with the following gradation: 1. State of prevention. 2. State of alarm. 3. State of public disaster. 4. State of siege. 5. State of war. The Law on Public Order shall not affect the functioning of the agencies and institutions of the state, the members of which shall continue to enjoy the privileges and immunities recognized by law. Art. 154. Any person has the right to take legal action regarding liabilities deriving from unnecessary acts and measures intended to re-

strict guarantees if they are not authorized by the Law on Public Order. This right may be exercised whenever the respective decree has ceased to be in effect. Art. 155. Within a period of one month after a decree restricting guarantees has ceased to be in effect, the President of the Republic shall submit to Congress a detailed report of the acts that occurred and of the measures taken during the emergency.

TITLE V LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
CHAPTER I. CONGRESS

Art. 156. The legislative power is vested in the Congress of the Republic.

Art. 157. The Congress is composed of Deputies elected directly by the people, by universal suffrage. The Republic shall be divided into electoral districts. Each district shall elect two Deputies, but when the population of a district is in excess of 200,000 inhabitants an additional Deputy shall be elected for each additional 100,000 inhabitants or fraction of over 50,000. Each district shall also elect one alternate Deputy. Art. 158. Congress shall meet without the need of convocation on the fifteenth of June each year. Its regular sessions shall last four months and may be extended for such time as may be necessary. It shall meet in special session whenever convoked by the Standing Committee or by the executive, to deal with matters which gave rise to the convocation. It may discuss other matters if so determined by a favorable vote of two thirds of the total number of deputies. Fifteen or more Deputies have the right to petition the Standing Committee to convoke the Congress for appropriate reasons of public convenience or necessity. If the petition is made by at least one half plus one of the total membership, the Committee must immediately issue the convocation. Art. 159. All resolutions of Congress must be adopted with the concurrence of an absolute majority of its membership, except in cases for which the law shall require a specific number. Art. 160. Deputies are representatives of the nation and, as a guarantee of the exercise of their parliamentary function, from the day on which they are declared elected, they shall enjoy the following privileges: 1. Personal immunity from judicial accusation or trial unless Congress has previously declared that there are grounds for legal action. If dis-

covered in the act of committing a crime, they may be arrested, but must be immediatly placed at the disposal of Congress for the purposes of a previous hearing. 2. Freedom from liability for their opinions, for their initiative, and for the manner in which they handle affairs in the discharge of their duties. All state agencies are required to maintain toward the Deputies the consideration due them by reason of their high office. These privileges do not authorize arbitrary action, excess of personal initiative or any kind of maneuvers intended to counteract the principle of non-reelection for the presidency of the Republic. Congress alones hall have jurisdiction to try and decide whether there has been arbitrary action or excess of power and to impose pertinent disciplinary sanctions. If the declaration referred to in section 1 of this article has been made, the accused thereby becomes subject to the jurisdiction of a competent judge. If provisional detention is ordered, the accused is suspended from office until the writ of detention is altered. In the event of a final sentence of conviction the post thereupon becomes vacant. Art. 161. When Congress is not in session, the Standing Committee shall decide on whether or not there are grounds for action against a Deputy. Art. 162. Whenever for any reason the office of a Deputy becomes vacant, the alternate Deputy for the district in question must be called to fill it within eight days, and in his default, another person is to be selected by lot from among the remaining alternates. Alternate Deputies shall be entitled to remuneration only while holding office. Art. 163. To be elected Deputy a person must be a native Guatemalan as defined in Article 5 of this Constitution, enjoy his rights of citizenship, and be over thirty years of age. Art. 164. The following may not be Deputies: 1. Officials of the executive and judicial branches, and employees thereof or of the legislative branch. Persons holding a teaching position, and professionals in the service of social welfare establishments, are excepted from the foregoing prohibition. 2. Contractors for public works or enterprises which are being financed by funds of the state or a municipality, their guarantors, or anyone having claims pending for such works. 3. Relatives of the President and of the Vice-President of the Republic, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. 4. Those who have been convicted by final sentence in a case involving accounts, if their liabilities have not been settled. 5. Military men in active service. 6. Anyone representing the interests of companies or of individual persons operating public services.

7. Ministers of any religion or sect. If at the time of his election, or subsequently, the elected Deputy comes under any of the prohibitions included in this article, his office shall be declared vacant; but if he comes under section 1 he may choose between his employment or the office of Deputy. The election of a Deputy is void if he was an official exercising jurisdiction in the electoral district for which he was a candidate, or if he had exercised jurisdiction within three months prior to the date on which the election was held. The office of Deputy is compatible with the performance of a temporary or special diplomatic mission and with representation of Guatemala in international congresses. Art. 165. Deputies shall hold office for a term of four years. They may not be elected again until after the lapse of one term. Reelection is permitted only once. Congress shall elect its board of officers each year.

CHAPTER II. POWERS OF CONGRESS

Art. 166. It is the duty of Congress:
1. To open and close its sessions. 2. To count the ballots in the election for President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to proclaim as elected by the people the citizen who has obtained an absolute majority of votes. 3. To elect the President and Vice-President of the Republic, by ballot, from the two candidates who have obtained the greatest number of votes in case there was no absolute majority of votes. 4. To receive the oath of office from the President and Vice-President of the Republic and to invest them with their offices. 5. To accept or reject the resignation submitted by the President or Vice-President of the Republic. Congress shall verify the authenticity of the resignation. 6. To grant or refuse permission to the President of the Republic to leave the territory of Central America or to put aside temporarily the duties of his office. 7. To summon and invest the Vice-President with the office of President of the Republic, in the event of absolute or temporary absence of the President. 8. To grant or refuse permission to the Vice-President of the Republic to leave the territory of Central America. 9. To elect those officials who, in accordance with the Constitution or by law, are to be so elected by Congress, to remove them from office after a hearing, to accept or refuse their resignations and to elect the persons to replace them.

10. To withdraw recognition from the President of the Republic if, after his constitutional term has ended, he continues to hold the office. In such a case, the Armed Forces of the country shall automatically become subject to the authority of the President of the Congress. 11. To declare whether or not there are grounds for legal proceedings against the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and all magistrates referred to in Article 242 of this Constitution, Ministers and vice-ministers of State when in charge of their ministries, the secretary general of the President of the Republic and the under-secretary acting in his place, the Attorney General of the nation and congressional Deputies. All decisions in this regard shall be taken by a vote of two thirds of the total number of Deputies. 12. To declare by a vote of two thirds of the total number of Deputies in Congress, the physical or mental incapacity of the President of the Republic to perform his duties. The declaration must be based on a previous report from a committee of five doctors, appointed by the board of directors of the respective association at the request of Congress. Art. 167. Congress or its committees may summon the Ministers or the Attorney General of the nation to be heard while a law is being discussed or a matter is being studied. Art. 168. Congress, or, when not in session, the Standing Committee, has the duty to call without delay for general elections whenever the President of the Republic has not done so by the date indicated in Article 186 of the Constitution. Art. 169. Specific powers of Congress are: 1. To rule upon the credentials issued by the Electoral Council to elected deputies. 2. To accept or reject resignations submitted by its members. 3. To issue regulations governing its own internal functioning. 4. To compel the attendance of absent Deputies and correct the faults or ommissions of those present, under the foregoing rules. 5. To administer and dispose of the funds appropriated in overall items in the budget of the state. 6. To appoint and remove its administrative and technical personnel. Art. 170. It is also the duty of Congress : 1. To enact, amend, and repeal legislation. 2. To approve, not later than December fifteenth of each year, the budget of revenues and expenditures of the state as submitted by the executive or to amend it as a whole. The proposed budget must be submitted to Congress at least sixty days prior to the date on which the fiscal year is to begin. If the new budget has not been approved by the end of a fiscal year, the budget in effect at the time shall continue in force. 3. To levy ordinary and special taxes according to the needs of the state and establish bases for the collection thereof.

4. To approve or disapprove each year, in whole or in part, and based on a report from the Office of Comptroller of Accounts, the detailed account and justification of all receipts and expenditures of the public treasury, presented by the executive for the preceding fiscal year. 5. To decree public honors for outstanding services rendered the nation. In no case may these honors be bestowed on the President or VicePresident of the Republic, during their terms of office, or upon any other official while he is occupying his post. 6. To declare war and approve or disapprove treaties of peace. 7. To decree amnesty for political crimes and related common crimes when the public convenience so requires. 8. To confer or refuse to confer the rank of general in accordance with the provisions of Article 217 of this Constitution. 9. To determine the fineness, weight, type, and denomination of coins and the system of weights and measures. 10. To contract for, convert, and consolidate the public debt. In this regard, Congress shall authorize the executive in each case to negotiate loans within the country or abroad or to put into effect consolidation or conversion operations on previously approved bases. The decree shall indicate the amount of the transaction to be effected, the type and class thereof, its purpose, the maximum rate of interest, and, when pertinent, the repayment premium, the issue price of the bonds, and any other agreed conditions, In order to guarantee payment of all or part of any public debt with the revenue of the nation, it shall be necessary that Congress so decree, specifying what revenue is affected and in what proportion. In order that any of the transactions referred to in this section except for loans shall be considered approved or authorized, a vote of an absolute majority of all the deputies shall be necessary. Matters relating to loans of any kind must be authorized by a two-thirds vote of Congress. 11. To approve or disapprove bills concerning claims against the public treasury for unrecognized credits, submitted to it by the executive organ, and to approve special appropriations for the payment thereof, provided that such credits may not be claimed by way of contentious-administrative or judicial remedy. 12. To decree, at the request of the executive organ, reparations or indemnities in the case of an international claim, when this has not been referred to arbitration or an international court. 13. To approve, prior to their ratification, by a vote of two thirds of all the Deputies in Congress, treaties, conventions, or any other international agreement, whenever : (a) They affect laws in force for which this Constitution requires the same majority of votes; (b) They affect the national domain or establish a partial or complete union of Central America;

(c) They obligate the state financially, in a proportion in excess of one percent of the budget of ordinary revenues, or when the amount of the obligation is undetermined; (d) They constitute an engagement to submit any matter to international judicial or arbitral decision; (e) They contain a general arbitration clause or agreement to submit to international jurisdiction; (f) They refer to the passage of foreign armies through the national territory or to the temporary installation of foreign military bases; (g) They affect or could affect the security of the state or put an end to a state of war. 14. To approve, prior to their ratification, by a vote of an absolute majority of all the Deputies in Congress, treaties, conventions, or any other international agreement, whenever: (a) They affect laws in force, other than those indicated in paragraph (a) of the preceding section; or if they relate to international organizations; and (b) Any others whose approval is requested by the executive. 15. To perform any other functions indicated in the Constitution.

CHAPTER III. THE MAKING AND APPROVAL OF LAWS

Art. 171. The Deputies in Congress, the executive organ acting through the Ministry concerned with the subject matter, the Council of State, and, in matters within their cognizance, the Supreme Court of Justice and the University of San Carlos of Guatemala may initiate laws. Art. 172. No law may be contrary to the provisions of the Constitution. Laws that violate or distort constitutional mandates are ipso jure null and void. Art. 173. After a bill has been introduced and accepted, it shall be brought up for debate at three different meetings, held on different days, and it may not be put to a vote until it is held to have had sufficient discussion in the third meeting. An exception is made of those cases that Congress, by a two-thirds vote of all Deputies in Congress, declares to be national emergencies. In all other situations and proceedings the provisions of the internal regulations shall be followed. Laws classified as constitutional require, for their amendment, a vote of two thirds of the Deputies in Congress, following favorable recommendation by the Council of State. Art. 174. If a bill that is introduced is not accepted by Congress, ten Deputies or the organ or entity that took the initiative in drafting it, may request the President of Congress to refer it to the Council of State for an opinion. The President of Congress must so act without other formality.

If after a bill has been accepted by Congress and the appropriate opinions have been obtained, two months have elapsed without it being discussed or approved or rejected, the same procedure as indicated in the preceding paragraph may be followed. In both cases, the Council of State shall have a period of two months in which to issue an opinion on the bill submitted to it. If the Council issues no opinion by the end of that period, its opinion shall be deemed unfavorable and the bill thereby rejected. If a favorable opinion is issued by the Council of State, on the bill as originally submitted or with amendments introduced, the bill shall be returned to Congress for study by a committee presided over by the President of Congress and composed of three deputies and three members of the Council of State, appointed by the directing officers of each body. If the opinion of the mixed committee is favorable, the bill and any pertinent observations shall be submitted to Congress for discussion and vote. If unfavorable, or if the committee issues no opinion within thirty days, the bill shall be held to be rejected. Art. 175. After a bill is accepted, five Deputies may make a motion that before it is submitted for discussion the opinion of the Council of State should be heard. If Congress approves the motion, the bill is to be submitted to the Council of State. The Council of State shall examine it and return it within a period of not over two months from the date of receipt, with the understanding that if the bill is not returned within that time, it shall be deemed that the Council had no observations to make. Art. 176. After a bill is approved it shall be sent to the executive for sanction and promulgation. Within a period of fifteen days and by agreement with the Council of Ministers, the President of the Republic may return the bill to Congress with such observations as he deems opportune. Congress shall consider the observations made by the executive, after hearing the opinion of the Council of State unless that body has already acted. If the observations are not accepted the bill may be tabled until the following term of sessions, but if Congress ratifies the bill by a twothirds vote of its members, the executive must sanction and promulgate the law within eight days after he receives it. If the executive does not do so, Congress shall order its publication as a law of the Republic. Art. 177. Whenever the executive has not returned a bill at the end of fifteen days from the date of receipt, it shall be held to be sanctioned and must be promulgated as law within the next eight days. In the event that Congress has adjourned before the end of the fifteen-day period in which it could have been returned, the executive must return the bill within the first eight days of the regular meetings of the following session. A law takes effect eight days after its publication in full in the Diario

Oficial (the official journal), unless the law itself extends or decreases that
period.

Art. 178. Executive approval is not required for regulations passed by Congress for its own internal functioning nor of provisions relating to Articles 166 and 169 of this Constitution.
CHAPTER IV. STANDING COMMITTEE

Art. 179. Each year before adjourning, Congress shall appoint eight Deputies to comprise the Standing Committee. The President of the legislative body shall also be a member and shall be chairman thereof, and the Committee shall function during the time that Congress is not in session. Three alternates shall be elected in the same manner. Art. 180. The Standing Committee shall meet whenever it is convoked by its chairman or when it is so decided by a majority of its members. The duties of the Standing Committee are as follows: 1. To deal with matters left pending in the Congress. 2. To call the Congress into special session when required in the national interest and when agreed upon by two thirds of the members of the Committee. 3. To submit a detailed report to Congress on the work carried out by the Committee. 4. To call upon alternate delegates to fill vacancies. 5. Any other duties expressly assigned to it by the Constitution and by the internal regulations of the Congress. The Standing Committee also has the powers assigned to it by clauses 2 and 4 of Article 169 with respect to its members.
TITLE VI EXECUTIVE BRANCH
CHAPTER I. PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

Art. 181. The executive functions are exercised by the President of the Republic, who represents the national unity, is the Head of State, and shall always act together with his Ministers, either assembled in council, or separately, with one or more of them. He co-ordinates the action of the executive branch. Art. 182. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the people, by universal suffrage, by an absolute majority of votes and for a term of four years, which may not be extended.

Art. 183. To be elected President it is necessary:
1. To be a native Guatemalan as defined in Article 5 of this Constitution and never to have adopted a foreign nationality or citizenship. 2. To be more than forty years of age. 3. To be in complete enjoyment of the rights of citizenship. Art. 184. The following may not be elected to the office of President of the Republic: 1. The leader or chiefs of a coup d'etat, armed revolution, or similar movement that alters the order of this Constitution, nor anyone who as a result of such acts assumes leadership of the state, for the term during which the constitutional order was interrupted nor for the following term. 2. The person occupying the office of the President of the Republic when an election to that office is held, or who occupied that office at any time within six months prior to the election. 3. Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity and the second degree of affinity of the President and of the Vice-President of the Republic, if the latter is occupying the presidency, and such relatives of persons referred to in paragraph 1 above. 4. Any person who has been a Minister of State or held a high military command, during any time within the six months prior to the election. 5. Ministers of any religion or sect. Art. 185. A person who at any time has held office as President of the Republic by popular election or who has held such office for more than two years as a replacement of the elected President, may not again hold such office for any reason. The reelection or prolongation of the term of the presidential office by any means is punishable under the law. Any mandate so intended is null and void ipso jure. Art. 186. The President of the Republic shall call for general elections not less than four months prior to the date on which they are to be held. These elections must take place on the first or second Sunday in March of the year in which a presidential term ends. Art. 187. The President-elect shall take office on the first of July following his election, at a formal session of Congress, before which he shall take the following oath: "I swear to perform the office of President of the Republic of Guatemala with loyalty and patriotism, observe and enforce the Constitution and the laws, as well as to maintain the principle of nonreelection for this office. If I do not do so, may the people demand it." Art. 188. In cases of a temporary or absolute impediment of the President of the Republic he shall be replaced by the Vice-President. In the first case, the President shall reassume his office ipso facto, when the reason for the impediment has ended. If the impediment of the President is absolute, the Vice-President shall

occupy the presidency until the end of the Constitutional term; and in the absolute impediment of both men, the term shall be completed by the person designated by an assembly composed of the Congress of the Republic and the Council of State, by a two-thirds vote of the total number of Deputies and Councillors; this assembly shall meet immediately without need of convocation and shall be presided over by the President of Congress or his substitute, following internal regulations. Art. 189. The President of the Republic has the following functions: 1. To provide for the defense and security of the nation and the preservation of public order. 2. To observe and enforce the Constitution and the laws. 3. To exercise command of the Armed Forces of the nation as Commanding General of the Army. 4. To approve, promulgate, execute and enforce execution of the laws; to issue decrees within the powers granted by the Constitution, and issue resolutions, regulations and orders for the strict compliance with the laws without altering their spirit. 5. To dictate such measures as are necessary in the event of a serious emergency or public disaster, and advise Congress thereof at its next session. 6. To participate in the making of laws by presenting bills to Congress through the Ministers of State. 7. To exercise the right of veto with regard to laws enacted by Congress except in those cases in which such enactments do not require executive approval in accordance with the Constitution. 8. To submit to Congress annually during its first session a written report on the general state of the Republic and of affairs of the public administration during the course of the previous year. 9. To render the necessary assistance for strict compliance with and immediate execution of court decisions, acting through the medium of the government agencies concerned and at the request of courts of justice. 10. To submit annually to Congress, not less than sixty days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, through the Ministry of the Treasury, the proposed budget which shall contain a detailed account of the revenues and expenditures of the state. If Congress is not in session, it must meet in special session to act on the proposal. 11. To direct, exclusively, the international policy of the Republic and to conclude, ratify, and denounce international treaties, conventions, or agreements. 12. To submit, for consideration by Congress before ratification, the treaties, conventions or agreements referred to in paragraphs 13 and 14 of Article 170 of this Constitution, as well as contracts and concessions for public services authorized by the executive, following recommendation by the Council of State.

13. To convoke the legislative branch into special session by means of a decree which shall specify the matter or matters that are reasons for the convocation. 14. To appoint and remove the Ministers and vice-ministers of State; the officials and employees of the office of the presidency of the Republic; the directors general; the departmental governors; officials of the decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies, the appointment of whom pertains to him by law; other civilian officials and employees whose appointment or removal is not provided for in some other manner by the Constitution or a law. Military offices and employment are governed by the constitutive law of the army and by other military laws. The appointments and removals of Ministers and vice-ministers are to be authenticated by the secretary general of the presidency or the official acting in his stead. The appointment of this secretary requires no authentication. 15. To appoint and remove diplomatic and consular representatives and officials. Diplomatic representatives and officials, consuls general and career consuls must be Guatemalans as defined in Article 5 of this Constitution. In cases of unification of diplomatic representatives, agreed upon with Central American countries, the appointments shall be made in conformity with the respective treaties or conventions. 16. To receive diplomatic representatives; and to issue and withdraw the exequatur of consular commissions. 17. To administer the public treasury in accordance with the law. 18. To encourage new industries and promote investments in accordance with the law. 19. To authorize the establishment, dissolution and liquidation of banks and credit institutions, in accordance with the law. 20. To exercise, pursuant to law, supervisions and inspection of banks and credit institutions, financial enterprises, and bonding and insurance companies. 21. To safeguard the conservation of the natural resources of the nation and provide for their utilization, transformation, and development, in accordance with the law. 22. To direct, inspect, and develop public education; organize and intensify the literacy campaign; and give preferential attention to the development of agricultural, industrial and technical training. 23. To establish and maintain a directing and co-ordinating institution and the necessary subordinate offices to organize and develop plans and programs designed to achieve effective and practical integration of the Indian population into the national culture. 24. To see to the preservation and improvement of the health of the

inhabitants of the nation, with special attention to sanitation of the country and the campaign against alcoholism. 25. To give special attention to plant and animal health, and adopt effective measures to preserve and increase the flora and fauna within the territory of the Republic. 26. To promote the planning and execution of public works and services in accordance with previously approved development programs. 27. To promote the adequate development of capital and labor, as factors of production. 28. To grant retirement benefits, pensions, and annuities, in accordance with the law. 29. To exonerate taxpayers from fines and surtaxes incurred for failing to pay taxes within the time limits required by law, or for acts or omissions of an administrative nature. 30. To commute the death penalty to the immediately lesser penalty and to grant pardons for political and related common offenses. 31. To confer decorations on Guatemalans and foreigners. 32. To see to the strict compliance with the guiding principles set forth in the Constitution with respect to electoral and political matters and integrity of the suffrage. 33. To establish consultative bodies that may be deemed necessary for a better performance of his duties. 34. To co-ordinate the action of the Ministers of State. Art. 190. The President is responsible for his acts, as prescribed in Article 145 of this Constitution and by the provisions of the Law on Responsibilities.

CHAPTER II. VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

Art. 191. The Vice-President of the Republic shall perform the functions of the President of the Republic in those cases and in the manner established by the Constitution. He shall be elected on the same ballot with the President of the Republic, in the same manner and for the same term. He may not be reelected to the same office nor elected President for the immediately following term. The Vice-President must have the same qualifications as those for the President of the Republic; he shall enjoy the same immunities, and he is immediately below that official in order of rank. Art. 192. The Vice-President of the Republic shall assume office together with the President and shall take the following oath : "I swear to perform the office of Vice-President of the Republic with loyalty and patriotism; to observe and enforce the Constitution and the law. If I do not do so, may the people demand it".

Art. 193. The functions of the Vice-President of the Republic are: 1. To preside over the Council of State, of which he is an ex officio
member. 2. To participate in the discussions of the Council of Ministers. 3. By designation of the President of the Republic. to represent him with all the dignities pertaining to him, in official and protocolary acts. 4. To perform any other duties assigned by the Constitution. Art. 194. In the event of an absolute impediment of the Vice-President, the procedure set forth in the second paragraph of Articel 188 of this Constitution is to be carried out. Art. 195. The Vice-President of the Republic is responsible for his acts in the same manner as is the President.

CHAPTER III. MINISTERS OF STATE

Art. 196. For handling the affairs of the executive branch there shall be the number of Ministries specified by law, with the powers and competence indicated therein. Art. 197. Each Ministry shall be headed by a Minister of State, who shall have the following functions: 1. To exercise jurisdiction over all offices under his Ministry. 2. To appoint and remove the officials and employees in his Ministry, when this power is conferred on him by law. 3. To countersign the decrees, orders, and regulations issued by the President of the Republic, when related to his office, in order that they shall be valid. 4. To submit to the President of the Republic the plan of work for his Ministry and annually, a report of work accomplished. 5. To submit annually to the President of the Republic, within the time required, a draft budget for his ministry. 6. To direct, conduct, conclude, and inspect all business relating to his Ministry. 7. To participate in the discussions of the Council of Ministers and sign the decrees and orders issued by it. 8. To appear before Congress and the Council of State and participate in debates on matters relating to their Ministry, when this is deemed advisable. 9. To see to the strict enforcement of the laws, administrative integrity, and proper expenditure of public funds in matters entrusted to them. Art. 198. The President of the Republic and the Ministers of State, meeting together constitute the Council of Ministers, which discusses matters submitted for its consideration by the President of the Republic, who convokes it and presides over it.

The Ministers are jointly and severally responsible with the President of the Republic for all measures signed together with him. Art. 199. To be a Minister of State it is necessary: 1. To be a Guatemalan as defined in Article 5 of this Constitution. 2. To be in full enjoyment of citizenship rights. 3. To be more than thirty years of age. Art. 200. The following may not be Ministers of State: 1. Relatives of the President or Vice-President of the Republic, or of another Minister of State, within the fourth degree of consanguinity and second degree of affinity. 2. Persons who have been convicted in a case involving accounts and have not settled their liabilities. 3. Contractors on works and enterprises which are financed by funds of the state, its decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous agencies, or of municipalities, their guarantors, and anyone who has claims pending in respect of such matters. 4. Persons who are representing or defending the interests of companies or persons operating public services or plants making alcoholic or fermented beverages. 5. Ministers of any religion or sect. In no case may Ministers act as attorneys in fact for natural or juridical persons nor may they manage the business of individuals in any way. Art. 201. Ministers are required to present to Congress annually during the first ten days of July each year, reports on the activities of their respective fields, which must also contain a budgetary account of their Ministry. Art. 202. Ministers have the obligation to appear before Congress to answer interpellations put to them with regard to any act of government. The Ministers of Defense and of Foreign Affairs may be excused from answering questions on matters that affect the national security or international affairs. The Minister or Ministers to be interpellated shall be advised of the basic questions forty-eight hours in advance. Any Deputy may pose the questions he deems appropriate relating to the matter or matters under interpellation and such questioning may result in a vote of lack of confidence, which must be requested by at least eight Deputies. Art. 203. Whenever Congress issues a vote of lack of confidence in a Minister, the latter shall immediately submit his resignation. The President of the Republic may accept it, but if he considers in the Council of Ministers that the act or acts charged against the Minister are in conformity with public opinion and with the policy of the government, the interpellated Minister may appeal to Congress within eight days following the vote, and if he does not do so he shall be held to have left his post. Ratification of the vote of lack of confidence shall require approval by two thirds of the number of Deputies in Congress. If the vote is ratified, the

resignation is considered accepted and the minister shall leave office immediately. The same procedure is to be followed if a vote of lack of confidence is issued against several Ministers, but the number may not exceed three in each case. Art. 204. In each Ministry there shall be a vice-minister. To be a viceminister the same qualifications are required as to be a Minister. The creation of posts in addition to vice-ministers shall require a favorable opinion of the Council of State. Art. 205. Ministers and vice-ministers of State are responsible for their acts in accordance with the provisions of Article 145 of this Constitution and the provisions of the Law on Responsibilities. Art. 206. The President of the Republic shall have as many secretaries as may be necessary, with powers determined by law. The secretary general of the presidency of the Republic and the private secretary must have the same qualifications as Ministers and shall be entitled to the same privileges and immunities.

CHAPTER IV. COUNCIL OF STATE

Art. 207. The Council of State shall be composed of : 1. The Vice-President of the Republic, who shall preside. 2. Two members for each of the branches of the government, designated respectively by the Congress, the President of the Republic, and the Supreme Court of Justice. 3. One member designated by the presidents of the professional associations recognized by the University of San Carlos of Guatemala. 4. One member appointed by the municipalities of the Republic, chosen in the manner determined by law. 5. One member representing urban workers and one representing farm workers, appointed by the boards of directors of their respective legally registered unions. 6. One member for each of the following four sectors: agriculture, industry, commerce, and private banking, designated by the respective associations. An alternate for each member shall be chosen in the same manner. Art. 208. The persons, entities, and sectors mentioned in the preceding article shall make the appropriate designations not later than July fifteenth of the year in which a presidential term begins, and they must officially notify the President of the Republic of the names selected, including the alternates, so that the corresponding order and credentials may be issued. If the designations are not made within the period indicated, the President of the Republic shall make the appointments before the last day of July, from among persons belonging to the sectors indicated.

Art. 209. The members of the Council of State shall assume office on the first of August of the corresponding year, for a term of four years. The President of the Republic shall receive their oath and install them. No one may be a member of the Council of State for more than two terms, and these must be alternate in all cases. Art. 210. In the event of absence, or temporary or absolute impediment of a member, he shall be replaced by the respective alternate. If the impediment is absolute, the alternate shall complete the term of his principal and a new alternate must be designated. If there is an absolute impediment of both principal and alternate, new designations shall be made to complete the term. During a temporary absence or impediment of the President of the Council, the Council itself shall select a substitute. In the event of an offense, misconduct, or negligence in performing his functions, any member may be removed from office by a vote of two thirds of the members of the Council, with the exception of the Vice-President of the Republic. If a removal is voted, the government branch or entity that made the appointment shall select a substitute. The new member shall finish out the term. Art. 211. To be a member of the Council of State it is necessary: to be over forty years of age, to be of recognized integrity and competence in affairs of state, and to have the same qualifications as those required to be a Minister of State. Members shall have the same privileges and immunities as those of Deputies in Congress. In the case of a previous hearing, the Supreme Court of Justice shall take cognizance. Art. 212. The following may not be members of the Council of State : 1. Officials or employees of the branches of the government; of decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous agencies, or of municipalities. Persons holding teaching positions or professional positions in social welfare establishments are exempted from this prohibition. 2. Relatives of the President or Vice-President of the Republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. 3. Anyone who has been convicted of an offense involving accounts and has not settled his liabilities. 4. Contractors of public works or enterprises financed by state funds, or funds of the decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous agencies, or of municipalities, their guarantors, and anyone having claims pending on such business. 5. Anyone representing or defending the interests of persons or companies operating public services or plants making alcoholic or fermented beverages. 6. Ministers of any religion or sect. Art. 213. The duties of the Council of State are: 1. To render opinions on the negotiation and renegotiation of contracts

for the establishment or creation of public services and the concessions granted for them. 2. To render opinions on bills and other matters submitted to it for study by the government branches. 3. To render opinions on treaties, conventions, and other international agreements that require the approval of Congress, prior to consideration by that body. 4. To render opinions on disputes that arise between decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies, between universities, or between the latter and professional associations, when a solution is not provided for by law. 5. To submit for consideration by the President of the Republic initiatives and solutions which in its opinion should be given to general problems of the country. 6. To accept or reject resignations of its members, except that of the Vice-President of the Republic. 7. Any others specified in the Constitution or in laws. Art. 214. The Council of State shall meet as often as necessary. Its decisions shall be taken by an absolute majority of votes. In the event of a tie, the President shall have two votes. A law shall regulate all matters relating to the organization and functioning of the Council of State, and for its internal management it may adopt its own regulations. The Council shall appoint its administrative staff.
CHAPTER V. THE ARMY

Art. 215. The Army of Guatemala is the institution designed to maintain the independence, sovereignty, and the honor of the nation, the integrity of its territory, and peace within the Republic. It is one and indivisible, essentially nonpolitical and not deliberative; it is composed of land, sea, and air forces; its organization is hierarchical and is based on principles of discipline and obedience. The organizing or functioning of militias other than the army of Guatemala is punishable. Art. 216. The President of the Republic is the commanding General of the Army and he shall issue its orders through the Minister of National Defense. As such he has the powers specified by law, and particularly the following: 1. To decree mobilization and demobilization. 2. To grant promotions from second lieutenant to colonel inclusive, and the equivalent ranks in the Navy; to confer military decorations and honors and grant special pensions. Art. 217. In peacetime, promotions to brigadier general and General

of Division, or their equivalents in the Navy, shall be authorized by Congress, on the proposal of the President of the Republic, to members of the Army of immediately lower rank who meet the requirements specified by the constitutive law of the Army. In time of war, and while armed fighting is in progress, these ranks may be conferred by the President of the Republic. Art. 218. To be an officer in the Army of Guatemala a person must be a native Guatemalan as defined in Article 5 of this Constitution and must not have adopted a foreign nationality at any time. Art. 219. The Army must offer its co-operation in emergencies and in times of public disaster. Art. 220. The Army of Guatemala is governed by its constitutive law and by military laws and regulations.
CHAPTER VI. THE PUBLIC MINISTRY

Art. 221. The functions of the Public Ministry are exercised by the Attorney General of the nation who shall have such auxiliary agents and investigators as are specified by law. The Attorney General shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, by selecting from a panel of three proposed by the Council of State. He must be a lawyer and member of the legal association, with not less than ten years of professional practice or services in the judicial branch and he shall have the same privileges and immunities as the Ministers of State. He may be removed by the President, after a hearing in the Council of State. Art. 222. The principal functions of the Attorney General of the nation are: 1. To represent the state and defend its rights and interests, judicially or extrajudicially. 2. To enforce compliance with the laws, and the execution of sentences, judicial decisions and administrative provisions, in those cases specified by law or when they affect the interests of the state. 3. To intervene on his own initiative, or at the request of the executive in accordance with his instructions, in matters in which the state has an interest, formalizing acts and signing contracts that may be necessary for such purposes. 4. To take such steps as may be necessary for the correct and prompt administration of justice and the investigation of crimes and violations that disturb the social or public order. 5. To assist the courts and the public administration and perform the functions of legal counsel as specified by law. 6. To represent and defend those persons specified by law. 7. Any others specified by law.

CHAPTER VII. FINANCIAL REGIME

Art. 223. The revenues of the state shall be anticipated and expenditures determined in the general budget, which shall be applicable during the year for which it has been approved. It is obligatory that there be but one budget. All revenues of the state constitute one common indivisible fund, to be used exclusively to cover the expenditures of the state. The decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies shall have their special budgets and funds, whenever so provided by law. Any special expenditure must be decreed by Congress as an extension of the general budget and the approval thereof is subject to the same requirements as those specified for the regular budget. Art. 224. The Organic Law of the Budget shall regulate: 1. The preparation and execution of the general budget. 2. The transfer of items within the total appropriation for each branch of the government, branch of the public administration, and the decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies. 3. Economy in management and in the use of any surplus and unexpected revenues. 4. Expenditure of sums for unforeseen expenses, but in no case shall the amount of the appropriated item be exceeded. 5. All technical principles and all measures necessary for efficient conduct of government affairs and for maintaining a balance between, and control over, revenues and expenditures. Art. 225. Every law involving investments and expenditures by the state must indicate the source of the funds intended to cover them.
CHAPTER VIII. OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER OF ACCOUNTS

Art. 226. The Office of Comptroller of Accounts is a technical institution, with decentralized functions, which controls the revenues, expenditures, and financial interests of the branches of the government, the municipalities, and the state decentralized, autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies, as well as of any entity or person that receives funds from the state or collects funds from the public. Its organization, functioning and powers shall be determined by law. Art. 227. The chief of the Office of Comptroller of Accounts shall be elected by Congress and shall hold office for four years; he shall have the powers to appoint and remove officials and employees of the various divisions of the Office and to appoint supervisors in matters within his competence. He may be removed by Congress in those cases and in the manner prescribed by law, and he shall submit an annual report of his

activities to that body. He shall be entitled to the same immunities as those of magistrates of the Court of Appeals. Art. 228. The person holding the position of chief of the Office of Comptroller of Accounts must be a Guatemalan as defined in Article 5 of this Constitution, over thirty-five years of age, and of recognized integrity; he must enjoy full citizenship rights, have been absolved of his liabilities if ever convicted of an offense involving accounts, and must not be connected with the prohibitions established in the Law on Probity. He must also be a member of a university professional association, with not less than five years of practice in his profession, or a person who has specialized in the subject with ten years' experience. The assistant chief, who acts as a replacement when necessary, must meet the same qualifications. Art. 229. The administrative recourses specified by law may be used against decisions rendered by the Office of Comptroller of Accounts; but if fines or penalties have been imposed appeal may be entered before the Court of Second Instance of Accounts.

CHAPTER IX. ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS OF THE REPUBLIC

Art. 230. The territory of the Republic, for administrative purposes, shall be divided into departments and these in turn into municipalities. Nevertheless, Congress may alter the administrative division of the country by establishing a system of provinces, departments and municipalities, or any other system, without diminishing municipal autonomy, if deemed advantageous to the general interests and progress of the nation. Art. 231. Departmental government is entrusted to a governor appointed by the President of the Republic, without prejudice to the provisions of the second paragraph of the preceding article. Art. 232. The capital of the Republic and its zones of influence shall constitute the central district. The government of this district shall be exercised by a municipal corporation headed by a mayor (alcalde), all such officials being elected by the people.
CHAPTER X. MUNICIPAL REGIME

Art. 233. A special autonomous regime for the government of municipalities shall include: the power to dispose of their own resources, the carrying out of their own aims, and administrative supervision of local public services. Art. 234. The government of the municipalities shall be vested in municipal corporations presided over by mayors in accordance with the

law. The mayors and other members of the municipal corporations shall be elected directly by the people, and they may not be reelected, except after the lapse of one term. Art. 235. Municipal autonomy is technical in character and shall tend toward a strengthening of the economy and administrative decentralization. A law shall regulate this principle and shall determine: 1. The scope of the autonomy. 2. The fees, taxes, revenues, and other income. 3. The co-ordination of functions and the mutual co-operation between municipalities and the central government and other public agencies. For the carrying out and enforcement of their ordinances and the provisions thereof, municipalities may organize police corps in accordance with their resources and requirements. This service shall operate under the direct orders of the mayor. Municipal assets, income, and tax revenues are the exclusive property of the municipalities and shall enjoy the same guarantees and privileges as the property of the state. The levying of taxes must be adjusted to the needs of the municipality and shall require the approval of the executive. Art. 236. The law shall classify municipalities into categories in order to fix the scope of their autonomy, according to the demographic characteristics of the municipality, its economic capacity, its political and administrative importance, its cultural development, and other circumstances of interest to the municipality. Municipalities coming within the urban sphere of influence of the capital of the Republic or of any other city may be annexed by agreement between the President of the Republic and Council of Ministers and the municipality in question, after a hearing and the preparation of pertinent technical studies. Art. 237. The executive shall appropriate annually a percentage of the general budget of ordinary revenues of the state which is to be expended, according to technical plans, to meet the needs of the municipalities. This planning shall give preferential attention to the demands made by the municipal corporations. The foregoing provisions should be understood to be without prejudice to local or regional work projects, of general utility, which are undertaken directly by the executive for the welfare and progress of the separate municipalities of the Republic. Art. 238. The executive is empowered to undertake on its account and under its jurisdiction large-scale work projects that cannot be carried out by the municipalities. Such programs are to be authorized by the Council of Ministers, following a hearing with the Council of State and the municipalities concerned. Art. 239. A mayor may not be tried or arrested without a prior decla-

ration of cause by a court of competent jurisdiction, except in case of flagrante delicto. TITLE VII JUDICIAL BRANCH
CHAPTER I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 240. Justice is administered in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the Republic. The authority to judge and to execute judgments rests with the courts of justice. The other agencies of the state must offer the courts of justice any assistance that may be required to carry out their decisions. The judicial function is exercised exclusively by the Supreme Court of Justice and the other courts having ordinary or special jurisdiction. The administration of justice is obligatory, gratuitous, and independent of the other functions of the state. It shall always be open to the public except when morals, the security of the state, or the national interest demand secrecy. Art. 241. Magistrates and judges must be native Guatemalans as defined in Article 5 of this Constitution, of recognized integrity, and in the enjoyment of their citizenship rights. Magistrates and judges must belong to the professional association of lawyers, with the exception of those cases for which the law provides otherwise for specified courts of special jurisdiction and for the lower courts. The judicial function is incompatible with the holding of an office in a political party or labor union or with the status of minister of any religion. Municipal mayors may serve as judges of lower courts in those cases and in the manner prescribed by law. Art. 242. The President of the judiciary, the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the Court of Appeals, of the contentious-administrative courts, of the Court of Second Instance of Accounts, and of the Court of Conflicts of Jurisdiction, as well as their respective alternates, shall be elected by Congress for a term of four years. In case of resignation or an absolute impediment of a magistrate, Congress shall elect his replacement to complete the respective term. The law shall determine the number of magistrates to make up each court, as well as the organization and functioning of the courts, and the procedures to be followed according to the subject matter to be considered. Magistrates may be removed from office only in case of a crime, notorious misconduct, or manifest incapacity, determined by a vote of two

thirds of the members of Congress, following a hearing with the party concerned. Art. 243. The judicial term is to be counted from August first of the year in which the President of the Republic assumes office. Art. 244. Titular magistrates who are reelected after having served two complete successive terms shall be entitled to permanent status until they reach the age of seventy, at which time they must be retired or pensioned with the highest allotment specified in the respective law. Art. 245. No trial shall have more than two instances and a magistrate or judge who has exercised jurisdiction in one of these may not sit in the other instance nor in cassation, for the same matter, under liability of penalty. No court or authority may try a case that has already been terminated, except in those cases and forms of review specified by law. Art. 246. Courts of justice shall always observe the principle that the Constitution prevails over any law or international treaty. In specific cases, in any instance and in cassation, before sentence has been pronounced, the parties may claim unconstitutionality of all or a part of a law and the court must rule on the matter. If the law is declared to be unconstitutional, the sentence shall be limited to a statement that the legal provision does not apply to the case in question and this shall be transmitted to Congress. Art. 247. The regular courts shall hear all controversies involving private law in which the state, a municipality, or any decentralized, autonomous or semiautonomous agency is a party. Art. 248. The Supreme Court of Justice shall prepare the draft budget. of salaries and expenses of the judicial branch and forward it in due course to the Ministry of Finance for inclusion in the general budget that the executive must send to Congress. The national treasury shall inform the judicial treasury each month, sufficiently in advance, of the amount of the twelfth part of the budget pertaining to the judicial branch. The revenues of the judicial treasury from receipts derived from the administration of justice are exclusive and the Supreme Court of Justice has the authority to determine how they shall be spent, in accordance with the law.
CHAPTER II. SUPREME COURT OF JUSTICE

Art. 249. The Supreme Court of Justice shall consist of at least seven magistrates. It may be divided into chambers whenever the administration of justice so requires. The President of the judicial branch is also President of the Supreme Court of Justice and his authority in respect of the administration and discipline of the courts extends throughout the Republic.

In the event of a temporary impediment of the President of the judicial branch or whenever according to law he may not sit or act, he shall be replaced by one of the other magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice in the order of their election. Art. 250. To be elected a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice a person must be over forty years of age and in addition to meeting the requirements set forth in Article 241 of this Constitution, he must have served one full term as a magistrate of the Court of Appeals, of a contentious-administrative court, or of the Court of Second Instance of Accounts, or he must have practiced the profession of lawyer for more than ten years. Art. 251. The Supreme Court of Justice shall make the appointments, removals from office, exchanges, and transfers of judges of first instance, judges of accounts, and of judges of lower courts. It may also transfer magistrates when this is considered desirable. Art. 252. The President of the judicial branch shall appoint the officials and employees thereof; and in accordance with a technical system to be adopted in the regulations that are to be issued by the Supreme Court of Justice, he shall appoint the clerks, officials, and other employees of the courts of the Republic.

CHAPTER III. COURT OF APPEALS AND OTHER COURTS

Art. 253. In order to be elected magistrate of the Court of Appeals, of the Contentious-Administrative Courts, of the Court of Second Instance of Accounts, and of the Court of Conflicts of Jurisdiction, a person must be over thirty-five years of age, and in addition to meeting the requirements set forth in Article 241 of this Constitution, he must have been a judge of first instance for five years or have practiced the profession of lawyer for the same length of time. All titular and alternate magistrates of the Court of Appeals and the other courts referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be elected as a group by Congress. The Supreme Court of Justice shall distribute the positions to constitute each court in the manner most advantageous to the administration of justice. Art. 254. The Court of Appeals shall be formed into as many divisions as the Supreme Court of Justice may determine and it shall also fix their residence and jurisdiction. Art. 255. The Contentious-Administrative Court has the duty of hearing cases involving disputes arising from acts or decisions of the public administration, of municipalities, and of the decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous agencies, in the course of performing regular duties, and also cases involving actions deriving from contracts and concessions of an

administrative nature. The recourse of cassation may be taken against final sentences and rulings on such cases. Art. 256. The judicial function in respect to accounts shall be exercised by the judges of first instance and the Court of Second Instance of Accounts. The recourse of cassation may be taken against final sentences and decisions which terminate a case in matters in which the amount involved exceeds five hundred quetzales. This recourse is inadmissible in procedures taken to enforce financial obligations. Judges of first instance of accounts must have the same qualifications as are required of judges of first instance of ordinary jurisdiction. Art. 257. The Court of Conflicts of Jurisdiction shall be formed according to law and shall meet exclusively: 1. To settle disputes between the Contentious-Administrative Court and the public administration. 2. To settle disputes arising between the Contentious-Administrative Court and courts of ordinary or special jurisdiction. 3. To settle disputes that may arise between the public administration and courts of ordinary or special jurisdiction. Art. 258. The courts of first instance of ordinary or special jurisdiction shall consist of judges who must meet the qualifications set forth in Article 241. Art. 259. The military courts shall try crimes and misdemeanors committed by members of the Army in active service. Their jurisdiction extends to military men not in active service and to civilians only if they act as chiefs or leaders of armed action against the public powers. Their organization, composition, and functioning shall be governed by military laws and supplementarily by ordinary legislation.

CHAPTER IV. COURTS OF AMPARO

Art. 260. The Special Court of Amparo is composed of the president of the first division of the Court of Appeals or in his default by the president of one of the other divisions, in numerical order, and six members of the same divisions, who shall be chosen by lot from among the principals and alternates. The drawing is to be held in the division from which the president is selected. This court takes cognizance of amparo proceedings entered against the Supreme Court of Justice or any of its members, and against Congress and the Council of State for acts and decisions that are not merely legislative. Art. 261. The law shall regulate all matters relating to the organization and functioning of all other courts that must attend to the recourse of

amparo entered in accordance with the principles set forth in the Constitution.
CHAPTER V. COURT OF CONSTITUTIONALITY

Art. 262. The Court of Constitutionality shall be composed of twelve members, as follows: the president and four magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice designated by that body; the other members are to be chosen by lot in one group by the Supreme Court of Justice from among the magistrates of the Court of Appeals and the Contentious-Administrative Court. The President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall preside over the Court of Constitutionality. Art. 263. The Court of Constitutionality shall hear appeals entered against laws or governmental orders of a general nature on the ground that they contain the partial or total defect of being unconstitutional. A measure may be declared unconstitutional only by an affirmative vote of at least eight members of the Court. If the affirmative vote is less, the decision shall be limited to declaring the appeal denied. The Court must render its decision within a maximum period of two months from the date on which the appeal was entered. Art. 264. An appeal on grounds of unconstitutionality may be entered by: 1. The Council of State. 2. The Lawyers' Association, by decision of its general assembly. 3. The Public Ministry, by order of the President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers. This institution shall be a party in every case even if not acting as appellant. 4. Any person or entity affected by the law or government order challenged as unconstitutional, with the assistance of ten practicing lawyers. The Court may order the suspension of the law or government order if it is obviously unconstitutional and susceptible of causing damage that cannot be remedied. The suspension shall be general in effect and shall be published in the Diario Oficial on the day following issuance of the order. For an order of suspension a vote of an absolute majority of all members of the Court of Constitutionality is sufficient. An appropriate constitutional law shall regulate all matters relating to this subject. Art. 265. If the decision declares that a law or government order of a general nature is wholly unconstitutional, the law or order is thereby no longer in effect; and if only partially unconstitutional, that part is thereby without effect. In both cases the effect ceases on the day following publication of the decision in the Diario Oficial.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, if suspension was ordered in conformity with Article 264 of this Constitution, the effects of the decision shall be retroactive to the date on which the suspension was published. No appeal of any kind may be entered against a decision of the Court of Constitutionality. TITLE VIII AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 266. Congress and the Council of State, meeting in assembly, may decree, on its own authority, by a two-thirds vote of the total membership of both bodies, such amendments to the Constitution as may be necessary for Guatemala to become organized as a part of the full or partial union of Central America. Amendments intended to incorporate Belize into the national territory may be adopted in the same manner. For any other constitutional amendment it is essential that Congress by a two-thirds vote of all its members convoke a National Constituent Assembly, indicating the article or articles that are to be amended, except as provided in the following article. Art. 267. Amendment of Articles 14, section 4; 33; 166, section 10; 182, and 185, or any article referring to the principle of non-reelection of the President of the Republic may never be made. Likewise, the effects of these articles may not be suspended nor may their effectiveness or force be lessened in any manner. Art. 268. Congress shall call for elections for the National Constituent Assembly, which must be installed within ninety days following the call. The call shall indicate the article or articles upon which amendment has been agreed. Art. 269. To make up the National Constituent Assembly each election district shall elect two Deputies. Those districts having a population in excess of 200,000 inhabitants shall elect one additional Deputy for each additional 100,000 inhabitants or fraction of over 50,000. Each district shall also elect an alternate. The National Constituent Assembly and Congress may function at the same time. The qualifications required to be a Deputy to the National Constituent Assembly are the same as are required for a Deputy to Congress, and constituent Deputies shall have the same privileges and immunities. Art. 270. When a constitutional amendment has been adopted, the National Constituent Assembly shall dissolve itself immediately after the promulgation of the amendment.

TITLE IX EFFECT OF THE CONSTITUTION
SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 271. All constitutions and constitutional amendments enacted prior to this present Constitution, and any laws and provisions which have had the same effects, are hereby repealed.
TITLE X TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 1. Belize is declared to be a part of the territory of Guatemala. The executive must undertake all steps that would tend to settle its position in accordance with the national interests, and until that time the following standards shall govern: (a) In order to be recognized as native Guatemalans, persons born in Belize must expressly opt for Guatemalan nationality. It is an exclusive power of the executive to grant the recognition in each case. (b) The constitutional and legal provisions relating to the frontiers of the Republic shall be applicable with respect to this territory, as shall customs and immigration laws, save for exceptions made by the executive. Art. 2. Congress must enact the Civil Service Law called for by Article 120 of this Constitution, within not more than two years after the Constitution enters into force. Art. 3. The general elections for President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Deputies to Congress, and members of the municipal corporations for the entire country shall be held on the first Sunday of March, 1966. The National Constituent Assembly shall call for the general elections prior to October thirty-one of the present year. Art. 4. The general election procedure shall be governed by a law that is to be enacted by the government of the Republic subject to the rules thereon contained in this Constitution. For these elections the Electoral Council shall be composed as follows: 1. The director of the Electoral Register, who shall preside. 2. One titular member and one alternate, designated by the legally registered political parties that have met the membership requirement indicated in the Constitution. 3. One titular member and one alternate, designated by the directive

officers of the National Constituent Assembly from among its deputies other than these officers. 4. One titular member and one alternate designated by the present Council of State. Art. 5. The branches of the government and the municipal corporations shall be composed in the manner prescribed by this Constitution; and the qualifications, limitations, impediments, prohibitions, and immunities specified therein shall be applicalbe to the respective candidates. The Supreme Court of Justice shall continue to perform its functions with the present number of magistrates, until it is composed as specified in Article 249 of this Constitution and installed as indicated in Article 8 of this chapter. Art. 6. The National Constituent Assembly shall rule definitively on the validity of the election of Deputies to Congress and instal those elected in office; and the Congress, for this time only, in the transition to the new legal order, shall be installed and begin its sessions on May 5, 1966, and end the term on June 15, 1970. Art. 7. The National Constituent Assembly shall become dissolved when Congress is installed. The latter body shall consider the matter of the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic in accordance with constitutional provisions. Art. 8. The members of the judicial branch and other officials that are to be named by Congress, and also the municipal corporations shall take office, this once, on June 15, 1966. Art. 9. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take office at a formal session of Congress on July 1, 1966. Art. 10. The Fundamental Charter of Government, contained in Decreelaw No. 8, dated April 10, 1963, shall continue in force until May 4, 1966. The legal validity of the decree-laws issued by the government of the Republic, as well as all administrative and governmental acts performed according to law, on or after March 31, 1963, are recognized. The Minister of National Defense shall perform the functions pertaining to the President of the Republic, from the time this Constitution takes effect until the person who has been elected to that position assumes office. Art. 11. This Constitution shall enter into force on May 5, 1966, with the exception of the transitional provisions which go into effect on the day following their publication in the Diario Oficial. Transmit to the executive for its publication and enforcement. Done in the Hall of Sessions of the National Constituent Assembly in Guatemala City, September 15, 1965.

