THE POPULAR REVOLUTIONARY REPUBLIC OF

GUINEA
THE POPULAR REVOLUTIONARY REPUBLIC OF GUINEA Second Constitution Preamble The people of Guinea, by its overwelming vote of September 28, 1958, has rejected colonial domination and, in the process, has reacquired its national independence and constituted itself a free and sovereign State. This State is now denominated: Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea. The history of Guinea attests: a. b. that the Guinean Nation is born of the State; that it is engendered by the action of the popular

masses mobilized in the heart of the Democratic Party of Guinea; c. That it is the Party which has founded the State, and

that this State therefore, must only identify itself with the Party which organizes, directs and controls it, in practically assuming all the functions concerning the Party-State in working for the realization of the People-State. In Guinea, power is exercised by the People through the Democratic Party of Guinea, the sole and exclusive political directing force which integrates all the social strate in application of the principle of Democratic Centralism. The PDG is the Party of the Democratic African Revolution, the creator of the Independence of the People of Guinea, the effective arm of political, economic and social promotion, founded on the action of working masses, the sources of creative energy. It is a Popular Revolutionary Party. The fundamental philosophy of the PDG is the recognition of the pre-eminence and the primacy of the People, the Supreme Arbiter, the source of legitimacy and of the legality of power. The Party is the supreme instrument of the People in the
13


exercise of power and the principal directing force of its action. The PDG considers the fundamental, permanent and universal contradiction between Good and Evil as the legitimate struggle between social classes, as the sole dynamic and historic course of the conquest, the exercise and the development of political, economic and social and cultural power by the People. The PDG leads this struggle on two fundamental fronts: 1. The Front of the domination of nature by the appropriation by the

People of all knowledge and savior-faire through the means of creative work. 2. The Front of the permanent struggle against all regimes and

systems of exploitation of man, through the effective and complete exercise by the People of Power, and of all powers. The mass line is the principal which orients the PDG in the class struggle. On the basis of the mass line, the PDG has pledged a process of radical transformation of the society, of constant and resolute struggle against all (the) forces and against all (the) inclinations of exploitation of man by man. The Guinean Revolution, like all genuine revolutions, is, by its very essence, global and multi-faceted. It goes to the root of things and arms the People throughout its all ideological, cultural and material conquests in order to render it invincible in history. In the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, the class in power is the working People which constitutes the People-class. The PDG, Party of the People-class, (has) for the realization of its objectives a technical instrument: The Popular and Revolutionary State. The State, with all its apparatus and structural, operational, material and immaterial means, is the instrument through which
14


the People-class exercises sovereignty and power, defends itself and constantly develops to satisfy completely all its progressive aspirations. The organization of the Revolutionary Guinean State is obedient to this exigency of thoroughgoing progress towards the objective of the working People (becoming) always more free, always more dignified, always responsible and more capable. Determined to solidify the principle which desires that the DPG proclaims the phase of the Party-State whose conception postulates: 1. That the Democratic State does not administer the People, but

manages (the) public resources; 2. That the Democratic State is the technical instrument of the

People, for the realization of its choices, of its decisions. Since that time [with] all problems having to be analyzed and resolved at the level of the People, at each echelon of its organization, the State loses its character of anti-popular coercion [in order] to become the faithful instrument of the People, (the) regulator of social reality in the service of democratic progress. The Party-State is the fusion, in one sole organic entity, of the Party and the State. (The) Popular Revolutionary Power solidifies (concretizes) the phase of the Party-State. In the course of this phase, the People of Guinea undertake to construct a Nation strong, prosperous and just, a society socialistic, and to pursue indefinitely its evolution towards higher and higher progress in every domain. The realization of fixed objectives necessitates (the) total mobilization and perfect organization of the popular masses and their effective and efficacious large participation in the politics of the State by the exercise of Revolutionary Power at all echelons of the social organization of the country such as defined by the
15


Statutes of the Democratic Party of Guinea.

FIRST TITLE Of Sovereignty First Article. The Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea is directed by the Democratic Party of Guinea, the supreme expression of political authority in the country. Article 2. The DPG as much as the national Party, constitutes the Party-State of Guinea. It consecrates the national reality of the unification of the Party and the State, (the) political-administrative entity resulting from the national popular will. Article 3. The national Emblem is the Red, the Yellow and the Green, arranged vertically in bands of equal size. The National Anthem is: Liberty. The Motto of the Republic is: Work-Justice-Solidarity. Article 4. National sovereignty belongs to the People, who exercise it in all matters and at all echelons (levels), through organizations of the masses called Revolutionary Powers within the cadre of a sole Party: the DPG. Article 5. It is exercised notably over the totality of its earthly space: ground and underground, of its air space and of its territorial waters, over all its natural resources on its continental plateau and within its exclusive economic zone. The land is and remains the inalienable and exclusive property of the People. Because of this, it can be neither sold nor purchased. The development and enjoyment belong solely to strong and moral persons, according to the dispositions of the Law. TITLE II. Of the Fundamental Rights and Duties of Citizens Article 6. All the citizens and residents of the Popular Revolution16


ary Republic of Guinea, without distinction as to race, sex or religion, have the right to (elect) and to be elected according to the conditions prescribed by (the) Law. Article 7. The citizens of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea enjoy freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of procession and of demonstration within the conditions prescribed by (the) Law. Article 8. Freedom of conscience is guaranteed to citizens. Article 9. No one may be arbitrarily detained. Article 10. 'The domicile of the citizens of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea is inviolable. The secrecy of correspondance is guaranteed by (the) Law. Article 11. (The) Citizens of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea have the same right to work, to rest, to social assistance, to instruction and to education. Article 12. The exercise of labor freedoms and of the right to strike is recognized for the worker. Article 13. All acts of racial discrimination, as well as all propaganda of a racist or regional character, are punished by (the) Law. Article 14. The Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea accords the right of asylum to foreign citizens pursued because of their struggle for the defense of a just cause or for their scientific and cultural activity. Article 15. All (the) citizens of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea have the duty to conform to the Constitution and to the Laws of the Republic, to pay their fiscal contributions and to fulfill honesly their civic obligations. Article 16. The Defense of the Fatherland is the sacred duty of every citizen of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea. Treason towards the People and the Fatherland constitutes the greatest crime.
17


Article 17. In the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, the rights and duties of citizens are founded on the principle of solidarity, "One for All, All for One." Article 18. Work is a, sacred duty and an honor for the citizen. Article 19. The citizen has the right to work and the obligation to work according to his capacity. He is rewarded according to the quantity and quality of his work. He must observe rigorously the discipline and the work schedule. Article 20. The citizen has the right to medical care and to social insurance. Handicapped persons or those who have lost the ability to work through disease or illness, aged persons, have the right to assistance. Article 21. The woman, in the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea, enjoys rights equal to those of men in all domains of political, economic, cultural and social life. The immovable assets which a family possesses, even if the title of ownership is in the name of the head of the family, may not be given away without the previous agreement of the adult members of the family. The right of inheritance is recognized for all the spouses and all the children of the citizen. (The) heirs are equal in rights and duties. Article 22. Marriage and the family are encouraged and protected by the Party-State. Article 23. The human being is sacred. The Party-State has the obligation to protect and respect it. Each citizen has the right to the free development of his person within consideration of the democratic and social order. Article 24. The citizen has the right to free education. Education is compulsory.
18


Article 25. Every citizen has the right to bring complaints before the tribunals of the Party-State against any organ of power or against any person from whom he may have suffered injury. Article 26. All the natural resources of the country belong to the People. Article 27. The citizen must use carefully and respect the assets of the collectivity, fight any act of embezzlement and of waste, and take constant care of the safety and the development of the general welfare. Article 28. To manage the property of the collectivity, the PartyState creates (the) Enterprises, Societies and Services which develop their activities according to the interests of the People and the objectives of the National Plan of development. Article 29. Access to responsibilities at the center of the PartyState is open to all citizens who meet the criteria of revolutionary engagement, of competence, of integrity and who live solely on their salary and who do not pursue, either directly or through an intermediary, any lucrative activity. Article 30. The exercise of public responsibilities can not in any case become a source of enrichment nor a means of serving private interests. Article 31. The citizen shall give proof of revolutionary diligence towards all elements hostile to the democratically revolutionary regime established in the country. TITLE III Of Revolutionary Power Article 32. The Revolutionary Power (Power of the People, by the People and for the People), is exercised by the People organized at the seat of the Democratic Party of Guinea, Party-State, on the basis of democratic centralism in the following manner:
19


a) all the members of the organs of Revolutionary Power are elected and their mandate is renewed periodically; b) the popular masses control the activity of organs of the PartyState created for this purpose; c) (the) elected persons have the duty to give account of their actions to their electors and the latter have the right to recall (revoke) them in case they no longer deserve the confidence that has been placed in them; d) the decisions adopted by the higher organs of the Party-State are obligatorily respected by the lower organs; e) the lower organs of the Party-State report on their activities before the higher organs which can annul or change them according to the situation. f) The activity of (the) directing organs of the Party-State is regulated by a system of double subordination: subordination with regard to Instances from which they emanate and subordination to (the) higher organs and to their Instances. g) (The) freedom of discussion, the exercise of criticism and of self-criticism and the subordination of the minority to the majority reigns in all the collegial organs of the Party-State. Article 33. The Revolutionary Power is structured as follows: The Central Revolutionary Power The Regional Revolutionary Power The District Revolutionary Power The Local Revolutionary Power. Article 34. The Revolutionary Powers of the Party-State are exercised at each echelon through a Parliament and an Executive. TITLE IV Of Central Revolutionary Power Article 35. The Central Revolutionary Power is exercised by:
20


A.

The Parliament which includes: The National Congress The Supreme Constitutional Assembly The National Counsel of the Revolution The National Popular Assembly.

B.

The National Executive includes: The Supreme Authority (Responsible) of the Revolution, President of the Republic The Political Bureau The Government. TITLE V Of the National Parliament FIRST CHAPTER Of the National Congress

Article 36. The National Congress is the supreme Instance of the Party-State. It has general authority over all the affairs of the Nation. It defines the broad orientations as well as the general principles of the domestic and foreign policies of the Party-State. It votes on resolutions. It votes on the proposed laws determining the objectives of the Development Plan. It elects the National Political Bureau, the Central Committee and other central organs of the Party-State. CHAPTER II Of the National Council of the Revolution Article 37. The National Council of the Revolution, whose composition and powers are decided by the statutes of the Party, controls the execution of the tasks entrusted to the organizations of the Party-State. Article 38. The National Council of the Revolution votes on resolu21


tions and basic laws for the use of the Popular National Assembly responsible for their legislative formulation. CHAPTER III Article 39. The Central Committee is the Supreme Instance of the Party-State between 2 Sessions of the National Council of the Revolution. CHAPTER IV Of the Popular National Assembly Article 40. The method of election of the members of the National Popular Assembly, the conditions of eligibility and of ineligibility, the length of the mandate as well as the number of deputees are decided by the Law. Article 41. The National Popular Assembly meets (convenes) at the convocation of its President or at the request of 2/3 of its members in order to decide on bills, as well as any other questions which are submitted to it or of which it is seized. Article 42. The National Popular Assembly votes its rules of procedure in setting: 1. 2. The composition and the rules of procedure of the bureau; The number, the method of designation, the composition, the role

and the power of the working Commissions; 3. The organization of the administrative services placed under the

authority of the President of the Legislative Council assisted by a Secretary General; 4. 5. The disciplinary system of the Deputies; In general, all the rules concerning the functioning of the

Assembly within the range of its constitutional power. Article 43. The President of the National Popular Assembly is elected on the recommendation of the Central Committee. TITLE VI
22


Of the National Executive FIRST CHAPTER Of the President of the Republic, Secretary General of the PartyState, Supreme Authority of the Revolution Article 44. The Supreme Direction of the Party-State is assumed by the President of the Republic, Secretary General of the Party-State, Supreme Authority of the Revolution. Article 45. He is elected by direct and secret universal suffrage by an absolute majority of the registered voters. Article 46. He is elected for 7 years. He is re-eligible. To be eligible for the Presidency of the Republic, it is necessary to be of Guinean nationality and to enjoy the full range of civil and political rights. Article 47. The Constitutional Council oversees the legality of the election of the President of the Republic. The composition, the duties and the rules of procedure of the Constitutional Council are set by the Law. Article 48. The President of the Republic assumes office within the week which follows his election. He takes the oath before the Supreme Constitutional Assembly whose composition, prerogatives and rules of procedure are set by law. Article 49. Outside the powers of Supreme Authority of the Revolution contained in the present Constitution, the President of the Republic enjoys the following powers and prerogatives: 1. He incarnates the unity of direction of the Party-State at home

and abroad. 2. He is the guarantee of the Constitution, of the Independence and

of the integrity of the territory. 3. He is the Commander in Chief of all the Popular and Revolutionary

Armed Forces.
23


4. 5. 6.

He is responsible for the National Defense. He appoints the members of the Government and sets their duties. He presides over joint sessions of the central organs of the

Party-State. 7. 8. 9. He disposes the ruling power. He oversees the execution of laws and regulations. He provides, conforming to the law, the needs of the civil and

military services. 10. He disposes the right of pardon, the right of total or partial

release from all punishment, as well as the right to remove the consequences of tions. 11. He can, on any question of national importance, go to the people

all

manner of punishment pronounced by all jurisdic-

by way of a referendum. 12. He appoints and recalls the Ambassadors and the extraordinary

Envoys of the Republic abroad. He receives the credentials and the recalls of foreign Representatives. 13. He concludes (the) international treaties.

He promulgates the Laws. 14. He awards (the) decorations, distinctions and honorary titles.

Article 50. The acts of the Revolutionary Government are signed by the President of the Republic. Article 51. In case of vacancy in the Presidency for whatever reason, the Revolutionary Government continues to function in order to expedite current matters ( .affairs) until the election of a new Chief of State within a maximum (delay) of 45 days, in the course of which presidential elections are organized. Article 52. The responsibility of President of the Republic is incompatible with the exercise of any other lucrative office. Article 53. When an imminent peril threatens the Institutions, the
24


security or the independence of the Nation, the integrity of its territory and when the regular functioning of the popular powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic takes exceptional measures dictated by the circumstances looking towards the restabilizing of the situation. He informs the Nation by message and convenes one of the National Instances of the Party-State. Article 54. The measures taken cease to have affect when there is an end to the circumstances which have generated them. CHAPTER II Of the Political Bureau Article 55. The Political Bureau is the supreme executive organ of the Party-State. It sets the date, the program of the Sessions of Instance of the Party-State and oversees the application of their decisions. Article 56. The Political Bureau assists the President of the Republic, Supreme Authority of the Revolution, in accomplishing his responsibilities. CHAPTER III Of the Government Article 57. The Revolutionary Government, presided over by the President of the Republic, Supreme Authority of the Revolution, is composed of the Prime Minister, Ministers chosen by preference among the members of the Central Committee and the higher Cadres of the PartyState by virtue of their revolutionary commitment, their competence and their integrity. Article 58. The Revolutionary Government takes the general measures necessary for the accomplishment of the general policies of the Party-State, notably those which concern the application of laws and decrees. Article 59. The Revolutionary Government coordinates and directs the activity of the Ministers who compose it.
25


Article 60. Within their respective functions, the members of the Revolutionary Government carry out their responsibilities before the President of the Republic. Article 61. The President of the Republic, Secretary General of the Party-State, Supreme Authority of the Revolution, presides over the Congress, the Political Bureau, the National Council of the Revolution, the Superior Councils of the Central Committee and of the Revolutionary Government. Article 62. The functions (duties) of members of the Revolutionary Government are incompatible with the exercise, in private capacity, of all professional activities. Article 63. The Revolutionary Government is assisted by the central specialized organs, called Superior Councils, responsible for the execution of its resolutions and decisions, whose creation, composition, functions and rules of procedure shall be set by Law. TITLE VII FIRST CHAPTER Of the Relations Between the Parliament and the Executive Article 64. The National Popular Assembly studies and votes upon the bills which it is considering, or which are routinely considered by: The National Congress of the Party The National Council of the Revolution The Central Committee, the Political Bureau and the Revolutionary Government The Supreme Authority of the Revolution, Chief of State, who alone take the initiative on laws. Article 65. The reso lutions issued by the national instances of the Party, placed in the form of propositions for laws, basic laws, or law plans, are studied and adopted as a priority. Article 66. There are in the exclusive domain of the law:
26


The elaboration of the Plan of Development, The civil rights and the fundamental guarantees accorded to citizens for the exercise of public liberties, The nationality, the condition (state) and the capacity of persons, (the) marriage regulations, successions and freedoms. The determination of crimes and derelictions, the penal procedure, amnesty, The labor code and the Public Function, The system of issuing money and credit, The assessment, the rates of interest and the methods of collecting and recovering taxes of all sorts, The electoral system of the Popular National Assembly, the Popular Regional Assemblies, the Popular District Councils and the Local Revolutionary Powers, The general organization of public services and establishments, State offices, societies and enterprises, The regulation of property, real rights and civic obligations. The conditions for giving away property of the State, of the private domain (sector?) and the management of the domain of the State (public domain), The organization and administration of public collectives, their responsibilities and their resources. Article 67. The President of the Republic, Supreme Authority of the Revolution, (can) may take by ordinance, in case of necessity or emergency, measures which are normally in the domain of the law, with the exception of those pertaining to the revision of the Constitution. These ordinances are taken in the Council of Government, and submitted for ratification by the National Popular Assembly at its
27


next session where, for lack of which, they become lapsed and of no effect. Article 68. Matters other than those which are in the domain of the law rise from the regulatory Power of the Revolutionary Government. TITLE VIII Of Local Collectives Article 69. The Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea is composed of Local Collectives which are: 1. 2. 3. The Regional Revolutionary Power The District Revolutionary Power The Local Revolutionary Power or Popular Commune. The Local Collectives are administered by the elected Revolutionary Powers. FIRST CHAPTER Of Regional Revolutionary Power Article 70. The Regional Revolutionary Power includes: a) Instances of decisions which constitute the Parliament responsible for the elaboration and adoption of all legislative texts concerning the Region; b) Executive Organs responsible for putting into operation all policies concerning the management of the regional patrimony and its development. Article 71. The Instances of the RRP are, in the order of their hierarchal importance, the following: 1. The Federal Congress grouping together the executive organs of

the RRP, the DRP and the LRP. 2. The Regional Council of the Revolution (RCR) grouping the execu-

tive organs of the RRP and the delegations of the executive organs of the DRP and the LRP. 3. The Regional Popular Assembly, elected by universal suffrage, whose effect shall be fixed by law.
28


Article 72. The Regional Executive is the Regional Executive Council which includes: 1. 2. 3. The Federal Bureau The Regional Governors The Chiefs of Regional Services

Article 73. The Regional Executive Council holds a mandatory monthly Session and assumes collective responsibility for the correct management of the regional patrimony and the perfect execution of all the decisions of the National and Regional Instances concerning regional development. CHAPTER II Of District Revolutionary Power Article 74. The District Revolutionary Power consists of: a) two Instances of decisions which constitute the Parliament responsible for the elaboration and adoption of all the legislative and regulatory texts concerning the District. b) an Executive responsible for putting into operation all the policies pertaining to the management of the District and its development. Article 75. The Instance of District Revolutionary Power are in order: 1. The Congress of Sections grouping together the executive organs

of the DRP and the LRP. 2. The Conference of Sections grouping the executive Organs of the

DRP and the delegations of the executive organs of the LRP. Article 76. The Executive of the DRP is the District Executive Council. The District Executive Council mandatorily holds two monthly sessions and assumes collective responsibility for the correct management of the patrimony of the District and the perfect execution of all the decisions of the national and regional Instances and of the DRP concerning the development of the District.
29


CHAPTER III Of the Local Revolutionary Power Article 77. The Local Revolutionary Power is the basic Unit of the Democratic Party of Guinea, the Party-State. Article 78. The Local Revolutionary Power consists of: a) an Instance of decisions which constitute the Parliament responsible for the elaboration and adoption of all legislative texts concerning the LRP. b) an Executive responsible for putting into operation all policies affecting the management of the patrimony of the LRP and its development. Article 79. The Instance of decisions of the LRP is the General Assembly which meets weekly in regular Session. The General Assembly exercises the popular power. It constitutes the Congress of the LRP and has general jurisdiction over all the affairs of the LRP. The General Assembly may, at any time, decide to change the composition of the LRP. The President of the Assembly is the Mayor of the LRP. Article 80. The Executive of the LRP is the Bureau of the LRP elected in the General Assembly. Article 81. The Local Revolutionary Power disposes of all the powers, notably political, economic, socio-cultural, administrative, domainal and defense powers. It is responsible for promoting the accelerated development of the Popular Commune: production brigades, management projects for the territory of the LRP, raising the standards of living through work, education and culture. Its principal mission is to assure, through the establishment of better conditions, the construction of an efficient socialist
30


economy, structured and prosperous. TITLE IX Of the Judicial Authority Article 82. Justice is rendered in the name of the People of Guinea. The President of the Republic is the guarantee of the Independence of the judicial authority. It is equitable, humain and free. Article 83. Judges are elected by the instances of the party at all echelons. Article 84. In the exercise of their judicial functions, Judges shall obey only the revolutionary ethic and the law. Article 85. Court hearings are public, except in special cases proscribed by law. Article 86. The right of defense is recognized for the prisoner and the accused. Article 87. The judicial authority, the guardian of individual liberty, guarantees the respect of the rights of citizens within the conditions proscribed by (the) law. Article 88. The judicial organization of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea is set by (the) law. TITLE X Of African Relations Article 89. The Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea may conclude with one or many African States agreements of association or of community involving partial or total abandonment of sovereignty with a view to realizing the United States of Africa. TITLE XI Of International Relations Article 90. Peace Treaties, commercial Treaties, Treaties concerning international organizations, Treaties, Accords, Conventions which in31


volve finances of the State, those which modify arrangements of a legislative nature, which concern the status of persons or which involve the cession, exchange or addition of territory, may only be ratified by (means of) a law. They may only take effect after having been properly ratified and on condition of their application by the other party. TITLE XII Of Constitutional Revision Article 91. The initiative for constitutional revision belongs to the President of the Republic, Supreme Authority of the Revolution. The National Congress or the Supreme Constitutional Assembly, by a majority vote of 2/3 of its members, may adopt or submit for referendum the proposal for constitutional revision. The republican form of the State may not be the subject of any constitutional revision. TITLE XIII Of Transitory Dispositions Article 92. The legislation and regulations in force within the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea remain applicable so long as they shall not have been modified in the ways provided by the present Constitution, unless they shall present a threat to the interests, the sovereignty and the independence of Guinea. Article 93. The present Law is adopted as the Constitution of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea.

32



