CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

GUINEA-BISSAU
by A. AYUK KIMA STEVEN A. HOLT and KENNETH R. RUSH Translation by Henrique José de Moura Moreira de Mota

Issued September 1987

Oceana Publications. Inc.
Dobbs Ferry, New York

c Copyright 1987 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION OF THE

REPUBLIC OF

GUINEA - BISSAU

Approved in May the 16th 1984 by the Popular National Assembly

Edition - ANP

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA-BISSAU

PREFACE

The glorious political armed fight for the national liberation, victoriously organized and directed by the African Party for the Independence of the Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC) will be inscribed in History as one of the most beautiful pages of the african people resistance against the foreign domination. The PAIGC, discharging the most roughs knockdowns against the portuguese colonialism, in the political and military action plan, has affirmed itself as one of the most efficient fighting instruments ever created in Africa for her complete liberation. Expressing in common action the most profound and authentic aspirations of the popular masses, the PAIGC has never interpreted the historical mission he was given , as aiming only the colonial system abolition. Thus, at the same time his heroical warriors were going on destroying the colonial State apparatus in Guinea, through the destruction of the military and economical forces on which it relyed, the PAIGC spread the basis of the future independent State, through a patient activity in the ideological, political, and social-economical areas. This action, developed during 18 years of fight, eleven of which holding weapons, finds its theoretical fundamentation in the genial thought of AMILCAR CABRAL. And, as a result of his clear vision and of a scientific interpretation of our time and of the geopolitical space realities, in which we live in, Cabral led to the Party guidings and action methods clearlydefined and able to carry him to realize the model of society at which our people aspires, one society without expliotation of man from man, definitely free from misery, ignorance, fear and decease. The independence of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, proclaimed in September, the 24th 1973, marks the begining of a new stage in the life of our people. A stage when, after we have declared ourselves as sovereigns before the international community, prioritarial tasks are imposed to us, which performance conditionates the materialization of the aims inscribed in the Major Programm of our Party- The National Unity and Development. Unity and Development that are indispensable to the defense and maintaining of the conquests we have achieved with the supreme sacrifice of the Nationality Founder AMILCAR CABRAL, and of so many other heroes and martyrs of our liberation glorious armed fight.

11

Adopting the present Constitution, which follows faithfully the line of an institutional evolution that has always followed our ideals and options, a line reaffirmed by the fair and revitalizing action of the Reajusting Movement of November the 14th, by the legality, rights and return to the use of the fundamental liberties, the Popular National Assembly of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau reveals the fact that its articulate is imbued with the humanism that has always inspired the PAIGC and that is reflected in the rights and liberties guaranteed here to the citizens, as a reverseless conquest of our fight. The Popular Nacional Assembly congratulates itself also for the circumstance that the present constitutional text is a result of a wide national debate in which the popular masses decisively participated.

Therefore, acting as a faithful interprets of the people's will and in the exercise of its responsabilities as the soveranity top organ, the Popular National Assembly approves and adopts, as fundamental Law and to be in force since May the 16th 1984, the presents Consitution of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.

12

TITLE I FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES About the nature and fundaments of the State

Article 1

- The Guinea-Bissau is a soverain, democratic, laic, unitary, anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist Republic.

Article 2 - 1. The national soverainity of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau lays on the people. 2. The popular masses perform the political power directly and through the organs in the power democratically elected. Article 3 - The Republic of Guinea-Bissau is a State of revolutionary national democracy, based on the national unity and on the effective popular participation in the performance, control and direction of the public activities and which determination is to construct one society free from the exploitation of men from men. Article 4 - 1. In the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC) is the society's and the State's ruling political force. 2. Carring out his historical mission, the PAIGC exerts his role based on the presente Constitution, being his duty, namely: a) to establish the general basis of the political, economical, social, cultural programm of defense and safety, to be accomplished by the State; b) to define the steps for the national reconstruction and establish the ways to achieve it; c) to select the candidates to regional counsellor and deputy. Article 5 - 1. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau proclaims her eternal gratitude to the fighter who, with his volonteer sacrifice, has guaranteed his Home-Land Liberation from the foreign domination, by reconquering the national dignity and our people's right to Freedom, Progress and Peace.

13

2. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau considers her honour and duty: a) to try, by all means, to guarantee a worthy and quiet life to the fighters for Home-Land Freedom who, due to their participation in the fight for liberation have became phisically handicaped, which makes them totaly or partialy incapable of work, and the first creditors of national gratitude; b) to guarantee the education to the orphans of the fighters for Home-Land liberation; c) In the extent of her possibilities, and according to the needs of those who have been considered, to assist parents, children and widows of the Fighters for Home-Land freedom. 3. The Fighter for Home-Land Freedom is the militant who, belonging to the PAIGC, has participated in the fight for liberation since September the 19th 1956 to September the 24th 1973, and the one who, having entered the Party files at the combat front since the last date above mentioned and until April the 24th 1974, revelaled, with his exceptional conduct, to be worthy

of that title.
Article 6 - 1. In the Republic of Guinea-Bissau there is a separation between the State and the religious institutions. 2. The State respects and protects the religious confessions recognized by Law. Those confessions' activity and the cults'exer cise are subjected to the law. Article 7 - The State of Guinea-Bissau, in the view of its unitary structure and national interest, promotes the creation and supports the action of decentralized territorial activities endowed with authonomy by law. Article 8 - 1. The State supports and protects the masses organizations, and the other organizations acknowleged by law, organized arround specific interests that fit and encourage the popular initiative and assure the wide masses participation in the Nation Reconstruction.

14

2. The State, in his action, leans on the masses organizations and on other social organizations to which he can transfer certain activities they may assume. 3. The State creates conditions to the development of the masses organizations and other social ones' material basis and protects their patrimony. Article 9 - The Republic of Guinea-Bissau practices her soverainty: 1. Over all the national territory, which comprises: a) the emersed surface comprised in the national frontiers limits. b) the interior and territorial seas defined by the law, as well as their limits and subsoils. c) the aerial space overlying the geographical spaces referred in a) and b). 2. Over all the natural resources, living and not living, that exist in her territory. Article 10 - In his defined by law exclusive economical zone, the State of Guinea-Bissau exerts exclusive competence concerning the preservation and exploitation of living and not living natural resources. Article 11- 1.The Republic of Guinea-Bissau social and economical organization aim is to promote continuously the people welfare, to end up with the exploitation of man from man and to eliminate all form of submission of the human being to degrading interests, in profit of individuals, groups or classes. 2. To achieve that goal, the State of Guinea-Bissau promotes: a) the independence and national unity defense and strengthening, b) the elimination of colonial domination and exploitation sequels and all forms of behaviour incompatible with the economical, social and cultural progress;

15

c) the development and strengthening of democratic power; d) the edification of an independent national economy and the social and cultural progress; e) the creation of the necessary structures to establish
an economical and social planning system;

f) the creation of the society's technical-material basis and the economy basic sectors control as a ground for social progress; g) the accomplishment of the Agrarian Revolution, having in mind the agricultural production development and as an indispensable condition to make a society free from exploitation; h) the organization of co-operation societies and the incitement to popular production; i) the development of co-operation relationship with other States and peoples. Article 12-1. In the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the following forms of property are recognized: a) the property of the State, all the people's common patrimony; b) the co-operative property which organization is based on the free consent, and incides on agrarian exploitation, consumer goods production, workmanship and other activities determined by law; c) the private property whose incidence falls upon goods different from the State's. 2. The State properties are the soil, the subsoil, the waters, the mineral resources, the main energy sources, the forest abundance, the industrial production basic means, the mass-media, the banks, the insurances, the undercarriage and the fundamental transport means.
Article 13 - 1. The national economy follows the principle guiding and planning.

of

the State

16

2. The State controls the external commerce, holds the monetary system and, particularly, the exclusivity on gold and currency operations. 3. The State can concede the co-operative societies and other individual or colective juridical persons,the exploitation

of State lands, since they serve the general interests and
increases the social wealth. 4. The State can authorize the foreign capital investment, providing it is useful to the country's economical and social development. Article 14 - The State recognizes the right to inheritance, in the terms established by law. Article 15 - The Public Health aim is to promote the population physical and mental welfare, as well as their ballanced insertion in the social-ecological sphere they live in. She must direct to prevention and tend towards the progressive socialization of the medicine and the medical-medicinal sectors. Article 16 - 1. The Education aims to the man's total formation. She must keep strictly linked to productive work, proporcionate the qualifications achievement, knowledge and values that allow the citizen's insertion in the community and contribute to his neverending progress. 2. The State considers the illiteracy extinction as a fundamental task. Article 17-1. It is the State's fundamental imperative to create and promote the favourable conditions to preservate cultural identity,as the support of national conscience and dignity, and as a stimulating factor of society's harmonious development. The State preserves and defends the people's cultural patrimony, which valuation must serve the progress and safeguard of human dignity.

17

2.Conditions will be created so that every citizen has access to culture and be incentivated to participate actively in its creation and divulgation. 3. It is a State's duty to encourage and promote the sports and physical culture practice and diffusion. Article 18-1. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau establishes and develops relationships with other countries, based on the International Right, national independence principles, equalty of the States, non interfering in internal matters and advantages reciprocity, pacific coexistence and non-alignment. 2. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau establishes and defends the right of the peoples to self-determination and independence; supports the people's fight against colonialism, imperialism, racism and all other forms of oppression and exploration; preconizes the international conflicts pacific solution, and participates in the efforts to assure peace and justice in the relationships between States and the settlement of a new international economical order. 3. Without damage of the conquests achieved through the fight for national liberation, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau participates in the efforts of the african States, in the regional or continental basis, towards the concreteness of the African Unity principle. Article 19 - It is a State's fundamental duty to safeguard, by all means, the people's conquests and, particularly, the established national revolutionary democracy. The defense of the Nation must be organized on the active participation and on the popular masses conscious adhesion. Article 20 - 1. The People's Revolutionary Military Forces (FARP), an instrument for the national liberation at the People's service, are the primordial institution for the Nation's defense. It is their duty to defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and to co-operate strictly with the specific national services to guarantee and maintain the internal security and the public order.

18

2. It is the FARP members civical and honour duty to participate actively in the National Reconstruction. Article 21 - 1. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau symbols are the Flag, the Arms and the Hymn. 2. The Flag of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau is formed by three rectangular bands, in red, yellow and green. The bands are identical in shape and size, being the red one on the left side, vertically, and the yellow and the green ones, horizontally, respectively, in the right upper and lower side . The red band is marked with a 5 points black star. 3. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau Arms consist of two palm-leaves arranged in circle, united in the base where a yellow shell is placed, and joint by one ribbon, engraved with the lemma "UNITY FIGHT PROGRESS". On the upper central part there is a black 5 points star. 4. The National Hymn is "This is our beloved Father-Land". Article 22 - The Republic of Guinea-Bissau capital is Bissau.

TITLE II About the rights, liberties, guarantees and Fundamental Duties

Article 23 - 1. All citizens are equal before the Law, have the same rights and are subjected to the same duties, without distinction of race, sex, social, intelectual and cultural level, religious belief or philosophical convictions. Article 24 - Men and women are equal before the Law in all fields of political, economical, social and cultural life. Article 25 - 1. The State acknowledges the constitution of the family and assures her protection. 2. Children are equal before the Law, independently from their progenitors' civil state.

Article 26 - 1. All national citizen, whether he lives in the country or is abroad, has the same rights and is subjected to the same duties of the other citizens, exception made in case of incompatibility with the absence from the country. 2. The citizens that live in a foreign country enjoy the State's care and protection. Article 27 - 1. The foreigners, in the basis of reciprocity, and those who, by any reason, have lost nationality, that live or are, for any reason, in Guinea-Bissau, have the same rights and are subjected to the same duties of the citizens from Guinea, except in what concerns political rights, public functions as well as other rights and duties expressly reserved by law to the national citizens. 2. Public functions are allowed to foreigners only if their character is mainly technical, exception made when there is an agreement or international convention. Article 28 - The rights, liberties, warranties and duties concerning this Constitution don't exclude any others foreseen in the rest of the laws of the Republic. Article 29 - The performance of rights, liberties and fundamental warranties can only be suspended or limited in case of martial law or emergency state, declared in the terms of the law. Article 30 - Every citizen has the right to appeal to jurisdictional services, against the acts that violate their rights acknowledged by the Constitution and by the law, being impossible to deny justice for reasons of insufficient economical means. Article 31 - None of the rights and liberties guaranteed to the citizens can be used against the independence of the Nation,the integrity of the territory, the national unity, the institutions of the Republic and the principles and aims consecrated in the present Constitution.

20

Article 32-1. Every citizen has the right to live and to physical and moral integrity. 2. Every citizen enjoys the inviolability of his person, and can't be arrested or suffer any sanction, but in the cases, forms and warranties foreseen by the law. Every accused or offender has the right to a defense. 3. Nobody can be submited to torture, penalties or cruel, unhuman and degradant treatments. 4. Security measures that deprive liberty for an undefined or unlimited period, are not allowed, exception made to those that are justified by danger caused by a serious psichical anomaly. 5. The penalty system is ruled by the law. Article 33 - Penal law can't be retroactive. Exceptions are made only in cases when retroactivity can benefit the condemn or accused person. Article 34 - The extradiction or the expulsion of a national citizen from the country is not admissible, whatever the case. Article 35 - 1. It is an honour and a supreme duty of the citizen to participate in the defense of independence, sovereignty or territorial integrity of the Nation. 2. Every citizen has the duty to render military service, in the terms of the law. 3. Treason to native land is punishable with the heaviest punishments. 4. The basis of remuneration according to the amount and quality

of work must be applied in compliance with the possibilities
of the national economy.

21

Article 37 - 1. The worker has the right to protection, security and hygiene in work. 2. The worker can only be fired in the terms foreseen by the law. 3. The State will gradually create a system able to guarantee the worker social security in his old age, illness and incapacity for work. Article 39 - The State recognizes the citizen's right for inviolability to his home, correpondence and other means of private communication, except in cases expressly foreseen by the law in matter

of criminal process.
Article 39 - Every citizen has the right to protect his health and the duty to promote and defend it. Article 40 - Childhood, youth and motherhood have the right to the society's and State's protection. Article 41 - 1. Every citizen has the right and duty to education. 2. The State promotes gradually the gratuitousness and equal possibility to all citizens to access to every degree of education. Article 42 - Intelectual, artistic and scientific creation are free since
they don't oppose the promotion and social progress.

The law will protect the author rights. Article 43 - 1. Every citizen has the right and duty to participate in political, economical and cultural life of the country, according to the law. 2. All citizen can present suggestions, protests, claims and petitions to sovereign organs or to any other authorities, in the terms and forms determined by law.

22

Article 44 - The freedom of thought expression, meeting, associationism, manifestation, as well as the freedom of religion choice, are guaranteed in the conditions foreseen by the law. Article 45 - According to the development of the country, the State will progressively create the necessary conditions to complete per formance of the economical and social rights, acknowledged in this title.

TITLE III About the State Power Organs

Article 46 - The Organs in Power that represent the people of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau are the Popular National Assembly and the Regional Counsils. The power of all other State Organs emanate from them. Article 47 - 1. The Regional Counsils' Members are elected by free, universal, equal, direct and secret suffrage. The electors are all national full aged citizens over 18 years old, exception made of inaptitudes established by the law. 2. The Popular National Assembly members are elected by the Regional Counsils, among their members, providing they are native national citizens, in the conditions and forms fixed by law. 3. Only the citizens over 21 years old are eligible to the Regional Councils and to the Popular National Assembly. 4. The electoral system, the eligilibility requirements, the territory divisions into electoral circles, as well as the number of the Regional Councils and Popular National Assembly members are fixed by the Electoral Law.

23

CHAPTER I About the Popular National Assembly

Article 48 - The Popular National Assembly is the State's power supreme organ, She decides the fundamental questions of internal and external State's policy, organizes and controls the application of the political, economical, social, cultural,defense

and security line defined by the PAIGC. Article 49 - 1. The Popular National Assembly members are called deputies. 2. The deputies to the Popular National Assembly are representants of all people and not only of the electoral circles that have elected them. 3. It is the deputies duty to keep a strict contact with their voters and to inform them regularly about their activities. Article 50 - The duration of each legilatura is 5 years and begins with the electoral results announcement. Article 51 - The deputies for the Popular National Assembly swear in the following terms: " I swear I will do everything I can to

fulfill,

with honour and

total loyalty to the People, my deputy charge, defending always and incompromisingly the national interests and the principles and aims of the Constitution of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. Article 52 - The deputy has the right to make interpellations before the State Counsil and the Government members, oraly or written, having the respective answer to be given him in the same session or in the maximum delay of 15 days, written, in case investigations are needed. Article 53 - 1. No deputy can be disturbed, persecuted, arrested, imprisoned, judged or condemn by the votes or opinions he emanates during his deputy charge.

24

2. The red-handed case excepted, to which corresponds one penalty equal or superior to two years of compulsory work, or the Popular National Assembly or State Counsil previous assent excepted, the deputies can't be persecuted or imprisoned because of criminal or disciplinar questions, in discernment or without it. Article 54 - 1. The rights and privileges, as well as the powers and duties

of the deputies are regulated by the

law.

2. The deputy that neglects seriously his duties may be dismissed by the Popular National Assembly. Article 55 - 1. The Popular National Assembly will elect in the first session

of each legislature, her President and
the table.

all other members

of

2. The Table is composed by the President, one first Vice-President, one second Vice-President, one first Secretary and one second Secretary, elected by all the legislature. The Table attributions and competence are regulated by the Assembly Regiment. 3. The Popular National Assembly President charge is incompatible with the Government member's. Article 56 - It is incumbent on the Popular National Assembly: 1. to proceed to the constitutional amendment, in the terms of the articles 999 and subsequents. 2. to elect the Counsil of State and its respective President, for the legislature complete period. 3. to decide about the popular referendum realization. 4. to make laws and vote motions and decisions. 5. to decide about the constitutionality of the laws, laws-by-decrees and all other legislation. 6. to appreciate, modify or annul the legislative diplomas or any measures taken by the Organs of State, contrary to the present Constitution and the laws.

25

7. to approve the general State's Budget Law. 8. to approve the treaties that concern the participation of the Guinea-Bissau in international organizations, the treaties for frienship, peace, defense, frontiers adjustment and any others the Government decides to submit to her approval. 9. to approve the National Development Plan and its respective law. 10. to pronounce about the martial law or emergency state, declared in the terms of the law. 11. to appreciate the State accounts, concerning each economical year. 12. to grant amnesties. 13. to elaborate and approve her regiment. 14. to exercise the rest of the attributions she is committed to by the Constitution and the Law. Article 57 - The Popular National Assembly creates permanent specialized Commissions, according to the matters, and can constitute eventual commissions for specific subjects. Article 58 - The Popular National Assembly holds her meeting once a year, in ordinary sessions. She can also assemble in extraordinary sessions, convened by the State Counsil's initiative, by the Cabinet Counsil or if required by the majority of the deputies. Every detail for its func tioning is regulated by the law.

Article 59 - The PAIGC Political Bureau members and the Government members that are not deputies, may sit and speak in the Assembly plenary meetings.

26

Article 60 - 1. The legislative initiative competes to the deputies, the State Council and the Cabinet Council. 2. The Popular National Assembly decisions take the form of Laws, deliberations and motions. Article 61 - The attributions of the President of the Popular National Assembly are: 1. to preside the Popular National Assembly sessions and watch over the application of its regiment; 2. to convene the Popular National Assembly ordinary sessions; 3. to superintend and coordinate the Popular National Assembly permanent and eventual commissions' work; 4. to assigne and order the publication of the Popular National Assembly laws and deliberations in the Official Bulletin; 5. to guide the Popular National Assembly international relationship; 6. to attend the State Counsil meetings; 7. Every other that he is assigned by the present Constitution

of the Popular National Assembly.

CHAPTER II. About the State Counsil

Article 62 - 1. The State Counsil is the Popular National Assembly organ that, between the legislative sessions, assumes its competence, executes its decisions and accomplishes the functions it is assigned by the present Constitution and by the laws. 2. The State Counsil is responsible before the Popular National Assembly, to whom he renders accounts of his activities.

27

Article 63 - 1. The State Counsil consists of 15 members, elected amongst the deputies by the Popular National Assembly, in the first session of each legislature. 2. Among the State Counsil elected members, the Popular National Assembly elects the State Counsil President. 3. In his first meeting, the State Counsil elects two Vice-Presidents and one Secretary. Article 64 - 1. The attributions of the State Counsil are: a) to defend the Constitution of the Republic; b) to organize the popular referenda, decided by the Popular National Assembly; c) to convene extraordinarily the Popular National Assembly whenever imperious reasons of public interest justify it; d) to

fix fix

the dates for the elections for the Regional Councils and Popular National Assembly;

e) to

the interpretation of the constitutional and or-

dinary laws; f) to declare martial law and emergency state; g) to create and extinguish Ministeries and Secretaries of State, under its President proposal; h) to suspend the Cabinet Council decisions and the Regional Councils deliberations that oppose the Constitution and the laws, or affect other regions interests or national interests, and to submit that question, to approval, to the Popular National Assembly in its first session;
i) to annul the State Committees and other local power or-

gans' decisions and acts that oppose the Constitution, the Laws, Laws-by-Decrees, decrees and any other decisions emited by any organ hierarchically superior to those, or that affect other areas or national interests.

28

j) to ratify and divulge the international treaties and conventions; k) to exempt and commute penalties;
Z) to approve his regulations;

m) All other functions he is assigned by the Constitution, the Laws or the Popular National Assembly. 2. The State Council decisions assume the form of Law-by-decrees, motions, and deliberations.

CHAPTER III About the President

of

the State Counsil

Article 65 - The President of the State Council is the Chief of State, and

of Government, and the Supreme Commander of the People's Revolutionary Military Forces. He represents the Republic of Guinea- Bissau. Article 66 - The President of the State Coulsil is given possession in one Popular National Assembly plenary meeting, by the respective President, swearing in that solemn act: "I swear, by my honour, to defend the National Independence, to dedicate my inteligence and my energies to the service of the people of Guinea-Bissau, fulfilling the duties inherent to the State Counsil President high functions with total
loyalty to the PAIGC aims, the Constitution and the Republic

Laws." Article 67 - The attributions of the President of the State Counsil are those the Popular National Assembly or the present Constitution conferee him, namely: 1. to represent the State and the Government and guide its general politics;

29

2. to send messages to the Popular National Assembly;
3. to direct the State Counsil and the Government activities

and to preside their meetings; 4. to appoint and discharge from commission the Ministers, Secretaries of State and the G.N.B. (Guinea National Bank) Governor; 5. to appoint and exonerate the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Attourney General; 6. to appoint and recall the Ambassadors; 7. to grant honorific titles and the decorations of the State; 8. to give possession to the members of the State; 9. to give possession to the Presidents of the Regions State Committees; 10. to give credit to the foreign Ambassadors; 11. to promulgate the Laws-by-decrees, to sign and order the publishing, in the Official Bulletin, of the decisions of the State Counsil and the Cabinet Counsil Decrees; 12. to exert the rest of the funcions he is assigned to by Law. Article 68-1. In case of being abroad, temporary impediment, disease or death, the President of the State Counsil will be replaced in his State funcions, by the Vice-Presidents of the State Counsil, according to the established hierarchical order. 2. In case of vacancy for the position of President of the State Counsil, the Popular National Assembly will proceed, under proposal of the PAIGC's Central Committee and in the maximum delay of 15 days, to the election of the new President of the State Counsil, whose mandate will end with the legislature in force. 3. The substitute of the President of the State Countil cannot exercise the assignments foreseen in the numbers 4, 5,6 and
10

of the article 67

of the present Constitution.

30

4. The Vice-Presidents can coordinate the governmental areas of activity they may eventually be assigned to by the President

of the State Counsil.

CHAPTER IV
About the Government

Article 69 - 1. The Government is the supreme executive and administrative organ of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. 2. The Government leads the national politics in harmony with the general lines established for his action, by the Popular National Assembly and by the State Counsil. Article 70 - The Government is composed by the State Chief and by the Vice-Presidents of the State Counsil, by the Ministers and Secretaies of State and by the GNB Governor. Article 71 - The Vice-Presidents of the State Counsil, the Ministers, the Secretaries of State and the CNB Governor swear in their entrance into office: "I swear, on my honour, to dedicate my intelligence and my energies to serve the People, accomplishing my functions of Vice-President of the State Counsil (Minister or Secretary of State or GNB Governor) of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau Government, with total loyalty to the PAIGC, the Constitution and the Laws." Article 72 - 1. In the exercise of his functions, it is incumbent on the Government: a) to interpret and apply, in a creative way, the governmental line of action, established by the Popular National Assembly and by the State Counsil;

31

b) to rule the State Administration, coordinating and controling the activity of the Ministrys, of the rest

of the administration central departments, and of the
region and sector State Committees; c) to organize and rule the execution of the political, economical, cultural scientific, social, defense and security activities, inscribed in its programm; d) to propose the Popular National Assembly to annul or to propose the State Counsil to suspend the resolutions adopted by the Regional Counsils or by the rest of the local power organs assemblies, when ilegal or when affecting other communities or the country's interests; e) to prepare the National Development Plan and the Government Estimate, and assure it's execution; f) to regulate it's own organization and functioning; g) to approve the bills and projects of Law-by-decree and submit them to the Popular National Assembly and the State Counsil; h) to negotiate and conclude international pacts and conventions; i) to appoint the civil and military offices; j) whatever more it is assigned to by the Popular National Assembly or by the State Counsil. 2. The competence assigned mentioned in the paragraphs a), b), c), d), f), and g) is accomplished by the Government, when holding the Cabinet Counsil meeting.

Article 73 - 1. The Cabinet Counsil is composed by the Government Chief, who takes the chair, the Vice-Presidents of the State Counsil and the Ministers. 2. Specialized Cabinet Counsils may be created, according to the subjects.

32

3. The Government members are entailed to the resolutions taken in the Cabinet Counsil. Article 74 - The Government, in the Cabinet Counsil meetings, exercises its executive competence through decrees and orders. Article 75 - The Government is politically responsible before the Popular National Assembly and before the State Counsil. Article 76 - The Government members are civilly and criminally responsible, by the acts they legalize and practice.

CHAPTER V About the Local Power Article 77 - The local power organs belong to the unitarian State power. They are based on the popular participation, lean on the local communities initiative and creative capacity and act in a strict co-operation with the masses organizations and on other social ones. Article 78 - 1.For political-administrative purposes, the national territory is divided into regions, and these ones subdivided into sectors. The Law can still establish other subdivisions. 2. The Law can grant one sector the statute of Autonomous Sector dependent, organically and directy, on the Central Administration. Article 79 - 1. In each political-administrative circumscription, the power highest local organ is the Counsil, being the highest executive function assigned to the State Committee

of the respective circumscription.
2. The Law will establish the form for the appointment and duration in Commission for the members of the Counsils that the Law will create in the political-administrative circumscriptions inferior to regions, and determine the rest of the details about the organiza t ion and functioning •

33

3. The composition of each echelon's State Committees is fixed by Law. 4. In each political-administrative circumscription, the administrative services submit to the respective Counsil, State Committee and the organ hierarchically superior in the correspondent administrative branch. Article 80 - 1. The Regional Counsils are elected for 5 years in the form established in the present Constitution and in the Laws. 2. The Counselor may be deprived by the respective Counsil when he seriously neglects his duties. Article 81 - The attributions of the Regional Counsil are: 1. to ennoble the citizens'political and civic conscience; 2. to assure the respect for the public order; 3. to defend the citizens' rights; 4. to improve constantly the citizens' life and work conditions; 5. to

fulfil

prioritarily the regional taks fixed in the Na-

tional Plan and to promote a strict discipline observance for that Plan's execution; 6. to promote, develop and control the political, economical, social and cultural activity of the citizens and their collectivities; 7. to act towards the reinforcement of the country's defense and security capacity; 8. to evaluate the local resources, for the region's economic development and to satisfy more and more the population needs,in what concerns goods and services;

34

9. to support the activities of the services installed in

the region. 10. to create, direct and develop scholarly, cultural, medical, sportive institutions, as well as other public services; 11. every other attributions he is assigned by the Constitution and by the Law. Article 82 - During the fulfilment of its obligations and within the limits established in the Constitution and in the Laws, it is the Regional Counsil incumbence: 1. to perform and make perform the decisions from the State superior departments;
2. to annul, suspend or modify the resolutions and decisions

from the organs subordinated to the State, whenever they infringe the Constitution, the Laws, the Law-by-decrees, the decrees, the rules or the State Superior Organs resolutions, or when they affect other communities' interests or the country's general interests; 3. to create casual commissions for certain questions and permanent commissions organized according to spheres of activity, to help him, as well as to help the State Regional Committee, during their functions; 4. to appoint and deprive the assessor judges from the Regional Popular Court; 5. to approve the Regional Budget, know the regional accounts and take the proper measures; 6. to approve the Region's development yearly programm; 7. to exert the rest
titution.

of

the powers he is vested by the Cons-

35

Article 83 - To the accomplishment

of

their attri bu tions, and within the

limits

established by the Law, the Regional Councils adopt

resolutions that are compulsory to all the institutions, collectivities and citizens of the respective regions.

Article 84 - In his first meeting, the Regional Counsil elects, for all

the legislature, the Table, composed by one President, one Vice-President and one Secretary. Article 85 - The Regional Counsil holds his meetings in regular sessions twice a year. He can also meet extraordinarily when convened on his President own initiative, or under proposal of the State Committee's President. Article 86 - 1. The State Regional Committee is the region's executive organ. It is appointed by the Government. 2. The State Regional Committee composition is fixed Law. Article 87 - The State Regional Committee attributions are: 1. to prepare the Regional Counsil regular and extraordinary sessions; 2. to execute the resolutions adopted by the Regional Counsil, as well as the decisions from the State superior organs; 3. to give support to the Regional Counsil's members activity, as well as of their Commissions; 4. to annul the execution of any decision emanated from the local organs hierarchically inferior, when they violate the Constitution, the Laws or any other measures from the State power superior organs,or when they affect other communities' interests or the country's general interests. the

36

t. to elaborate the regional budget; C. to know, appreciate and adopt the right measures, about the hierarchically inferior organs accounts; 7. to prepare the region development yearly programm; 8. to rule the administrative services and control the local enterprises; 9. to adopt measures to support the activity of the productive units and the activity of the services settled in the region; 10. any other he is vested by the law or by the Regional Counsil resolutions. Article 88 - 1. During the fulfilment of its attributions, and in between the Counsil Sessions, the State Regional Committee takes resolutions and gives out orders. 2. The State Committee resolutions and orders with a general character must be submited to ratification by the Counsil in his first meeting. Article 89 - It is the President of the State Committee own's attributions: 1. to represent the Government in the region; 2. to convene and preside the State Committee meetings; 3. to organize the State Committee activity. Article 90 - 1. The State Committees of the region inferior circumscriptions have the incumbence to make, in the respective territory, the activities of the regional and national programms,and are hierarchically dependent from the State Committees of the echo ion immediately above who guide them and control their activity.

37

CHAPTER VI About the Justice Administration

Article 91 - 1. The Justice serves the accomplishment of the Constitution fundamental aims. 2. The Justice is administrated on the basis of the ample popular participation. 3. The Justice administration is an exclusive incumbence of the courts established by the law. Article 92 - The Supreme Court of Justice is the Republic supreme juridical instance. Its judges are appointed by the President of the State Counsil. Article 93 - 1. It is forbiden the existence of courts exclusively to judge certain kinds of crimes. 2. The following exceptions are made to the previous number: a) The military courts who have the incumbence to judge the crimes essentially military, defined by law and other fraudulent crimes which, for an important reason, are legally comparable to the first ones, by reason of the subject; b) the administrative and fiscal courts and the audit office. Article 94 - Popular courts can be created by law, to acknowledge legal litigations with social character, either civil or penal. Article 95 - 1. The Judge exercises his functions with total loyalty to the fundamental principles and aims of the present Constitution. 2. In the exercise of his functions the Judge is independent and must only obey the law and his conscience.

38

3. The Judge is not responsible for his judgements and decisions. Only in the cases specially foreseen by the law can he he liable to civil, criminal, or disciplinary responsibility, by reason of the exercise of his functions. Article 96 - The law regulates the organization, competence and functioning of the Justice administration organs. Article 97 - 1. The Prosecuting Counsel is the organ of State encharged

of.

near the courts, fiscalizing the legality, representing the public and social interest and is the 'mister for the penal action. 2. The Prosecuting Counsel is organized as an hierarchical structure, under the Attourney General direction. 3. The Attourney is appointed by the President of the State Counsil.

TITLE IV WARRANTY AND AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

CHAPTER I About the fiscalization of the law's constitutionality Article 98 - 1. The courts cannot apply rules to the facts submitted to trial, that ever break what is disposed in the Constitution or the principles she consecrates. 2. The question of inconstitutionality can be officiously raised by the court, by the Prosecuting Counsel or by any one of the contending parties. 3. When the question of inconstitutionality is admitted, the incident goes separalety to the Popular National Assembly, who will decide.

39

4. The decisions taken in matter of inconstitutionality by the Popular National Assembly will have general compulsory force and will be published in the Official Bulletin.

CHAPTER II

About the Constitutional Amendment

Article 99 - 1. The present Constitution can be amended at any moment, by the Popular National Assembly. 2. The initiative to amend the Constitution belongs to the deputies, the State Counsil and the Government. Article 100 - 1. The proposal for amendment will indicate the articles that must be amended and the sense of the changes to be introduced. 2. The law proposition for amendment must be submitted by, at least, one third of the deputies in commission, by the State Counsil or by the Government. Article 101 - The amendment proposals will have to be approved by the majority

of two thirds of the Assembly deputies.
Article 102 - No amendment project can affect: a) the unitarian structure and the State's republican form; b) the State's laic Statut; c) the national territory integrity.

Approved in May the 16th 1984 Promulgated in May the 16th 1984 The President of the Popular National Assembly, Carmen Pereira

40

