CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

HAITI
by GISBERT H. FLANZ and PATRICIA K. LANE

Issued November 1984

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1984 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF HAITI PREAMBLE THE HAITIAN PEOPLE PROCLAIM THE PRESENT CONSTITUTION IN ORDER TO: Consecrate their sovereignty and (to) reaffirm with conviction and solemnity the rights and liberties of man and citizen; - Assure and deepen the equality, justice, order, internal peace, security, respect for authority and public power, (the) defense of the unity of the Nation, as well as the stability of its institutions, (the) political and economic development and social and cultural progress; - Organize a public administration which conforms to the missions of regional and national development of the State; - Guarantee to the woman her eminent dignity as a human person; - Reaffirm the fidelity to the international norms which guarantee peace and cooperation among nations; - Protect the rights and reciprocal interests of employed and employers; - Furnish to the individual and the family the necessary conditions for their development; - Guarantee to all social categories the right to education, to professional training and to culture; - Assure to all citizens equal access to public offices and services; - Reaffirm the solidarity and equality of all citizens, residents or expatriates, in the responsibilities of taxation and cataclysms which may strike the Nation; - Constitute an integrated Haitian Nation, socially just, economically free, politically independent in the practice of a social democracy adapted to its customs and traditions. TITLE I THE TERRITORY OF THE REPUBLIC Article 1. - Haiti is an indivisible, sovereign, independent, democratic and social republic. Port-au-Prince, the capital, is the seat of its government. This seat may be moved elsewhere in case of force majeure.

43

Article 2. - The territory of the Republic is inviolable and cannot be alienated, either temporarily Or definitely, either in its entirety or in part, by any treaty or convention. Article 3. - The limits of the Republic of Haiti are those established (consacrées) by international law. The territory of the Republic comprises: 1. - The part of the island bordered on the East by the Dominican Republic in conformity with the treaties pertaining to it; 2. - The islands within the limits established by International Public Law, of which the principal ones are: La Tortue, la Gonave, l'Isles 1 Vaches, les Caymittes la Navase and la Grande Caye; 3. - The airspace up to the height established by International Public Law; 4. - The territorial sea and the continental shelf, as limited by the law and international conventions. The territory of the Republic is divided into nine departments. Each department is subdivided into arrondissements and each arrondissement (is subdivided) into communes and each commune into wards (quartiers) and rural sections. The law determines the juridical nature, the number, the boundaries, the organization and the functioning of these divisions and subdivisions. Article 4. - The departments can be regrouped into administrative regions and serve as districts for planning and regional development action. The law shall determine the mode and conditions of the creation of regions which could have the juridical status of territorial collectivities. Likewise, the communes of the same department can associate themselves for purposes determined by their competence. Article 5. - The commune is a territorial collectivity which is authorized to administer itself in an autonomous fashion through councils elected by universal suffrage. The law establishes the conditions and limits of the autonomy of the communes as well as their organization, their resources, their responsibilities and the mode of (the) election of communal councils. Article 6. - All other territorial collectivities other than the commune can only be established by the law. Article 7. - At the direction of each, department an agent of the central government is nominated with the title of Prefect. At the head of each arrondissement is a subprefect, who is (placed) under the authority of the Prefect of the department. The status of the prefects and (the) subprefects, the coordination and the control by the prefect of the decentralized services are determined by the law. Article 8. - The Prefect is, in the department, the first holder (de'positeur) of the authority of the State. He is the representative of the Head of the Executive Power. The Prefect may delegate power in accordance with the conditions and modes provided by the law.

44

TITLE II THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF HAITIANS AND ALIENS CHAPTER I HAITIAN NATIONALITY Article 9. - Nationality is a juridical bond which unites individuals or societies, companies or groups of individuals with the State. Article 10. - The Haitian nationality of individuals may be by birth or acquired. Article 11. - Haitians by birth are: 1) 2) 3) Any individual born in Haiti of a Haitian father or a Haitian mother; Any individual born abroad of a Haitian father and a Haitian mother; Any individual born in Haiti of a foreign father or, if not recognized by the father, of a foreign mother, provided that he descends from the black race.

The quality of acquiring Haitian nationality by birth cannot be removed by the ulterior recognition of the foreign father. Article 12. - The rules pertaining to the Haitian nationality of individuals acquired by naturalization or by special favor are determined by the law. The same applies to the nationality of (personnes morales) societies or companies. CHAPTER II ALIENS Article 13. - The conditions of admission and stay of aliens are established by law. Article 14. - Aliens who are on the territory of the Republic enjoy (beneficient) the same protection as that accorded to Haitians. They enjoy the civil, economic and social rights subject to the legal provisions concerning the right to ownership of real estate and to the exercise of the liberal professions. Article 15. - Any alien, after five (5) years of continuous legal residence on the territory of the Republic, may acquire Haitian nationality by naturalization by conforming to the regulations established by the law. Haitians by naturalization are allowed to exercise their political rights ten (10) years after the date of their naturalization.

45

Article 16. - The quality of Haitian by naturalization is lost in all cases provided by law and particularly by at least three (3) years of continuous residence outside the Haitian territory withput duly granted authorization. Whoever loses Haitian nationality in this way may not recover it. Article 17. - A Haitian by origin, who Was naturalized in a foreign country may recover Haitian nationality by conforming to the legal rules (prescriptions). Article 18. - Double nationality may be recognized by bilateral or multilateral convention without presumption to the exercise of the political rights which are reserved to Haitians who have never opted for another nationality. Article 19. - A foreigner may be expelled from the territory of the Republic, if he is judged undesirable and if he interferes directly in the political life of the State. CHAPTER III CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS Article 20. - The union (reunion) of civil and political rights confers the quality of citizenship. The exercise, enjoyment, suspension and (the) loss of civil and political rights are regulated by the law. Article 21. - All Haitians of one or the other sex, who have attained the age of more than eighteen (18), (may) exercise their civil and political rights, if they meet (réunissent) the other conditions prescribed by the Constitution and the Law. CHAPTER IV FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS Article 22. - Haitians are equal before the law, subject to the advantages conferred upon native Haitians who have never renounced their nationality. Article 23. - The powers of the State are instituted to protect the life, the honor and the property of all the persons living in the territory of the Republic and to assure the accomplishments of the missions of the State. Article 24. - Individual liberty is guaranteed and protected by the State. No one may be prosecuted, arrested or detained except in the cases determined by the law and in the forms which it prescribes. Arrest and detention may only take place with a written mandate by the legally competent authority. In order for the mandate to be executed it is necessary: 1) that it states formally the reason for the detention and the legal provision which punishes the alleged fact:(fait imputé); that a copy be given at the moment of the execution (of the order) to the accused person (personne inculpée except in case of flagrant offense.

2)

46

Article 25. - No one may be kept in detention unless he has appeared within the forty eight (48) hours following his arrest, before a judge (who is) called upon to rule on the legality of the arrest and who has confirmed the detention based on specific reasons. Article 26. No one may be diverted from the judges who are assigned to him by the Constitution and by the law. A civilian may not be judged by a military court nor may a military person be diverted from a tribunal of civil law in a civil law matter (matiere de droit commun), except in case of a legally declared state of siege. In the case ofa petty offense, the accused is referred to the justice of the peace who rules de f initively. In the case of a misdemeanor or a crime, the accused may, without previous permission and by a simple statement, appeal to the Chief Judge of the civil court who is empowered to rule on the legality of the arrest and detention pursuant to the oral conclusions of the governmental commissioner without delay or waiting for his turn, all other business being put aside. If the arrest is judged illegal, the judge will order the immediate release of the detained and this decision is enforceable on the spot notwithstanding appeal or petition to the highest court of appeal. Article 27. - No search of a domicile and no seizure of papers can occur without the power of the law and within the procedures it prescribes. Article 28. - All violations of the provisions regarding individual liberty as mandated by articles 24, 25, 26, 27 supra are arbitrary actions. The injured parties may, without previous authorization, appeal to the competent tribunals (courts) to prosecute the authors and executors of all arbitrary actions, whatever their capacity may be and regardless of whatever organization they may belong to. Article 29. - The law may not be applied retroactively, except in penal matters when favorable to the accused. Article 30. - No sentence may be established other than by the law, nor applied in cases other than determined by law. Article 31. - No one can be forced to testify against oneself or against one's parents, up to the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of alliance, be it criminal, correctional or simple police matters. Article 32. - The right to private property, acquired justly and in accordance with civil law, by physical or moral persons whose rights cannot be injuried (contravened) by subsequent laws, is guaranteed. Nevertheless, when the application of a law enacted for the public use or in the social interest conflicts with individuals' ri g hts and (the) needs recognized by law, the public or social interest supersedes the private interest. Article 33. - Land ownership does not extend to springs, rivers or other streams, to mines, quarries and other subsoil resources which are part of the public domain of the State. The law defines the depth of measurement of land ownership and determines prospection and working claims of mines, minerals, quarries and other resources of the subsoil securing, however, a just and equitable compensation for the owner.

47

Article 34. - The State benefits from the right of pre-emption in all land transactions. The conditions of the exercise of this right are determined by the law. Article 35. - The right of expropriation for reason of public use is recognized to the State. Yet this right may not be exercised without payment or consignment to the order of whom it may concern according to the law. The appeal against expropriation measures and prejudices or damages caused to the property of another by State officials rests with the judicial administration. Article 36. - Scientific, literary and artistic property, considered as transferable and negotiable property, is protected within the conditions defined by the law. Article 37. - The freedom to work is recognized to all individuals or companies and is regulated by law. Nevertheless, all importers, forwarding agents and manufacturers' representatives are prohibited from engaging in the retail trade, even through an intermediary. Article 38. - Every worker shall be entitled to a fair wage, job training, health protection, social security and the welfare of his family insofar as his country and his region's economic development permit. Every worker has the right to participate, through his delegates, in the determination of collective working conditions. Every worker has the right to defend his interests through trade union activities. Each worker can belong to the trade union representing his professional activity. He cannot be obligated to join a trade union. Every worker has the right to rest and leisure time. Annual paid vacations and bonuses are compulsory. Article 39. - Capital punishment may not be imposed for any political matter, except treason. The crime of treason consists in taking up arms against the Republic, joining avowed enemies of Haiti, and giving them support and assistance. Article 40. - Everyone has the right to express his opinion on any matter and by every means within his power. The expression of thought, whatever form it takes, cannot be subjected to prior censorship, except when war has been declared. Abuses of the right to freedom of expression (speech) are defined and punished by law. Article 41. - All religious and religious services are free. Any person has the right to profess his religion and practice his faith as long as the exercise of this right does not disturb the public order. No one can be compelled to belong to a religious association or to follow religious teachings contrary to his convictions. The law establishes the conditions by which religious and religious services are recognized and function.

48

Article 42. - Haitians have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms by conforming to the laws that regulate the exercise of this right and without needing prior authorization. This provision does not apply to public gatherings which are entirely subject to police regulations. Article 43. - Haitians have the right of association, of forming political parties, labor unions and cooperatives. This right may not be subject to any preventive measure. No one can be compelled to join an association or a political party. The law regulates the conditions for the functioning of those groups and favors their formation. Article 44. - The right of petition is recognized. It is to be exercised personally, by one or more individuals, never on behalf of a group. Any petition addressed to the legislative body must give rise to the regularity procedure making it possible to rule on the subject of the petition. Article 45. - The privacy of correspondence is inviolable. Nevertheless, private letters and documents can be intercepted by the authorities, by means of a judicial order, with the sole objective of searching for legal proof. For tax purposes and in cases of intervention by the State, the authorities can demand the presentation of accounting records and other related documents.

of

Article 46. - The State encourages marriage in order to improve the organization the family, which is the fundamental basis of society. The law regulates marriage while taking into account the full equality of the spouses. Article 47. - The right of asylum is accorded to political refugees, provided they conform to the laws of the country. Extradition in political matters is not admissible. Article 48. - No one shall be treated in a discriminatory fashion by civil servants or public authorities. Discrimination shall be understood as the accordance of a different and inferior treatment to an individual or a group of individuals due to social rank, color, race, sex, religion or political opinion. The provisions of the present article have no bearing on the conditions and qualifications required in order to exercise public offices and functions. Article 49. - Freedom of education is to be exercised in accordance with the law, under the control of the State which must see to the moral and civic training of the young. Public education is the responsibility of the State and the communes. Primary education is compulsory.

49

Technical and vocational training must be generalized. Access to higher education must be available to all, on an equal basis, and uniquely on the basis of merit. Article 50. - In the cases determined by law, a jury shall be used in criminal trials and for political offenses committed through the press or by some other means. Article 51. - The law cannot add to nor deviate from the Constitution. The letter of the Constitution must always prevail.
CHAPTER V

DUTIES Article 52. - All Haitian citizens are bound to civic duties which are the aggregate of moral, political, social and economic obligations toward the State and the Nation (fatherland). Article 53. - For the citizen, voting is not only a right but also a civic obligation.

Article 54. - All individuals living on the territory of the Republic must obey the laws and respect the established Public Powers (authorities). Article 55. - Every citizen must defend and serve the Nation (fatherland) and contribute to public spending according to his ability. Article 56. - Private property is a social function which entails obligations. Its use must be in the general interest. The landowner has an obligation to the collectivity (community) to cultivate, work and protect his land, particularly against erosion. Article 57. - The sanction for obligations for which Haitians and aliens living 7)T-1-The territory of the Republic are responsible is provided for by law.

TITLE III NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY CHAPTER I THE EXERCISE OF NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY Article 58. - National Sovereignty is vested in all the citizens. The people exercise the prerogatives of sovereignty directly by: 1) 2) 3) the election of the President of the Republic; the election of the members of the Legislature; the election of territorial councillors;

50

4)

the opinion which they express, by referendum, on all matters of national interest when they are consulted by the President of the Republic; the election of the administrative councils of the rural areas.

5)

Article 59. - The people delegate the exercise of national sovereignty to three powers. The Executive, the Legislative and the Judicial branches constitute the essential foundation of the organization of the State, which is civil, democratic, social and representative. Article 60. - Each power of the State is independent of the other two and performs separately the responsibilities (functions) pertaining to the exercise of its duties. Article 61. - The national colors, black and red, lie vertically, as prescribed by the Constitution of 1805. The coat of arms is the palmetto adorned with a trophy bearing the inscription "UNITY IS STRENGTH." The national motto is: "LIBERTY, EQUALITY, FRATERNITY." The national anthem is: "LA DESSALINIENNE."

Article 62. - The national languages are French and Creole. French shall be the official language of the Republic of Haiti. CHAPTER II LEGISLATIVE POWERS Article 63. - The legislative power is exercised by one assembly called the Legislature. The deputies of the legislature join together into the National Assembly to execute the duties and powers of the legislative power as provided for in the present Constitution. The seat of the legislature is that of the government. Article 64. - The number of members of the legislature is determined by law; but in no case can this number be less than fifty-nine (59) deputies. Article 65. - The deputies are elected for six (6) years by a majority of the votes cast by the electoral assemblies under the conditions and manners (methods) prescribed by the electoral law. Article 66. - In the event of the death, resignation, judicial interdiction, dismissal or acceptance of another office incompatible with that of a member of the legislature, the replacement of such deputy for the remainder of his term shall be done by partial elections within the conditions prescribed by law. Before accepting a resignation, however, the legislature may conduct any kind of investigation on the circumstances surrounding this resignation.

51

In the case of partial elections, these must take place within thirty (30) days of the convening of the electoral assemblies. This is also the procedure in case of invalid elections (nullité des elections) in one or more electoral districts. Article 67. - If the vacancy occurs during or after the last regular session of the legislature, no by-elections will be held. SECTION I CONDITIONS OF ELIGIBILITY AND OF INCOMPATIBLE OFFICES Article 68. - To be elected deputy, one must: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) Be Haitian by birth and never have renounced one's citizenship; Be over eighteen (18) years of age; Have resided at least five (5) years in the district to be represented; Enjoy civil and political rights; Own a building, exercise a profession or have an industry in the said district.

Article 69. - The following persons cannot be members of the legislature: 1) Concessionnaires or co-contractors of the State for the working of public services; Representatives or agents of individuals, companies or firms that are State grantees or co-contractors. Military personnel, be they in active service or prior to the lapse of two (2) years after the end of their tour of duty by resignation, dismissal or any other manner; Prefects, judges, and public prosecutors during the two (2) months following the end of their duties by resignation, dismissal or any other manner; Any other person in situations (circumstances) provided for by the present Constitution.

2)

3)

4)

5)

Article 70. - The members of the Executive branch and the agents of public offices can be elected to the post of deputy, but, except for educators, they will not be able to sit as deputies as long as they have not resigned from their offices. Article 71. - There is no compatibility between the responsibilities of a deputy and those of members of territorial collectivities.

52

SECTION II FUNCTIONS OF THE LEGISLATURE Article 72. - The functions (duties) of the legislature are: 1) 2) 3) To select in its midst the President and the members of his cabinet; To verify and validate the powers of its members to be the final judge in disputes arising in this connection; To enact laws, be they of its own initiative or at the initiative of the Executive branch. The Executive branch alone may take the initiative for laws concerning financial matters; To insure respect for the Constitution and the law; To adopt internal by-laws pertaining to the organization of the questorship, the appointment of personnel, discipline and the establishment of procedures to exercise its powers; To impose disciplinary penalties on its members including, in case of need, that of dismissal; To interpret the laws by means of legal power. The interpretation is given in the form of a law which cannot have a retroactive effect by taking away the rights previously acquired through judgment. To annually vote on the law pertaining to the national budget; To authorize grants, upon the initiative of the Executive branch and for a specified amount of time, for the establishment of companies, new industries, and services in the national interest as well as for the exploitation of raw materials; To investigate matters presented to it within the limits of its responsibilities; To summon one or more ministers or all the ministers of the government.

4) 5)

6)

7)

8) 9)

10) 11)

SECTION III THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 73. - The members of the Legislature meet as a National Assembly in order to: 1) Open and close each session; 2) Give preliminary approval to the decisions of the Head of the Executive Branch in matters pertaining to the declaration of war and to the negotiation of peace; Revise, in sum or in part, the Constitution in effect or vote on a new Constitution;

3)

53

4) 5)

Approve treaties, conventions and international accords; Act as a high court of justice under the conditions and in the manner prescribed by the present Constitution.

SECTION IV THE CONDITIONS AND METHODS OF THE EXERCISE OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER Article 74. - The elected deputies shall enter upon the performance of their duties the second Monday in April following the elections, except if they are elected to fill a vacancy. In this case, they shall take office upon their election and shall serve only for the remainder of the unexpired term. Article 75. - At the time of taking office, the deputies must pledge the following individually: "I swear to carry out my duties with patriotism, to maintain and safeguard the right of the people and to remain faithful (loyal) to the Constitution." Article 76. - The legislature shall meet without contestation in regular session each year, beginning the second Monday in April for a period of three (3) months. The session begins upon the first meeting of the deputies as the National Assembly. If necessary, the regular session can be prolonged by one or two months by the legislature or upon written request from the Head of the Executive branch. Article 77. - The President of the Republic can adjourn by decree, a session of the legislature for a minimum of fifteen (15) to a maximum of thirty (30) days. There cannot be more than two adjournments during the same session. In no case can the length of adjournment be cut off from the constitutional duration of the session. Article 78. - In case of emergency, the President of the Republic can convene the legislature by decree in the interval between sessions. In this case, the legislature cannot take up any matter not pertinent to the reasons for convoking the session. Any member, however, may address the Assembly on matters of public interest. Article 79. - In case of serious conflict between the legislature and executive branches, the President of the Republic has the power to dissolve the legislature. The dissolution decree will order at the same time that new elections be held within at most six (6) months from the published date of the said decree. During the vacancy of the legislature produced by the dissolution decree, the President of the Republic will see to the need f public services by resolutions and decrees taken with the cabinet. Nevertheless, the President of the Republic will only be able to use the right of dissolution after having resorted to or after no longer being able to resort to the option of adjournment.

54

Article 80. - The sessions of the legislature and of the National Assembly are public. They can be conducted in camera, however, upon the request of at least five (5) members. The deputies will decide subsequently by absolute majority whether the session should be resumed in public. Article 81. - The legislaturecannot deliberate or take decisions without the presence of the absolute majority of its members. Two-thirds of the members of the legislature are necessary for the National Assembly to deliberate and take decisions. Article 82. - All acts of the legislature and of the National Assembly shall be adopted by the absolute majority of the members present, except in cases where the Constitution requires a particular majority. Article 83. - The procedure for the final adoption of bills presented to the legislature is as follows: 1) 2) 3) Discussion and vote on the principle of the bill; Discussion and vote on each endorsement, each preamble and each article; Discussion and vote on the totality of the bill.

A bill can only be enacted into law after it has been voted on in its entirety. A bill may be withdrawn from consideration as long as it has not been definitely voted upon. Article 84. - The legislature has the right to amend and ratify the articles, to reverse the order of titles, chapters or sections during deliberations each time this appears logical and necessary. Article 85. - Any law passed by the legislature is immediately transmitted to the President of the Republic who, prior to promulgating it, has the right to object to it, in whole or in part. In this case, he sends back the said law to the legislature with his objections. The legislature is given eight (8) days to adjudicate the objections. Article 86. - The law, after being amended by the legislature, is returned to the President of the Republic to be promulgated. If the objections are rejected, the law is returned in its original state to the President of the Republic who is obligated to promulgate it. Article 87. - The rejection of the objections is voted on unanimously by the members of the legislature. If unanimity cannot be obtained, the objections are accepted. Article 88. - The right of objection must be exercised within fifteen (15) days from the date of the receipt of the law by the President of the Republic, excluding Sundays, national or legal holidays, days off, and recesses of the legislature pursuant to Article 77 of the present Constitution.

55

Article 89. - If, within the said time limit, the President of the Republic expresses no objection, the law must be enacted unless the session of the legislature closed before the expiration of the time limit. In this case, the law shall be postponed. Any law thus postponed shall, at the opening of the next session, be sent to the President of the Republic so that he may exercise his right of objection. Article 90. - A bill rejected by the legislature cannot be reintroduced at the same session. Article 91. - The laws, decrees and other acts of the legislature and the National Assembly are made public by means of the "Moniteur," the official newspaper of the Republic, and inserted in the printed and numbered bulletin bearing the title: "BULLETIN OF LAWS AND ACTS." Article 92. - The law takes effect from the day of its definite adoption by the legislature; but it only becomes mandatory after its promulgation by the President of the Republic and its publication in accordance with the mode provided for in Article 91. Article 93. - With the exception of the President of the Republic, the members of the executive power are responsible to the representatives of the people. Every deputy is granted the right to question or challenge a member of the Council of Ministers or the whole council on matters and actions of the public administration or on the general policy of the executive power. The request for challenge must be supported by a third of the members of the legislature. SECTION V PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES Article 94. - The members of the legislature receive an indemnity, the annual amount of which is specified in the national budget. Its payment will be effected in twelve monthly installments. Article 95. - The members of the legislature are protected by immunity from the day they are sworn in until the end of their mandate. They can neither be barred from the Assembly nor prosecuted, attached, subjected to judicial examinations in regard to opinions and votes they may cast during the discharge of their duties or of this exercise. Article 96. - During this mandate, no deputy may be prosecuted or arrested for felonious acts of a political, criminal, misdemeanant or police nature without the authorization of the legislature, except in case of flagrant offense for acts liable to bring about a sentence to afflictive and defamatory penalties. In the case of a flagrant offense, the deputy will be placed under house arrest at his residence. The Minister of Justice will inform the President of the Legislature of the unlawful acts if the legislature is in session. If it is not, the President of the Republic will summon the legislature to an extraordinary session within forty eight (48) hours following the deputy's placement under house arrest in order to apprise it of the unlawful acts or of the deputy's fate.

56

The legislature will suspend the accused deputy and put him at the disposal of the judiciary. SECTION VI INTERNAL ORGANIZATION OF THE LEGISLATURE
Article 97. - The internal organization of the legislature comprises:

1) 2)

The Bureau of the Legislature Specialized committees.

SUB-SECTION I THE BUREAU OF THE LEGISLATURE
Article 98. - The bureau is in charge of the general administrative of the legis-

lature. It is comprised of a president, a vice-president, a deputy-questor, and two secretaries.
Article 99. - The president and the members of the bureau are selected among the

deputies, by secret ballot, for the duration of the legislature. The president of the bureau is the President of the Legislature and of the National Assembly as well. He insures the direction of the debates. The duties of the president and of the members of the bureau are provided for in its internal regulations. SUB-SECTION II SPECIALIZED COMMITTEES
Article 100. - The specialized committees are created by secret ballot at the

beginning of each ordinary session. Their respective missions correspond to the ones of the various sectors of activities of the State. CHAPTER III THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH
Article 101. - The executive power is vested in a citizen bearing the title of

President of the Republic. He is assisted by secretaries of state and under secretaries of state. SECTION I THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Article 102. - To be elected President of the Republic, one must: 1) Be a natural born Haitian and never have renounced one's citizenship; 2) Be over eighteen (18) years of age;

57

3) 4) 5)

Be in possession of one's civil and political rights; Be a resident of Haiti; Be already discharged from one's responsibilities when one was accountable for public funds.

Article 103 - No individual can be elected to the Presidency of the Republic, even though he meets the requirements prescribed in Article 102 above, if he: 1) has been sentenced to afflictive and defamatory penalties for any reason, particularly the crime of treason; has carried or has incited carrying arms against the Republic; has been found guilty of fraudulent bankruptcy; has acquired Haitian citizenship by naturalization, by favor, consequence or benefit of the law; is a representative, agent, grantee, co-contractor or shareholder of foreign or Haitian companies.

2) 3) 4)

5)

Article 104. - Before taking office, the President of the Republic shall take the following oath before the National Assembly or the President of the Supreme Court of Appeal: "I swear before God and the Nation faithfully to observe and enforce the Constitution and the Laws of the Republic, to respect and protect the rights of the Haitian people, to work toward their greatness, to maintain the national independence and the integrity of the territory." Article 105. - The President of the Republic's office and his official residence are at the National Palace, in Port-au-Prince, except if the seat of government is changed. He is entitled to an annual indemnity (compensation) fixed by law in the budget and public funds which shall be apportioned in twelve monthly installments. Article 106. - The citizen Jean-Claude DUVALIER, trustee of the revolutionary legitimacy of 1957 under the banner of National Unity, unconditionally acknowledged and accepted as the Chief of State to insure the permanency of the Revolution by the popular resolution of January 31, 1971, shall exercise the duties of President of the Republic for life. Article 107. - The President for life of the Republic, the citizen Jean-Claude DUVALIER, has the right to appoint as his successor any citizen who fulfills the requirements provided for in Article 102 of the present Constitution. The nomination will be announced by a proclamation of the President-for-Life of the Republic who, by arrete, shall convoke the people in electoral meeting in order to ratify the said choice.

58

Article 108. - The successor designated by the President of the Republic and ratified by the people shall take actual charge of the executive power either by express resolution from the President-for-Life of the Republic, or for reason of any inability of the latter rendering him incapable of discharging his duties. He shall then take the oath provided for in Article 104 of the present Constitution and carry out, for life, the duties of the President of the Republic. Article 109. - If the President-for-Life of the Republic happens to be temporarily unable to carry out his duties, he can entrust the executive authority by a resolution bearing his exclusive signature, either to the successor designate or to one of the ministers for the duration of the hindrance. SECTION II POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Article 110. - The President of the Republic is the Head of State, the Head of the Government, Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, the Police Force and the National Security Volunteers. He is the Supreme Head of the General Administration of the State. He can dispose of the Armed Forces, the Police Force, and the National Security Volunteers, organize them and apportion them. Article 111. - He is entrusted with having the Constitution carried out as well as the laws and decrees of the legislature executed. He shall have the seal of the Republic affixed to the laws and shall promulgate them within the time provided for by the Constitution. To this end, he shall take all the regulations, resolutions, decrees without ever being able to stop and interpret the Constitution, the laws and decrees themselves, or be exempt himself from executing them. He shall see to the execution of judicial decisions pursuant to the law. Article 112. - In accordance with the terms and modes provided for by the Constitution, he can issue decrees having the power of laws after deliberations in the Council of Ministers. These decrees shall become executory after their publication in the official gazette, the "Moniteur." Article 113. - He shall nominate the Ministers of State, the Ministers and the Secretaries of State. He shall receive the individual or collective resignation of the members of his government which he shall reorganize, by resolution, in toto or in part. He shall nominate or remove civil and military officials of the State in the terms and modes provided for by the general statute of the Public Function and other laws. Article 114. - He shall nominate: 1) 2) 3) the President, Vice-President and the Judges of the Supreme Court of Appeal; the Officers of the Public Ministry; the President, Vice-President, Judges of the Courts of Appeal;

59

4) the Chief Judge and Judges of the Civil Courts as well as justices of peace and their assistants. Article 115. - He is entrusted with the care and conduct of international relations. He shall make every covenant, every international treaty and agreement which must be submitted to the National Assembly for approval before their ratification. He shall accredit the Diplomatic and Consular Representatives of the Republic to the governments of friendly countries; he shall receive the credentials of the Heads of the Diplomatic Missions of friendly countries and grant foreign consuls the exequatur. After receiving the approval of the National Assembly, he can declare war, negotiate and restore peace. Article 116. - In accordance with the Constitution and the Laws, he shall attend to the security of the State at home and abroad, to the safe-keeping and the preservation of the public peace and the protection of lives and property. Article 117. - He has the right to adjourn the sessions of the legislature and to summon it to extraordinary sessions in the terms and modes provided for by the Constitution. He also has the right to dissolve the legislature pursuant to such an eventuality as provided for in Article 79 of the present Constitution. The decree of dissolution will order, at the same time, the election of new deputies which will take place no longer than six (6) months after the publication of the said decree. Article 118. - He has the right to grant pardon or reprieve of all penalties for offenses the sentence of which has been passed, except in the case of impeachment by the courts or by the National Assembly, as it is provided for by the present Constitution. He can only grant amnesty in political matters and in accordance with the provisions of the law. Article 119. - The President of the Republic shall proclaim, by decree taken in the Council of Ministers, the state of siege on all or part of the national territory in case of civil unrest or impending invasion by outside forces. The state of siege cannot exceed thirty (30) days, except in uncontrollable circumstances (force majeure). This decree will also bear an immediate summon for the legislature to come to a decision regarding the opportuneness of the proclamation of the state of siege. The legislature, together with the executive branch, will decide upon the constitutional guarantees which will be suspended for the duration of the state of siege. The execution of the state of siege is determined by a special law.

60

Article 120. - At the opening of every legislative session, the President of the Republic shall address the National Assembly on the state (situation) of the country. On this occasion, the President of the Republic shall relay the reports on the activities of the past year prepared by the ministers. The address and reports shall not give rise to any debate. SECTION III THE MINISTERS Article 121. - The President of the Republic, Head of the Executive Branch, shall nominate as head of each ministerial department a Minister to whom he can adjoin one or more Secretaries of State. The law determines the number of ministerial departments which cannot, in any event, be inferior to five (5). It determines the functions and powers of the Ministers and Secretaries of State. The President of the Republic can confer the title of Minister of State to one or more ministers by reason of political importance and of the economic or social priority of the missions to be carried out. The Ministers of State take precedence over the Ministers who take precedence over the secretaries of State. The number of Ministers of State cannot exceed five (5). Article 122. - In order to be nominated as a Minister of State, a Minister, or a Secretary of State, one must: 1) 2) 3) be a natural born Haitian and never have renounced one's citizenship; be eighteen (18) years of age; be in possession of one's civil and political rights.

Article 123. - No individual referred to in Article 103 of the present Constitution can become a Minister of State, a Minister or a Secretary of State, even if he fulfills the requirements provided for in Article 122. Article 124. - The ministerial function is incompatible with the exercise of any public and private employment, except in the field of education. Article 125. - The Ministers and the Secretaries of State shall receive monthly indemnities and expenses as prpvided for by law. Article 126. - Each Minister individually is responsible for bills connected to his office and jointly for the ones he submits with the agreement of his colleagues. Article 127. - The Ministers respectively are responsible not only for the bills presented by the President of the Republic which they endorse, but also for the ones emanating from their own departments. They are also responsible for the inexecution of the laws.

61

In no case can the written or oral order of the President of the Republic free a Minister from the responsibility attached to his office. In the execution of their duties, the Ministers render their decisions by means of regulations, instructions, memoranda, communiqués and notices. Article 128. - The Ministers of State and the Ministers have free access to the Legislature and the National Assembly in order to support draft bills and the objections of the government as well as to answer the deputies' questions. SECTION IV THE GOVERNMENT Article 129. - The Ministers of State, the Ministers, assembled in a cabinet under the chairmanship of the President of the Republic, form the Government. Article 130. - The Council of Ministers is a debating and decision-making organization. The Secretaries of State, the high officials can be heard by the Council of Ministers on specific subjects. Restricted councils composed of Ministers interested in a particular problem can be convened under the presidency of the Head of the Government. The decisions taken by the restricted Council have the same force as those taken by the full Council. The minutes of the debates and decisions of the Council are recorded in a special register and signed by all attending members. The recording shall take place after the approval of the minutes of each session. The debates of the Council of Ministers are held under the seal of secrecy. Article 131. - When the legislature, during an interpellation, questions the responsibility of the Council of Ministers by a unanimous vote of disapproval by its members, the President of the Republic has the option either to dissolve the legislature and call for new legislative elections, or to dismiss the Council of Ministers and form a new one. Article 132. - The President of the Republic can, by means of a bill bearing his sole signature, delegate the presidency of the Council of Ministers to a Minister of State or, by default, to a Minister. The bill will specify the duration and the terms of this delegation. Similarly, a bill bearing the sole signature of the President of the Republic can delegate to Ministers of State and to Ministers the authority to appoint certain categories of civil servants. CHAPTER IV THE JUDICIAL BRANCH Article 133. - The judicial power is vested in a Supreme Court of Appeal, Courts of Appeal, District Courts, and Civil (peace) Courts, the number, organization and jurisdiction of which are determined by law. Special tribunals for the handling

62

of specific cases can be created by a law which will define their sphere of competence, their organization and their duration. Article 134. - The judges of the Supreme Court of Appeal and of Courts of Appeals are appointed for ten (10) years and the judges of the Civil Courts for seven (7) years, beginning the day they are sworn in. Article 135. - Once appointed, the judges cannot be removed from office; they cannot be transferred without their consent, even in the case of a promotion. Their functions can only be terminated pursuant to the Constitution and to the provisions of special laws. Article 136. - The President of the Republic guarantees the independence of the Judiciary. Article 137. - The office of a judge is incompatible with any other paid public function, with the exception of the field of education. Incompatibility by reason of blood relationship, relationship by marriage, or any other cause is regulated by law. The law also determines the prerequisites for becoming a judge at all ranks. Article 138. - Before taking office, all the judges and officers of the Public Ministry shall take the oath provided by law. Nevertheless, the President of the Republic, assisted by the President of the Legislature, shall receive the oath of the President of the Supreme Court of Appeal. Article 139. - In the event of litigation and upon the remanding of the case to the Supreme Court of Appeal, the latter, sitting as a full Court, shall rule on the unconstitutionality of the laws. The appeal for a ruling of unconstitutionality is not subject to any requirement of bail, penalty, or tax. Article 140. - The Supreme Court of Appeal rules on jurisdictional conflicts in the mode prescribed by law. Article 141. - Hearings in the Courts and Tribunals are open to the public. They can, however, be held in camera in the interests of the public order and morality. In this case,the closed session is pronounced by judgment. A closed session judgment cannot be pronounced in cases of political or journalistic offenses. Article 142. - The decrees of the Courts and the judgments of the Tribunals are executed in the name of the Republic. They shall carry executory rendered and instructions, the form of which is determined by law. The acts of notaries shall be made in the same form when their compulsory execution is involved.

63

Article 143. - The decrees of the Courts and the Judgments of the Tribunals must show cause and be rendered in open court. Article 144. - The Courts and the Tribunals shall only enforce the decrees and regulations of the Public Administration when they comply with the laws. Article 145. - The law determines the competence of the Courts and the Tribunals and regulates the procedures to be followed before them. It also provides for the disciplinary sanctions to be taken against the judges and the officers of the Public Ministry, with the exception of the judges of the Supreme Court of Appeal who are to be brought before the High Court of Justice according to the provisions of the present Constitution. Article 146. - The judges and officers of the Judicial Branch receive compensations established in the annual budget of the Republic. Their apportionment shall be made in twelve monthly installments. TITLE IV THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE Article 147. - By a unanimous vote of its members, the legislature can pronounce the impeachment of the President of the Republic for the crime of treason or any other crime or offense committed in the exercise of his functions. In case of impeachment, the legislature shall indict the President of the Republic before the National Assembly appointed as the High Court of Justice. Article 148. - The legislature can also impeach and indict before the High Court of Justice: 1) The Ministers of State, Ministers and Secretaries of State in cases of treason, embezzlement, misuse or abuse of authority or any other crime or offense committed in the exercise of their functions. 2) The President, Vice-President and members of the Supreme Court of Appeal in case of forfeiture. Article 149. - The members of the High Court of Justice, individually and at the opening of the hearing, shall take the oath to pass judgment with the impartiality and firmness which befit an upstanding and free man, in accordance with his conscience and his innermost conviction. Article 150. - By secret ballot and absolute majority, the High Court of Justice shall select among its members a commission responsible for the inquiry. The decision, issued as a decree, shall be rendered based on the Commission of Inquiry's report and by a two-thirds majority of the members of the National Assembly appointed as the High Court of Justice. Article 151. - The High Court of Justice can only render a decision of dismissal or of disqualification of the right to exercise any public function for a minimum of at least one year and a maximum of six years. The sentenced can be indicted by ordinary Tribunals, pursuant to the law, if there is cause to impose other penalties or to statute on the exercise of the civil suit.

64

Article 152. - Persons justiciable to the High Court of Justice avail themselves of the decennial limitation beginning the day they cease to perform their duties. Article 153. - Once it is called upon, the High Court of Justice must stay in session until it reaches a decision regardless of the length of the sessions of the legislature. TITLE V INDEPENDENT BODIES Article 154. - The following independent bodies shall be created by the Constitution: 1) 2) The Superior Court of Accounts and Administrative Claims; The State University of Haiti.

Article 155. - The Superior Court of Accounts and Administrative Claims is an independent financial and administrative jurisdiction entrusted with the administrative and jurisdictional verification of the receipts and expenses of the State, of the auditing of accounts of Autonomous Bodies as well as the ones of the territorial collectives. The Court is qualified to judge, without appeal, litigations involving the State and the territorial collectives, the public administration and officials, the public services and persons under their jurisdiction. The Superior Court of Accounts and Administrative Claims includes a Financial Auditing Section and an Administrative Claims Section. The President, Vice-President and the members of the Court are nominated by decree of the President-for-Life of the Republic for a period of ten (10) years and are irremovable for the duration of their mandate. Every year and within thirty (30) days following the opening of the legislative session, the Court will send a report to the legislature on the financial situation of the nation and the effectiveness of public expenditures. Article 156. - The organization of the Court, the status of its members, and its mode of operation are established by law. Article 157. - The State University of Haiti is the central body responsible for higher education and research. It is placed under the authority of a Rector, assisted by vice-rectors and deans of the public establishments of higher education and research. It receives an annual budgetary endowment from the Public Treasury. The Rector is appointed by a decree of the President of the Republic, the vice-rectors and deans by commission. The law establishes the conditions and modes of operation of the State University of Haiti.

65

Article 158. - The independent bodies created by the present Constitution have at their disposal a separate budget integrated in the General Budget of the Republic. TITLE VI ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES Article 159. - Upon convocation by the Executive Branch, the Electoral Assemblies meet in each commune, in accordance with the method provided by law for: 1) Elections to the positions listed in Article 58 of the present Constitution; Partial elections; Renewal of the legislature in case it was dissolved.

2) 3)

The Electoral Assemblies cannot attend to any other matter than the one stipulated by the present Constitution and have to be dissolved as soon as they have accomplished that for which they were assembled. Article 160. - The law regulates the conditions required to exercise the right to vote in Electoral Assemblies. TITLE VII THE ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM AND THE CIVIL SERVICE Article 161. - The Haitian Public Administration is the instrument responsible for concretizing the missions and objectives of the State. Article 162. - Civil servants are in the service of the State, but not in a political way. They are obliged to be loyal, discreet and reserved. Article 163. - The law determines the organization of the various structures of the Administration and specifies the conditions of their operation. Article 164. - The law regulates the civil service on the basis of aptitude, merit and conduct the guarantees the civil servants security of employment and career. Career officials of the Central Administration are not attached to any specific public service but to the civil service which assigns them to the various State bodies. Civil servants are forbidden to strike and abandon their duties collectively. The militarization of Public Services or the general mobilization can be ordered in case national danger or serious civil disorders, particularly in the event of an illegal general strike or one of a political nature. The general mobilization is ordered
by

virtue of the law on military service.

Article 165. - Political functions or duties are not a means to enter an administrative career, particularly the offices of Ministers and Secretaries of State, of Officer of the Public Ministry, of Prefect, Ambassador, Private Secretary to

66

the President of the Republic, member of a Minister's cabinet, Director General of a Ministerial Department or of an Autonomous Body, members of a Board of Directors. Article 166. - Civil servants take possession of their office in the conditions and modes set by law. Article 167. - Civil servants who have information about an infraction against the Public Treasury by their subordinates must inform the competent authority within the shortest period of time or risk being deemed receivers of stolen goods and prosecuted as such. Article 168. Unlawfully increased assets will be proven by any means, notably by presumption of the marked disproportion between the official's resources acquired since he took office and the total amount of the salary or wages his position entitled him to receive. To ascertain the amount of this increase, the actual capital of the official, plus his wife's and his under-age children's, shall be considered as a lump sum. The officials named by the law are required to declare the state of their finances to the Records Office of the Civil Court within sixty (60) days after they take office. The competent Commissioner of the Government can take any measure he deems necessary to verify the accuracy of the declaration. The law sanctions infractions against the Public Treasury and unlawfully increased assets. Article 169. - The officials guilty of the above-mentioned offenses can benefit only from the decennial limitation. This limitation starts taking effect only from the day he leaves office. TITLE VIII PUBLIC FINANCES CHAPTER I STATE RECEIPTS AND CURRENCY Article 170. - State receipts emanate from: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. The impost; The tax; Proceeds from properties of the private sector; Financial resources of public enterprises allocated to the State by law; Donations, loans and bequests.

Article 171. - Imposts or taxes paid to the State or the Communes can only be fixed by law. The impost is a civic obligation. It consists of a levy by the State proportional to the taxpayers assets.

67

The tax represents the assessed counterpart of a service. Article 172. - No privilege can be granted in matters of impost and tax. Any exemption from, increase or decrease of impost or tax must be decided by law.. Article 173. - A pension, gratuity, subvention and allocation of any kind payable by the Public Treasury can only be granted by virtue of a law proposed by the Executive Branch. Article 174. - The national monetary unit is the gourde. The law fixes the standard of its weights and measures as well as the standard of any odd monies the State has the power to coin and the right to distribute on the whole territory of the Republic. Article 175. - The Bank of the Republic of Haiti, the status of which is fixed by law, is vested with the exclusive right to coin the national money and to control its circulation. Any issue of coins or bills can only occur by virtue of a law which determines its amount and use. In no case can this amount be exceeded. Article 176. - The monetary policy is defined by the Executive Branch. It must be drawn in such a way as to create and maintain the most favorable conditions for the creation of jobs and the development of the national economy. Article 177. - The plurality of budgetary offices is expressly forbidden, save in the fields of secondary, vocational and higher education. CHAPTER II BUDGET AND BUDGETARY CONTROL Article 178. - The procedures relating to the preparation and execution of the budget are determined by law. Article 179. - The control of the execution of the law regarding the budget and public accountancy is insured by the Superior Court of Accounts and Administrative Claims and by the Office of the Budget. The modalities of this control are fixed by law. Article 180. - The Finance Minister is required to pay each ministerial department each month only one-twelfth of the amount provided for in its budget, unless prescribed by a law to the contrary for an exceptional and extraordinary case. The accounts of the Republic are kept by the Finance Minister according to accounting procedures established by law. The administrative exercise begins the 1st of October and ends the 30th of September of the following year.

68

Article 181. - Every year the Legislature votes on: The general budget of the State consisting of the survey and share of the funds allocated to each ministerial department and public body for the year. No proposal and no amendment, however, can be introduced when the budget is being voted on without the corresponding estimates of the ways and means. No changes can be made, either to increase or decrease the salaries of civil servants without a prior modification of the laws pertaining to them. Article 182. - The general accounting of receipts and expenditures of the previous year and the budgets prescribed by the preceding article, accompanied by the report of the Superior Court of Accounts and Administrative Claims, must be submitted to the Legislature by the Finance Minister at the latest within thirty (30) days following the opening of the legislative session. The same applies to the balance-sheet of the operations of the Bank of the Republic of Haiti as well as the ones of every other State account. Article 183. - In the event that the Legislature, for any reason whatsoever, does not balance the budget of one or more ministerial departments before its adjournment, the budget or budgets of the concerned departments shall remain in force during the next budgetary year. In the event that the budget of the Republic will not have been voted on through the Executive's fault, the President of the Republic shall convene immediately the Legislature to an extraordinary session for the sole purpose of voting the budget of the State. Article 184. - With the exception of credit institutions, the bodies, autonomous enterprises and entities which the funds of the Public Treasury subsidize, in whole or in part, are administered by special budgets and systems of compensation and wages approved by the Executive Branch. Article 185. - For every service of the Central Administration shall be established a single accounting system decreed by the Finance Minister upon a proposal from the Office of the Budget and the Superior Court of Accounts and Administrative Claims. Article 186. - Funds can be separated from the bulk of the revenues of the State according to the provisions determined by law and assigned either to the establishment of reserved funds or to the accretion of special endowments intended for Public Institutions with cultural purposes or plans for the establishment and development of assistance or social security programs, or plans for the development of small urban or rural properties or the development of the economy in general. TITLE IX Article 187. - The present Constitution shall guarantee private enterprise to the extent that it generates its activities in accordance with the law within the limits compatible with the interest of the collectivity. Toward this end, the State can offer and give financial guarantees for the establishment and enlargement of enterprises to the extent that it deems it appropriate and necessary to the promotion of private enterprise and in the sectors of production either of consumer or of production goods deemed essential to the accretion of the national wealth and the harmonious development of the economy in

69

general. In all cases where the State is the guarantor or endorser of a company or enterprise, it will have the right at any time to purchase a sufficient number of shares with voting power or of interest parts of the company or enterprise in order to insure the majority or total control of the company or enterprise. The law defines the modalities by which the State can purchase shares or parts of companies or enterprises in which the State will hold shares or parts by reason of guarantees or partial assessed investment. Article 188. - The general direction of the economy is a responsibility of the State which intervenes in the production, distribution, use and consumption of goods and services in order to plan the economic and social development of the country. The State also intervenes in the administration and the development of human resources so that social justice be the main objective of economic growth. Article 189. - The State can take over the management of enterprises which render essential services to the community in order to insure their continuity should the owners, contractors, administrators or managers refuse to respect the legal provisions relating to the economic and social development of the country. It can even turn to nationalization if the national interest requires it. The law determines the cases and conditions of the take-over, nationalization or transfer of enterprises. Article 190. - A monopoly can only be instituted in favor of the State or communes in cases and under the conditions determined by law. Article 191. - In all grants awarded by the State, mention must always be made that, after a given time not exceeding twenty-five (25) years, all the works resulting from the grant become, without contest, the property of the State, in perfect working order and without compensation. Article 192. - The present Constitution considers land management as a fundamental factor to rural welfare, national integration, and equitable distribution of the national wealth. In this spirit, the regulation and control of the distribution and the apportionment of land preservation are part of the sovereign missions of the State. Article 193. - The law shall determine: 1) 2) the ratio between the territorial area and the number of inhabitants; the maximum acreage of land which an individual or a company can own in a rural or urban environment;

It shall determine as well: 1) the preservation and improvement of agricultural, pastoral, forest, industrial and urban spaces; 2) the establishment and revision of the national cadastral map based on the

70

ones from the communes, districts and departments. Article 194. - The Haitian State exercises its preemption right in all land operations and transactions either to regroup the agricultural, pastoral or forest areas or to stop the dismemberment of such areas, or to satisfy the need for space expressed by the provisions of the master plan for the development of the territory. Article 195. - A system of progressive impost applicable to every individual or company owning property of a larger size than that provided by law shall be established. Article 196. - The state must protect the family, secure aid and assistance for mothers and children, and provide for the necessary laws and resolutions enabling every home to enjoy the degree of well-being indispensible to its development. Article 197. - Marriage is a civil contract based on the political and economic equality of both spouses. Article 198. - Children born in wedlock and natural (illegitimate) children legally recognized (by their parents) have equal right to education, protection, assistance and inheritance from their parents. Article 199. - The law determines the conditions under which paternity can be traced as well as the legal status of illegitimate or abandoned children. Article 200. - Juvenile crimes are subject to a special judicial regime as per the law. Article 201. - Labor, a social function, enjoys the protection of the State and is not subject to exploitation. The State aims at providing the manual or intellectual worker with an occupation which enables him to obtain for his family as well as for himself the economic conditions of a dignified existence. Article 202. - The State takes charge of all those who, because of their age, physical or mental disability or any other reason, are unfit or incapable to work. Article 203. - The State shall take all the laws necessary to insure every worker with the minimal conditions for the protection of his health, family life and dignity as a human being. The law regulates child labor in a special way. Article 204. - The State must create all the conditions susceptible to allow every citizen to have access to and fully enjoy the benefits of culture. Education is compulsory and must be supplied free of charge by the State. Article 205. - Institutions of learning are public or private. The law defines the organization of education at the nursery, elementary, secondary, vocational higher levels. Article 206. - Any form of discrimination whatsoever is prohibited in institutions of learning.

71

Article 207. - The State has the duty to protect and promote, by any means in its power, the scientific, technical, folkloric, artistic, archeological and historical wealth of the nation. The law determines, for each domain, the special conditions of protection. Article 208. - The State must guarantee the protection and preservation of the health of every citizen. The law will organize the various aspects relating to the health of the population. TITLE X ARMED FORCES Article 209. - The Armed Forces are appointed to defend the integrity of the territory and the sovereignty of the Republic, and to maintain the public order as auxiliaries of the civil authorities to which they are responsible. The police duties are separate from those of the Army and entrusted to Special Agents subject to the civil and penal responsibilities in the terms and conditions provided for by law. The President of the Republic is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, the Police Force and the National Security Volunteers; all those who command the said Forces receive their orders from him. The President of the Republic makes all the decisions concerning the Armed Forces in the framework of the Constitution, (and) the laws and regulations in force. Article 210. - Military service is compulsory for every Haitian. The law fixes the mode of recruiting and the duration of the service. Article 211. - The Armed Forces are apolitical and essentially obedient. Their organization and the exercise of their activities are governed by special laws, provisions and regulations. Active military personnel cannot be eligible for representative or executive office. Every member of the military applying for a position in one or the other category must tender his resignation at least two (2) years beforehand. No member of the military can be called to public office while in active duty. Article 212. - The military career is a professional one and only ranks obtained according to the ladder fixed by law are recognized. He who has legally obtained a rank will keep it for the rest of his life and will not be deprived of it, save by an executory decision. Article 213. - The manufacture, possession, importation and exportation of arms and war material are exclusively restricted to the Executive Branch. Article 214. - The organization of the Armed Forces and the Courts they are dependent upon, as well as the procedure to be followed before these Courts, are fixed by law.

72

TITE XI GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 215. - The National Holidays are: Independence Day, January 1st; Heroes Day, January 2nd; Agriculture and Labor Day, May 1st; Commemoration of the Battle of Vertieres Day, November 18th, which is also Armed Forces Day; National Sovereignty and Recognition Day, May 22nd; President-for-Life Day, June 22nd; Discovery of Haiti Day, December 5th; Flag and University Day, May 18th. Legal holidays are determined by law. Article 216. - During the intervals between legislative sessions, the Head of the Executive Branch, Chief of State, is invested with full powers to take decrees having the force of laws in order to insure the safe-keeping of the integrity of the national territory and the sovereignty of the State, the consolidation of peace and order, the preservation of the economic and financial stability of the Nation, the enhancement of the welfare of rural and urban populations and the protection of the general interests of the Republic. Article 217. - The National Assembly cannot sanction any treaty or any other international instrument comprising clauses inconsistent with the present Constitution. The sanction of the National Assembly is given in the form of a law. Once sanctioned, and ratified in the manner provided for by the Constitution, international treaties and agreements become part of the law of the land and abrogate all laws which are contrary to them. Article 218. - In order to stimulate economic and social development, the State can associate itself with another State or integrate an economic community of states as long as the agreement of association does not include any clause contrary to the present Constitution. TITLE XII REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION Article 219. - The Legislative Power, upon the motion of one of its members, voted unanimously, or one from the Executive Branch, has the right to declare, during an ordinary session, that there is cause to revise in part or in whole the provisions of the Constitution in force. This declaration is immediately presented to the President of the Republic and published in the official newspaper. As soon as this declaration is published, and during the same session or upon summons to an extraordinary one, the Legislative Corps shall meet as a National Constituent Assembly to rule on the proposed revision. Article 220. - Upon completion of this revision, and in a special session, the National Constituent Assembly proclaims the new Constitution in the case of a total revision, or the amended provisions, in the case of a partial revision, and in this event incorporates them in the Constitution.

73

Article 221. - The initiative for the motion to revise the form of Government belongs exclusively to the Executive Branch. TITLE XIII TEMPORARY RESOLUTIONS Article 222. - The vote of the present Constitution brings the dissolution of the Legislature. No later than six (6) months after the publication of the present Constitution in the Moniteur, the Official Journal of the Republic, the Head of the Executive Branch will summon the Electoral Assemblies in order to elect the Deputies of the Legislature in accordance with the Constitution and the electoral law. The elected deputies will take office the second Monday of the month of April following the elections. Article 223. - The Chief of State is authorized to take decrees in council of ministers which have force of law until the newly elected deputies take office. TITLE XIV FINAL DISPOSITIONS Article 224. - All the codes of laws, all the laws, decree-laws, and all the decrees presently in force shall be preserved for everything that is not contrary to the present Constitution. Article 225. - The present Constitution shall enter into force as soon as it is promulgated.

PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY: Jaures LEVEQUE VICE-PRESIDENT: Metellus CHARLES SECRETARIES: Saint-Arnaud NUMA LES MEMBRES: Mme. Max ADOLPHE, Lamoussey L. ANDRE, Edner ANTOINE, Max BASTIEN, Gerard BEAUBRUN, Luc BENOIT, Jean Claude BOIS, Julio BORDES, Edner CADET, Arthur V. CALIXTE, Seymour CARRENARD, Charles CESAR, Montes CHARLES, Andre CHRYSOSTOME, Antonio DECAMETTE, Daniel DELIMON, Faustin DUMENY, Alceste ETIENNE, Pierre V. ETIENNE, Henry FRANCILLON, Amaury FRANCOIS, Reny GIOLT, Willy HOLLANT, Jean JABON, Lespinasse JEAN, Arcesius JEAN FRANCOIS, Lunsford JOSEPH, Weber A. KERSAINT, Alexandre G. LEROUGE, Félix LUC, Candelon LUCAS, Mathieu MESIDORE FILS, Mme. Rita Frederique MONCOEUR, Jacques ORIOL, Edeze PIERRE LOUIS, Jacques PIERROT, Emmanuel N. PLUVIOSE, Leroy PREVAL, Armand RAPHAEL, Hermann SAINT CLOUD, Edner SAINT FLEUR, Miermont SAINT JOY, Xavier SAINT LOUIS, Moreau SAINT PAUL, Jean SASSINE, Luc SENATUS, Andre SIMON, Giordani SYLVAIN, Daniel BEAULIEU. Jean Th. LINDOR QUESTOR: Hyppolite THERMITUS

74

