CONSTITUTIONS

of
NATIONS
SECOND EDITION

The first compilation in the English language of the texts of the constitutions of the various nations of the world, together with summaries, annotations, bibliographies, and comparative tables

VOLUME II FRANCE to NEW ZEALAND

by

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Formerly Ambassador of the United States of America to Australia, Secretary General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the San Francisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author of INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONSTHEIR CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS (Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague; and Justice House, New York, 1956), A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams, 1942), UNITED NATIONS GOVERN[MINT (Putnams, 1945), and co-author of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

Copyright 1956 by Martinus Nijhoff The Hague, Netherlands All rights reserved, including the right to translate or to reproduce this book or parts thereof in any form

PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS

CONSTITUTION of the REPUBLIC OF HAITI
November 25, 1950
PREAMBLE

We, the Members of the CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY, elected on October 8, 1950, for the purpose of giving to the HAITIAN PEOPLE a democratic CONSTITUTION guaranteeing their rights and their liberties, met in the city of Gonaives from November 3 to 25, 1950, and adopted a CONSTITUTION, Which fortifies national unity, Establishes a balance in the Powers of State, Strengthens internal peace, Guarantees Justice, Assures the protection of labor, Provides the benefits of Liberty and Culture for all Haitians, without distinction, And seeks to establish a Haitian Nation that is socially just, economically free, and politically independent, on the basis of a jointly and severally responsible democracy. Be it ordained that the present CONSTITUTION, formally signed on November 25, 1950, in the city of Gonaives, capital of the Department of Artibonite, be published in "Le Moniteur," the official journal of the Republic, in order that it shall become, from the date of publication, the SUPREME LAW of the REPUBLIC OF HAITI.
TITLE

I

The Territory of the Republic Art. 1. The Republic of Haiti is one, indivisible, sovereign, independent democratic, and social. Port-au-Prince is its Capital and the seat of its Government. This seat may be moved elsewhere according to circumstances. All adjacent islands, of which the principal ones are: La Tortue, la Gonave, l'Ile-a-Vache, les Cayemittes, la Navase, la Grande Caye and all those within the boundaries established by international law, are an integral part of the territory of the Republic, which is inviolable and inalienable. Art. 2. The territory of the Republic of Haiti is divided into Departments. The Departments are subdivided into Arrondissements, the

Arrondisements into Communes, and the Communes into Quartiers (wards) and Rural Sections. The number and the boundaries of these divisions and subdivisions are determined by law, which also regulates their organization and functioning
TITLE II

Chapter I. Rights Art. 3. The aggregate of civil and political rights constitutes citizenship. The exercise of these rights is regulated by law. Art. 4. Every Haitian, regardless of sex, who has attained 21 years of age, exercises political rights if he fulfills the other conditions prescribed by the Constitution and by law. Nevertheless, the right of women to vote shall temporarily be exercised only in voting for or holding office in municipal positions. The law shall provide for full and complete exercise of all political rights by women within a period not to exceed three years after the next general municipal elections. Upon the expiration of this period, no impediment may prevent the exercise of these rights. Women's fitness for all civil positions in the Public Administration is recognized. However, the law regulates the conditions to which women shall be temporarily subject with respect to family affairs and marriage, leaving open the possibility for any changes deemed expedient to attain a system of absolute equality between the sexes. Art. 5. The regulations concerning nationality are determined by law. Aliens may acquire Haitian nationality by conforming to the regulations established by law. Naturalized Haitians are not permitted to exercise political rights until ten years after the date of their naturalization. Art. 6. Every alien within Haitian territory enjoys the same protection that is accorded to Haitians, except for measures that might be found to be necessary against nationals of countries where Haitians do not enjoy the same protection. Art. 7. The exercise, enjoyment, suspension, and loss of political rights are regulated by law. Art. 8. The right to own real property is accorded to aliens residing in Haiti for their residential needs. I [However, an alien residing in Haiti may not become the owner of more than one dwelling in a single locality. He may not, in any case, engage in the business of renting real estate. Nevertheless, foreign building-construction companies shall have the benefit of a special statute regulated by law. The right to own real property is likewise accorded to aliens residing in Haiti and to foreign companies for the needs of their agricultural, commercial, industrial, or educational enterprises, within the limits and under the conditions	 prescribed by law.

This right shall terminate within a period of two years after an alien has ceased to reside in the country or the operations of such companies have ceased, according to the law that prescribed the: regulations to be followed for the transfer and liquidation of property belonging to aliens. Every citizen is competent to denounce violations of these provisions.

Chapter II. Public Right
Art. 9. Haitians are equal before the law, subject to the restrictions that may be imposed by law with respect to naturalized Haitians. Every Haitian has the right to take an effective part in the government of his country, to hold public office or to be appointed to State positions, without distinction as to color, sex or religion. The administration of the Public Services of the State, with respect to appointments, terms, and conditions of service, must be free from any privilege, favor, or discrimination. Art. 10. The State guarantees the right of all persons within the territory of the Republic to life and liberty. No one may be prosecuted, arrested, or detained except in the cases determined by law and in accordance with legally prescribed forms. No arrest or detention shall take place except by order of a legally competent official. For the execution of such an order, it is necessary: 1. that it formally state the reason for the detention and the provision of law that punishes the act charged; 2. that it be made known legally and that a copy be left with the accused • person at the time of execution, except in case of flagrante delicto. Any force or restraint that is not necessary for the apprehension or detention of a person, any moral pressure or physical abuse, especially during interrogation, is forbidden. The injured parties may appeal to the competent Courts, without previous authorization, to prosecute either the principals or agents. Art. 11. No one may be denied access to the Judges whom the Constitution or the law assigns to him. A civilian is never amenable to a Military Court, nor shall a military person, in exclusively civil matters, be denied access to a court of ordinary law, except in case of a legally declared state of siege. Art. 12. No search of the home or seizure of papers may take place except by virtue of law and in accordance with legally prescribed forms. Art. 13. The law shall have no retroactive effect, except in penal matters when it is favorable to the offender. A law is considered retroactive whenever it takes away acquired rights. Art. 14. No penalty may be established except by law, or applied except in the cases determined by law. Art. 15. The right to own property is guaranteed, although expropriation for a legally-established reason of public use may take place in consideration of the payment or appropriation of a just and prior indemnity by judgment of court to the order of the person entitled thereto.

But property also entails obligations. It may not be used contrary to the general interest. An owner of land must cultivate, work, and protect the soil, especially against erosion. The penalty for violation of this obligation is provided by law. The right of ownership does not extend to springs, rivers, water courses, mines, and quarries. These are a part of the public domain of the State. The owner of land containing springs, rivers, mines, and quarries shall be entitled to a just and prior indemnity exclusively for the land in the event of its use or exploitation by the State or its concessionaires. The conditions of use or exploitation are determined by law. Art. 16. Freedom to work is exercised under the control and supervision of the State and is regulated by law. However, save for those exceptions and distinctions established by law all importers, commission agents, and manufacturers' agents are prohibited from engaging in retail trade, even through an intermediary. The law shall define what is meant by an intermediary. Art. 17. Every worker has the right to a fair wage, to training through apprenticeship, to the protection of his health, to social security, and to the well-being of his family to the extent that the economic development of the country permits. It is the moral obligation of employers to contribute, according to their means, to the education of their illiterate workers. Every worker has the right to participate, through his delegates, in the collective determination of working conditions and to protect his interests through trade-union action. Annual vacations with pay are compulsory. Art. 18. Capital punishment may not be established in political matters, except for the crime of treason. The crime of treason consists, for Haitians, of taking up arms for a foreign State against the Republic of Haiti, of adhering to such State, or of giving it aid and comfort. Art. 19. Everyone has the right to express his opinions on any matter and by any means within his power. The expression of thought, whatever form it takes, may not be subjected to any censorship, except when war has been declared. Abuses of the right of expression are defined and punished by law. Art. 20. All religions and faiths recognized in Haiti are free. Everyone has the right to profess his religion, or to exercise his faith, provided he does not disturb public order. The Catholic religion, professed by the majority of Haitians, enjoys a special position as a result of the Concordat. Art. 21. As marriage tends to purity of morals by contributing to a better organization of the family, the fundamental basis of society, it shall be the duty of the State to adopt every possible and necessary means Ii tofaciltaeitandencourageits pread mongthep ople, specialyinthe rualcs. Art, 22. Freedom of education is exercised according to law, under

the control and supervision of the State, which should take an interest in the moral and civic training of youth. Public education is a responsibility of the State and of the Communes. Elementary education is compulsory. Public education is free in all grades. Technical and vocational instruction should be extended. Access to higher studies should be open to all on an equal basis, according to merit. Art. 23. The jury, in the cases designated by law, is established in criminal matters. Political offenses committed through the press or otherwise shall be tried by a jury. Art. 24. Haitians have the right to assemble peaceably and without arms, even for the discussion of political affairs, in conformity with the laws which regulate the exercise of this right, no requirement of prior authorization, however, being necessary. This provision does not apply to public gatherings, which remain entirely subject to police laws. Art. 25. Haitians have the right to associate, and to form political parties, labor unions, and cooperatives. This right may not be subjected to any preventive measure. And no one may be compelled to join an association or a political party. The law regulates the conditions for the functioning of these groups and fixes the manner of controlling the funds of labor unions. Art. 26. The right of petition is exercised personally by one or more individuals, never in the name of a group. Art. 27. The secrecy of letters is inviolable under penalties (for violations) prescribed by law. Art. 28. French is the official language. Its use is obligatory in the public services. Art. 29. The right of asylum is accorded to political refugees, with the condition that they conform to the law. Art. 30. Extradition will be neither granted nor requested for political matters. Art. 31. The law may neither add to nor derogate from the Constitution. The letter of the Constitution should always prevail.
TITLE III

Chapter I. Sovereignty and the Powers to which its Exercise is Delegated Art. 32. National Sovereignty is vested in the whole body of citizens. Art. 33. The exercise of this sovereignty is delegated to three Powers : the Legislative Power, the Executive Power, and the Judicial Power. They constitute the Government of the Republic, which is essentially CIVIL, DEMOCRATIC, and REPRESENTATIVE. Art. 34. Each Power is independent of the two others in its duties, which it performs separately. None of them may delegate its duties, or depart from the bounds set for it. Responsibility (for its acts) is attached to each of the three Powers.

Chapter II. The Legislative Power or National Representation
SECTION I

The Chamber of Deputies Art. 35. The Legislative Power is exercised by two Representative Chambers : a Chamber of Deputies and a Senate, which form the Legislative Body. Art. 36. The number of Deputies is fixed by law in proportion to the population. Until such time as the law fixes the number of citizens that each deputy should represent, there shall be thirty-seven deputies, distributed among the Arrondissements in the following manner: Four for the Arrondissement of Port-au-Prince; two for each of the Arrondissements of Cap-Haitien, Les Cayes, Port-de-Paix, Gonaives, Jeremie, Saint-Marc, Jacmel; and one deputy for each of the other Arrondissements. A deputy is elected by the relative majority of votes cast in the Primary Assemblies, according to the manner and conditions prescribed by law. Art. 37. To be a member of the Chamber of Deputies it is necessary:
1) 2) 3) 4) To be a Haitian and never to have renounced one's nationality; To have attained twenty-five years of age ; To enjoy civil and political rights; To have resided at least one year in the Arrondissement represented.

Art. 38. Deputies are elected for four years and are elegible for reelection indefinitely. They begin their terms on the second Monday in the April after elections. Art. 39. In the event of death, resignation, removal, judicial suspension of civil rights, expulsion, or acceptance of a new office incompatible with that of deputy, the replacement of such deputy in his electoral district for the remainder of his term only is provided for by a special election upon convocation of the electoral Primary Assembly by the President of the Republic in the same month the vacancy occurs. Before accepting a resignation, the Chamber may make inquiry as to the circumstances connected with the resignation. This election takes place within a period of thirty days after the convocation of the Primary Assembly, in accordance with article 124 of this Constitution. Procedure will be the same in default of election or in case of invalidity of elections in one or more districts. However, if a vacancy occurs during or after the last Regular Session of the Legislature, no by-election will be held.
SECTION II

The Senate Art. 40. Whenever available funds of the Public Treasury permit, new Departments may be created, due account being taken of the size of the population of certain regions and particularly of their twofold economic and political importance.

Until such time as the law fixes the number of Senators to be elected by departments, the Senate is composed of twenty-one members elected by the Primary Assemblies of each department and distributed in the following manner : Six for the West, four for each of the Departments of the North, Artibonite, and the South, and three for the Northwest. Their term of office lasts six years and they are eligible for reelection indefinitely. They begin their terms on the second Monday of the April after their election. Art. 41. To be elected Senator, it is necessary:
1) 2) 3) 4) To be a Haitian and never to have renounced one's nationality; To have attained 35 years of age ; To enjoy civil and political rights; To have resided at least two years in the department represented.

Art. 42. In the event of death, resignation, removal, judicial suspension of civil rights, expulsion, or acceptance of a new position incompatible with that of Senator, provision for the replacement of such senator for only the remainder of his term is made in his electoral district by a special election upon convocation of the electoral Primary Assembly by the President of the Republic in the month the vacancy occurs. Before accepting a resignation, the Senate may make inquiry into the circumstances connected with the resignation. This election takes place within a period of thirty days after the convocation of the. Primary Assembly, in accordance with article 124 of this Constitution. Procedure will be the same in default of election or in case of invalidity of elections in one or more districts. However, if a vacancy occurs within the six months preceding the expiration of the term of the Senator to be replaced, no by-election will be held.
SECTION III

The National Assembly Art. 43. The two Chambers shall meet in National Assembly in the cases specified in the Constitution and also for the opening and closing of each session. The powers of the Assembly are limited and may not be extended to matters other than those specially assigned to it by the Constitution. Art. 44. The titular President of the Senate presides over the National Assembly; the titular President of the Chamber of Deputies is the VicePresident thereof; the Secretaries of the Senate and of the Chamber of Deputies are the Secretaries of the National Assembly. In the event the titular President of the Senate is prevented from being present, the National Assembly is presided over by the titular President of the Chamber of Deputies and the acting President of the Senate becomes the Vice-President of the National Assembly. Art. 45. The powers of the National Assembly are: 1) To receive the constitutional oath from the President of the Republic;

2) To declare war, upon the advice of the Executive Power ; 3) To approve or reject treaties of peace and other treaties and international conventions ; 4) To amend the Constitution.

Art. 46. The meetings of the National Assembly are public. Nevertheless, they may be closed sessions upon the request of five members and afterwards an absolute majority shall decide whether the meetings should be resumed in public. Art. 47. In case of emergency, when the Legislative Body is not in session, the Executive Power may convoke the National Assembly in extraordinary session. Art. 48. The presence in the National Assembly of a majority of each of the two Chambers is necessary to pass resolutions.
SECTION IV

Exercise of the Legislative Power Art. 49. The seat of the Legislative Body is in Port-au-Prince. Nevertheless, according to circumstances, it may be transferred elsewhere to the same place and at the same time as the Executive Power. Art. 50. The Legislative Body meets by right each year on the second Monday of April. A session dates from the opening of the two Chambers in National Assembly. A session lasts three months. In case of necessity, it may be prolonged from one to two months by the Executive Power or by the Legislative Power. The President of the Republic may adjourn the Chambers, but the adjournment may not be for more than one month, and not more than two adjournments may take place during the same session. The period of adjournment shall not be charged to the constitutional duration of the session. Art. 51. In case of serious dispute, either between the two Chambers, or between one or both of them and the Executive Power, the President of the Republic has the power to dissolve the Legislative Body. The decree of dissolution shall at the same time order new elections. These the elections shall take place within a period of three months from During date of the said decree. these three months, the President of the Republic shall provide for the needs of the Public Services by decrees agreed upon in the Council of of secretaries of State. He may not, however, use the right of dissolution until after he has had to the procedure of adjournment, without result, or when, in recourse accordance with the preceding article, he may no longer resort to that
Art. 52. In the intervals between sessions and in case of emergency the

President of the Republic may convoke a special session of the Legislative
Body.

He must then explain to it the reasons for this measure by a Message. In the event a special session is convoked the Legislative Body may not act on any subject foreign to the reasons for the convocation. However, any Senator or Deputy may address the Assembly to which he belongs on questions of general interest. Art. 53. Each Chamber examines and confirms the credentials of its members and is final judge of disputes that arise in this regard. Art. 54. The members of each Chamber take the following oath:
"I swear to uphold the rights of the people and to be faithful to the Constitution."

Art. 55. The meetings of the two Chambers are public. Each Chamber may meet in secret committee upon the request of five members and then decide by a majority vote whether the meeting should be resumed in public. Art. 56. No monopoly may be established except in favor of the State or the Communes and under the conditions specified by law. However, the State or Communes, in the exercise of this privilege, may associate with or substitute societies or companies. In such cases, the concession contract must be submitted to the Legislative Body for approval. Art. 57. The Legislative Power makes laws on all matters of public interest. The initiative belongs to either of the two Chambers as well as to the Executive Power. Nevertheless, the budget law, laws providing for the assessment, distribution, and form of collection of duties and taxes, laws for the purpose of creating revenues or increasing revenues of the State or for increasing expenditures of the State must be voted upon first by the Chamber of Deputies. In case of disagreement between the two Chambers in regard to laws mentioned in the preceding paragraph, each Chamber appoints by ballot, in equal number, an interparliamentary committee which shall settle the disagreement finally. If disagreement arises with respect to any other law, such law will be deferred until the following session. If at this session, and even in the event of a change of the Chambers, the law having been reintroduced but no agreement reached, each Chamber shall appoint by ballot and in equal number, an interparliamentary committee charged with deciding on the definitive text to be submitted to the two Assemblies, beginning with that which first passed the law. And if these new discussions are without result, the bill or proposal of law shall be withdrawn. The Executive Power has the sole right to initiate laws concerning public expenditures; and neither of the two Chambers has the right to increase all or a part of the expenditures proposed by the Executive Power. Art. 58. Each Chamber, by its regulations, appoints its personnel, establishes its discipline, and determines the manner in which it exercises its powers. Each Chamber may apply disciplinary penalties to its members for

reprehensible conduct and may expel a member by a majority of two-thirds of its members. Art. 59. Any member of the Legislative Body who, during his term of office, shall have been subject to a penalty rendering him ineligible, shall be removed from office as Deputy or Senator. Art. 60. The members of the Legislative Body are inviolable from the day of taking their oath until the expiration of their term of office. They may not be excluded from the Chamber to which they belong or at any time prosecuted or attacked for their opinions or votes in the performance of their functions or occasioned by such performance. No physical restraint shall be used against a MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE
BODY DURING HIS TERM OF OFFICE.

Art. 61. No member of the Legislative Body may, during his term of office, be prosecuted or arrested for crime, misdemeanor or breach of police regulations, or for a political offense, without the authorization of the Chamber to which he belongs except in case of flagrante delicto, involving acts which entail infamous or afflictive punishment. He is then immediately placed at the disposal of the Chamber of Deputies or Senate, according to whether he is a Deputy or Senator, if the Legislative Body is in session; if it is not, at the opening of the next regular or special session. Art. 62. Neither of the two Chambers may pass resolutions without the presence of an absolute majority of its members. Art. 63. No act of the Legislative Body may be adopted without a majority of the members present, except as otherwise provided by the present Constitution. Art. 64. Each Chamber has the right of investigation into matters with which it deals. This right is limited by the principle of separation of Powers, in conformity with article 34 of the present Constitution. Art. 65. Every bill must be voted upon article by article. Art. 66. Each Chamber has the right to amend and divide the articles and amendments proposed. Amendments passed by one Chamber may not form part of a bill until after they have been passed by the other Chamber; and no bill shall become law until it has been passed in the same form by the two Chambers. Any bill may be withdrawn from discussion as long as it has not been finally voted upon. Art. 67. Every law passed by the Legislative Body is immediately sent to the President of the Republic who, before promulgating it, has the rightobjecnwlripat. I n this case, he returns the law with his objections to the Chamber that first passed it. If the law is amended by this Chamber, it is sent back to the other Chamber with the objections. If the law thus amended is passed by the second Chamber, it shall be sent again to the President of the Republic to be promulgated. I f the objections are rejected by the Chamber that first passed the law, Ifthescond ItisentbacktohescondChamberwith eobjctions. Chamber also votes for rejection, the law is returned to the President of the Republic, who is under obligation to promulgate it.

Rejection of objections is carried by both Chambers by a two-thirds majority of each; in this case, the votes of each Chamber shall be given by "yes" or "no" and recorded in the margin of the minutes beside the name of each member of the Assembly. If in each of the Chambers, two-thirds of the members do not agree upon rejection, the objections are accepted. Art. 68. The right of objection must be exercised within a period of eight days from the date of receipt of the law by the President of the Republic, excluding Sundays, national and legal holidays, recesses and days of adjournment of the Legislative Body, in accordance with article 50 of the present Constitution. The same period is applicable to examination of the objections as discussed in the preceding article. Art. 69. If, within the prescribed periods the President of the Republic makes no objection, the law must be promulgated, unless the session of the Legislative Body has ended before the expiration of these periods; in this case the law is deferred. A law thus deferred is sent to the President of the Republic, at the opening of the session, for the exercise of his right of objection. Art. 70. A bill rejected by one of the two Chambers cannot be brought up again in the same session. Art. 71. Laws and other acts of the Legislative Body and of the National Assembly become official through publication in "Le Moniteur" and are inserted in the printed and numbered bulletin entitled "Bulletin des Lois". Art. 72. A law is dated from the day of its definitive adoption by the two Chambers, but it does not become binding until after its promulgation by the President of the Republic. Art. 73. No one may present petitions personally to the Legislative Body. Art. 74. Authoritative interpretation of laws belongs solely to the Legislative Power; it is given in the form of a Law. Art. 75. Each member of the Legislative Body receives a monthly remuneration of ONE THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY GOURDES from the time of taking his oath. Any member of the Legislative Body who becomes a Secretary of State, Under-Secretary of State, or Diplomatic Agent ceases to be entitled to the remuneration granted him by the preceding paragraph, unless he is on a temporary mission. The office of member of the Legislative Body is incompatible with any other office remunerated by the State, except that of Secretary of State, Under-Secretary of State or Diplomatic Agent. A Legislator who has become a Secretary of State, Under-Secretary of State or Diplomatic Agent may not take part in the deliberations of the Chamber to which he belongs. The rights to question and interpellate a member of the Cabinet or the entire Cabinet concerning the acts and records of the administration is accorded to every member of the two Chambers.

A request for interpellation must be supported by one third of the interested body.
Chapter III. The Executive Power
SECTION I

The President of the Republic Art. 76. The Executive Power is exercised by a citizen who receives the title of President of the Republic. Art. 77. The President of the Republic is elected for six years. He is not immediately eligible for re-election and cannot in any case benefit from prolongation of the term. He takes office on the fifteenth of May of the year in which he is elected unless he is elected to fill a vacancy, in which case he takes office upon his election, and his term is deemed to have begun on the fifteenth of May preceding the date of his election. Art. 78. To be elected President of the Republic, it is necessary:
1) To be a Haitian, born of a father who was also born a Haitian, or in default of paternal recognition, of a mother likewise born a Haitian ; 2) Never to have renounced Haitian nationality; 3) To have attained forty years of age ; 4) To enjoy civil and political rights ; 5) To be an owner of real property in Haiti, and have customary residence in the country.

Before taking office, the President of the Republic takes the following oath before the National Assembly.
"I swear before God and before the Nation faithfully to observe and enforce the Constitution and the laws of the Haitian People, to respect their rights, to maintain the National Independence and the integrity of the Territory."

Article 79. The President of the Republic appoints and recalls the Secretaries of State and also public officials and employees. He is charged with supervising the execution of the treaties of the Republic. I le causes the laws to be sealed with the Seal of the Republic, and pro-mulgates them within the periods prescribed by articles 67, 68, and 69 of the present Constitution. I lo is charged with enforcement of the Constitution, and the Laws, Acts and Decrees of the Legislative Body and the National Assembly. I In makes all Regulations and Orders necessary for this purpose, but may never suspend or interpret the Laws, Acts and Decrees themselves, dispense with their enforcement. makes appointments to public positions or offices only by virtue He oftheConstiutionorbyexpres provisonoflawandundertheconditons it it prescib. He provides, according to the laws, for the internal and external security of the State. makes all treaties or international conventions, subject to the sanction of the National Assembly, to which he likewise submits all exec¬tive agreements for ratification.
He

He has the power to dissolve the Legislative Body, in accordance with article 51 of the present Constitution. He has the right of pardon and commutation of punishment, with respect to all final sentences, except in case of impeachment by the Courts or by the Chamber of Deputies, as is provided in articles 112 and 113 of the present Constitution. He may grant amnesty only in political matters and according to provisions of law. Art. 80. If the President finds it temporarily impossible to perform his duties, the Council of Secretaries of State is charged with the executive authority for the duration of the impediment. Art. 81. In case of vacancy in the office of President of the Republic through death, resignation or for any other reason, the President of the Court of Cassation, or in his default, the Vice President, or in default of the latter, the senior Judge of the Court of Cassation, is temporarily invested with the Executive Power. He shall immediately convoke the Primary Assemblies for the election of the President of the Republic, which must take place within four months after the date of convocation. The Provisional Chief of the Executive Power may not be a candidate for the Presidency before the Primary Assemblies which he has convoked nor be elected by them. Art. 82. All measures taken by the President of the Republic are previously considered in the Council of Secretaries of State. Art. 83. All acts of the President of the Republic, except Decrees nominating or recalling Secretaries of State, are countersigned by the interested Secretaries of State. Art. 84. The President of the Republic has no powers other than those conferred on him by the Constitution and the laws. Art. 85. At the opening of each session, the President of the Republic, by a message separately to each of the two Chambers, makes a general statement of the situation and transmits to them the reports given to him by the different Secretaries of State. Art. 86. The President of the Republic receives from the Public Treasury a monthly remuneration of TEN THOUSAND GOURDES. Art. 87. The President of the Republic has his official residence in the National Palace of the capital, except in case of a change in the seat of the Government.
SECTION II Election of the President of the Republic Art. 88. The President of the Republic is elected by secret ballot by direct suffrage, and by the relative majority of the votes cast by the voters of all the Communes of the Republic. Art. 89. Four months before the expiration of the term of the President holding office, he shall convoke the Primary Assemblies which meet upon such convocation or in their own right on the first Sunday in April for the purpose of electing the President of the Republic.

The registration of voters shall be open for thirty working days. The registration of voters, the organization and operation of the polling places, and the counting of votes shall be done in the manner and within the periods specified by law.
SECTION III

The Secretaries of State Art. 90. The law determines the number of Secretaries of State, but this number may not be less than five. The President of the Republic may, when he deems it necessary, add Under-Secretaries of State, whose powers are determined by law. To be a Secretary of State or Under-Secretary of State, it is necessary:
1) To be a Haitian and never to have renounced one's nationality; 2) To have attained 35 years of age ; 3) To enjoy civil and political rights.

The Secretaries of State and Under-Secretaries of State are distributed among the several ministerial departments required by the services of the State. An executive order shall determine this distribution according to law. Art. 91. The Secretaries of State meet in Council presided over by the President of the Republic or one of them delegated by him, or in default of such delegation, by the Secretary of State of the Interior. All discussions of the Council are recorded in a register and the minutes of each meeting are signed by the members of the Council who were present. Art. 92. The Secretaries of State have the right to attend each of the two Chambers, as well as the National Assembly, to support bills and objections of the Executive Power. Art. 93. The Secretaries of State are respectively responsible both for the acts of the President of the Republic which they countersign and for those of their departments as well as for the non-enforcement of laws. In no case may the written or verbal order of the President of the Republic relieve a Secretary of State from responsibility. Art. 94. Each Secretary of State receives from the Public Treasury a monthly remuneration of THREE THOUSAND GOURDES. The Under-Secretaries of State receive from the Public Treasury a monthly remuneration of TWO THOUSAND GOURDES.
SECTION IV The Council of Government Art. 95. There is instituted under the Executive Power a Council known as the "Council of Government," composed of nine, members appointed by the President of the Republic and whose purpose is to study and report to the Government on proposed laws or contracts of all kinds that may be submitted to it; to give its reasoned opinion on all questions relating to administration and on practical and technical conditions for accomplishing undertakings.

The Council of Government is authorized, according to circumstances and under conditions prescribed by law, to call in for advice and discussion any experts, technicians or specialists who by their knowledge and experience may be in a position to guide and support it in the accomplishment of its task, or even to utilize their services. Art. 96. The organization, powers and functioning of the Council shall be determined by law. Chapter IV. The Judicial Power Art. 97. The courts of ordinary law have exclusive jurisdiction over disputes concerning civil rights. Art. 98. The courts have jurisdiction over disputes concerning political rights, subject to the exceptions established by law. Art. 99. No court and no jurisdiction for legal controversies may be established except by virtue of a law. Art. 100. The Judicial Power is exercised by a Court of Cassation, the Courts of Appeal, and the lower Courts, the number, organization and jurisdiction of which are regulated by law. The President of the Republic appoints the Judges of the Courts (Cours and Tribunaux). He appoints and recalls the officials of the Public Ministry under the Court of Cassation, the Courts of Appeal and the other permanent Courts, as well as the Justices of Peace and their alternates. The Judges of the Court of Cassation and Courts of Appeal are appointed for ten years, and those of the Civil Courts for seven years. Their terms begin to run from the time of taking the oath. Judges, once appointed, are not subject to removal by the Executive Power for any reason whatsoever. However, they remain subject to the provisions of articles 112, 113, and 114 of the present Constitution and to the provisions of special laws specifying the grounds which may terminate their functions. Art. 101. Courts of Appeal shall be established, the jurisdiction and seat of which shall be determined by law. Art. 102. Land Courts, Labor Courts and Children's Courts may likewise be established, the organization, number, seat, and functions of which shall be fixed by law. Art. 103. The Land Courts have a temporary mission. Their functions shall cease when the purposes for which they are organized have been accomplished. Each Land Court shall have special jurisdiction over disputes relating to assessments, the registration of real property, real property rights and rights of possession, solely for the region for which it is established. The Courts of ordinary law and Peace Courts shall retain jurisdiction over litigation which is vested in them by law. Art. 104. The Court of Cassation does not rule on the merits of cases. Neverthless, in all matters, aside from those submitted to the jury, whenever upon a second appeal, even upon an exception, the same matter is presented by the same parties, the Court of Cassation, in accepting the

case, will not order remand but will rule on the merits of the case, sitting as a full court. However, in the case of appeals from temporary restraining orders or orders of examining magistrates, grants of appeal issued as a result of such orders, or from final sentences of the Peace Courts and sentences of the Land Courts, the Court of Cassation, in accepting the appeal, will decide without remand. Art. 105. The office of judge is incompatible with any other salaried public office. The law regulates the conditions requisite for being a judge of any rank. Art. 106. Commercial disputes are referred to Civil and Peace Courts in conformity with the Commercial Code. Art. 107. Sessions of the Courts are public unless such publicity endangers public order and morality; in such case, the Court so decides by judgment. In matters pertaining to political crimes and crimes involving the press, no closed sessions may be declared. Art. 108. Every decree or judgment is explained and pronounced in a public hearing. Art. 109. Decrees or judgments are rendered and executed in the name of the Republic. They are binding on the officers of the Public Ministry and agents of the Public Force. The records of notaries are issued in the same form whenever they have compulsory force. Art. 110. The Court of Cassation rules on jurisdictional conflicts in the manner prescribed by law. It takes cognizance of the facts and the law in all cases of decisions rendered by the Military Court. Art. 111. The Court of Cassation, when a case is litigated and remanded, rules in full court on the constitutionality of laws. The remedy for unconstitutionality is not subject to any requirement of deposit, penalty or tax. The interpretation given by the Legislative Chambers will be applied to the case without retroactive change of rights acquired by previous final judgment. The Courts will apply the decrees and regulations of the public administration only in so far as they conform to the laws. Chapter V. Proceedings against Members of the State Powers Art. 112. The Chamber of Deputies impeaches the President of the I Republic and summons him before the Senate sitting as a High Court of Justice, for the crime of treason or any other crime or misdemeanor iicnthtoepmrfe-adsdutie. It likewise impeaches and summons before the High Court: I) The Secretaries of State in case of embezzlement, treason, abuse
orexcsfpw,anyothercimsdano iteh performance of their duties. 2) In case of grave breach of trust, any member of the Court of Cas¬-sation, and any officer of the Public Ministry attached to that Court.

The impeachment may not be pronounced except by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Chamber. At the opening of the session, each member of the High Court of Justice takes an oath to judge with the impartiality and firmness that becomes a free and honest man, according to his conscience and inmost conviction. The High Court of Justice may not pronounce any other penalty except deprivation of civil rights, dismissal from office and loss of the right to hold public office for one year at least and five years at most; but the convicted party may be brought before the regular courts in conformity with the law, if there is occasion for applying other penalties or for deciding upon civil process. No one may be judged or convicted except by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Senate. The limits prescribed by article 50 of the Constitution for the duration of the sessions of the Legislative Body do not terminate the proceedings of the Senate sitting as a High Court of Justice. Art. 113. In case of grave breach of trust, any Judge or Officer of the Public Ministry is impeached by one of the Sections of the Court of Cassation. If any entire Court is involved, the impeachment is pronounced by the Court of Cassation sitting as a full court. Art. 114. The law regulates the manner of proceeding against the President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State, and Judges in the case of crimes or misdemeanors committed by them, either within or outside the performance of their duties. Art. 115. The law shall fix the extent of responsibility of either the State or of an official with respect to arbitrary acts performed in violation of the Constitution or the laws, and which have caused prejudice to third parties. The conditions under which action may be taken by injured third parties shall also be determined by law. In any case, the State or the responsible Secretary of State may only be convicted conjointly. Art. 116. The statute of limitations may never be invoked in favor of a military or civil official who is guilty of arbitrary or illegal acts to the prejudice of private individuals, until after the termination of his functions.
TITLE IV

The Communes Art. 117. The Commune is autonomous. The conditions and limits of this autonomy are regulated by law. Art. 118. The Communal Council is elected for four years and its members are indefinitely eligible for reelection. The number of members of a Communal Council is fixed by law. To be elected a member of a Communal Council, it is necessary:
1) To be a Haitian ; 2) To have reached 25 years of age ;

3) To enjoy civil and political rights ; 4) To own real property within the Commune or to engage in an industry or profession ; 5) To have resided at least two years in the Commune.

Art. 119. Before taking office, the members take the following oath before the Civil Court having jurisdiction: "I swear to respect the rights of the people, to work for the progress of my Commune, to be faithful to the Constitution, and to conduct myself always as a worthy and honest citizen." Art. 120. The Communal Council cannot be dissolved except in case of duly proven negligence, embezzlement, or fraudulent administration. In this case, the President of the Republic shall form a Commission of three members, known as a Communal Commission, called to manage the interests of the Commune until the next elections. Art. 121. In the event of the death, resignation, judicial suspension of civil rights of a member, or of his definitive conviction for an offense involving afflictive or infamous punishment, he shall be replaced by a citizen appointed by the President of the Republic. Art. 122. A Commune has the free disposition of its revenues, under the conditions prescribed by law. Art. 123. Every two years the Communal Council considers the selection of a Council for each Section Rurale within the Commune. This Council is called the "Council of Notables." It may be renewed indefinitely. It shall consist of, at the most, twelve honorary members. The law regulates the organization and functioning of this Council. Art. 124. A Section Rurale shall be organized within the communal system, for the purpose of bettering living conditions in country districts and ensuring protection for farm workers and the productivity of their labor by: 1) The establishment of rural health and education centers; 2) The organization of an efficient police force and good administration of justice; 3) The establishment of unattachable family estates (bien de famille insaisissable) and improvement of towns and villages through public hygiene regulations; 4) The organization of small agricultural and artisan credit adapted to the economic conditions of the country.
TITLE V

The Primary Assemblies Art. 125. The Primary Assemblies meet, of right or upon convocation a the Executive, in each Commune, on the second Sunday in January, in the manner provided by law, every four years, for the election of the Deputies and Communal Councilmen, and every six years for the election of Senators. They shall meet upon special convocation for the elections provided for in articles 39, 42, 51, 81 and 89 of the present Constitution. They may not take up any other matter and are obliged to adjourn upon the accomplishment of the purposes designated above.

Art. 126. The law prescribes the conditions requisite for voting in the Primary Assemblies.
TITLE VI

Prefectural Organization
Art. 127. The office of Prefect is established in the Departments and, where necessary, in the Arrondissements. The Prefects are civil officials who directly represent the Executive Power. The Law determines their powers and place of residence. Art. 128. The Prefects, Communal Magistrates, the Commissioner of Government, the Justices of Peace, School Inspectors, Agents of the Agricultural and Public Health Services, Public Works officials, Customs Directors, Tax Collectors, and all others representing the Public Services of the prefectural district constitute the Prefectural Council. This Council is required to meet twice a year at the seat of the Prefecture to consider all questions of a regional nature and to report thereon to the Executive. Likewise, in case of necessity, the Council meets in extraordinary session.
TITLE VII

Finances
Art. 129. The law shall prescribe the rules for the decentralization of the finances of the Republic, taking into account the general interests of the Nation. Art. 180. The public revenues or finances of the State are determined by law. Art. 131. The taxes for the benefit of the State and the Communes may not be levied except by law. The laws establishing taxes are in force for one year only. Art. 132. Direct taxation rests on the principle of progressive rates and is calculated on the basis of the amount of capital, wages and income. Art. 133. The monetary unit of Haiti is the Gourde. The law fixes its standard and weight as well as that of all lesser coins that the State is empowered to issue as legal tender throughout the territory of the Republic. The National Bank of the Republic of Haiti, whose statutes are prescribed by law, is vested with the exclusive privilege of issuing notes representing the Gourde. No issuance of coins or notes may take place except by virtue of a law which determines its use and amount. In no case may the amount fixed be exceeded. Art. 134. No privileges may be established with respect to taxes. No exemption, and no increase or decrease in taxes may be established except by a law. Art. 135. No pension, no gratuity, no subsidy, no appropriation

	 whatsoever may be made from the Public Treasury except by virtue of a law proposed by the Executive Power. Art. 136. Any transfer or any withdrawal from the Social Security funds is prohibited. Art. 137. Traffic in influence in the Government and in any branch of the Public Administration is prohibited. The law shall prescribe the measures to be taken to stop this practice. It shall apply the necessary penalties. No member of the Legislative Power, the Executive Power, or the Judicial Power may be personally interested, even through an intermediary in a contract of any kind to which the State is a party. However, the present provisions must not M any way directly or indirectly prejudice the functioning of enterprises operating in the general interest in the country and which are deemed suitable to promote the economic progress of the community, always provided that such enterprises have been established before the election of the member of the Legislative Body or before the appointment of the official or member of the Judiciary. Art. 138. Plurality of offices remunerated by the State is strictly prohibited, except in secondary, higher and professional education, or in (lie case of a person serving both as a professor in higher education and in a technical position in the same field. Art. 139. The budget of each Ministerial Department is divided into chapters and sections and must be voted article by article. T ransfer of funds is strictly forbidden. No sum allotted to one chapter may be credited to another chapter and tilled for other expenses without a law. The Secretary of State for Finances is bound, under his personal responiblty,a eochMinstralDpmechontly twelfth of the amount voted for its budget, except by decision of the Council of SecretariesrotariesfS,nxdarycse. The general accounts of receipts and expenditures of the Republic are the Secretary of State for Finances according to bookkeeping kept by methods established by law. The	 administrative year begins on the first of October and closes on the of September of the following year. thirtieth Art.140. . Each year the Legislative Body passes upon: 1)
ceding The account of receipts and expenditures of the past year or preportion
years; 2) The general budget of the State containing the estimate and of funds allotted to each Ministerial Department for the year.

Nevertheless, no proposal or amendment may be introduced with respect to the budget without a corresponding ways and means provision. may be made either to augment or reduce the salaries of pub	Art. lic officials, 141. except by a modification of the laws relating thereto. The general accounts and the budgets prescribed by the precdingatlmusb edothLgislavCmberyth Secrtayof Finceswthfdayreopnigfth Legislative session. This applies likewise to the annual balance statement

and transactions of the National Bank of the Republic of Haiti and to all other accounts of the Haitian State. The Legislative Chambers may refrain from all legislative work until these documents are presented to them. They refuse to release the Secretaries of State until the accounts presented or their supporting documents furnish all the necessary data for verification and decision. Art. 142. The examination and settlement of the accounts of the general administration and of everyone responsible to the public treasury shall be made according to the method prescribed by law. Art. 143. In the event that the Legislative Body, for any reason whatsoever, does not act upon the budget for one or more Ministerial Departments before its adjournment, the budgets of the interested Departments in force during the current fiscal year will be maintained for the following fiscal year. In the event that through fault of the Executive the budgets of the Republic shall not have been voted, the President of the Republic shall immediately convoke the Legislative Chambers in special session for the sole purpose of voting the budgets of the State, subject to the constitutional sanctions to be taken against the Ministers responsible. Art. 144. For the purpose of exercising a sure and permanent control over public expenditures, an Interparliamentary Commission shall be elected by secret ballot, at the beginning of each regular session, consisting of fifteen members, nine of whom are Deputies and six Senators, charged with reporting on the administration of the Secretaries of State in order that the two Assemblies may grant or refuse them their release. This Commission may add three specialists in accounting to assist it in its control.
TITLE VIII

The Public Force

Art. 145. A Public Force ,designated by the name of ARMEE D'HAITI, of which the President of the Republic is the Supreme Chief, is established for the internal and external security of the Republic and the guarantee of the rights of the people. Art. 146. The organization of the Army of Haiti and of the courts connected with it is determined by law. The Military Court must pronounce its sentences in the presence of the accused and his counsel, and note of that formality shall be made in the said sentence. Otherwise it shall be null and void. The accused or his counsel may make appeal in Cassation, either to the official performing the function of clerk of the court, who must receive it at the same session, or to the clerk of the Civil Court having jurisdiction, within three working days after sentence was pronounced. During this period, and while the cassation is pending, the execution of the inferior sentence is suspended. The official or clerk who receives the appeal is bound to transmit it, with all proceedings in the case, to the office of the Court of Cassation,

which shall take cognizance of the matter within a period of not more than fifteen days. Art. 147. Military service is compulsory. A law shall prescribe the method of recruitment and the duration of service. Art. 148. Police duties are separate from those of the Army and are entrusted to special agents subject to civil and penal liability in the forms and conditions governed by law. Art. 149. Military men in active service may not be called upon for any other public function. Art. 150. Military districts; independent of administrative territorial divisions, may be established according to circumstances by decree of the President of the Republic.
TITLE IX

General Provisions Art. 151. The national colors are BLUE and RED, horizontally arranged in bands of equal dimensions. The arms of the Republic are: the PALMETTO surmounted by the CAP OF LIBERTY adorned by a trophy with the motto: "L'UNION FAIT LA FORCE" (Union makes strength). The motto is: "LIBERTY, EQUALITY, FRATERNITY." The National Hymn is the DESSALINIENNE. Art. 152. No oath may be imposed except by virtue of the Constitution or a law. Art. 153. The National Holidays are : Independence Day, the first of January; Agriculture and Labor Day, the first of May; Flag Day, the L18th egal of May; and the Discovery of Haiti, December 6. holidays are determined by law. A rt. 154. All elections shall be by secret ballot. Art. :155. No place, no part of the territory may be declared in a state of siege except in case of civil strife or imminent invasion by a foreign force. An act of the President of Haiti declaring a state of siege must be signedbyalthScrsofeandpvirmte convocation of the Legislative Body to pass upon the advisability of the measure. The Legislative Body shall decide with the Executive Power as to what constitutional guarantees may be suspended in those parts of the territory placed in a state of siege. Art. 156. The effects of a state of siege shall be regulated by a special Art. 157. All Codes of laws are maintained in so far as they are not contrary to the present Constitution. All provisions of law, all decrees, orders. regulations and other acts that are contrary to it are repealed.
TITLE X

Amendment of the Constitution Art. 158. The Legislative Power, upon the proposal of one of the two

Chambers or of the Executive Power, has the right to declare that the constitutional provisions which it designates should be amended. This declaration should have the approval of two-thirds of each of the two Chambers. This may be done only during the last regular session of a legislature and shall be published immediately throughout the territory. A legislature is considered to be the term of office of the Deputies. Art. 159. At the first session of the following legislature, the Chambers shall meet together in National Assembly and shall act upon the proposed amendment. Art. 160. The National Assembly may not consider this amendment unless at least two thirds of the members of each of the two Chambers are present. No declaration may be made, no change may be adopted except by a two-thirds majority of the votes. Art. 161. Any expression of public opinion intended to modify the Constitution by means of REFERENDUM is strictly forbidden. SPECIAL ARTICLE. All acts undertaken by the Junte de Gouvernement of the Republic during the presidential vacancy which began on May 10, 1950 are ratified and validated.
TITLE XI

Temporary Provisions Art. A. The President of the Republic, Citizen Paul Eugene Magloire, elected October 8, 1950, shall take office on December 6, 1950 and his term will end May 15, 1957. Art. B. The Deputies elected under the authority of the decree of convocation of the Junte de Gouvernement of the Republic shall hold office until the second Monday of April 1955. The Senators elected under the authority of the decree of the Junte de Gouvernement of the Republic shall hold office until the second Monday of April 1957. Art. C. The next elections of the Communal Councils shall be held at the same time as the election of Deputies. Art. D. Upon publication of the present Constitution the mission of the Chamber of Accounts and of the Consultative Council shall terminate. Art. E. Four months after the elected President of the Republic takes office, the Executive Power is authorized to proceed with any reforms deemed necessary in the Judiciary. Art. F. The present Constitution shall take effect upon its publication in Le Moniteur, the official journal of the Republic. Done at Gonalves, seat of the Constituent Assembly, the 25th of November 1950, the 147th Year of Indepedence. (S) The President of the Constituent Assembly: Dantes Bellegarde (S) The Secretaries: Joseph Renaud and Archimede Beauvoir (S) The Members: Massillon Gaspard, Othello Bayard, Georges Bretoux, Emmanuel Leconte, Francois Mathon, Clovis Kernizan, Altidor Kersaint, Victor Duncan, Dr. Clement Lanier, Ambert Saindoux, Frederic Magny, Charles Riboul, Elie Tiphaine, and Georges Leon.

