CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Honduras.Tegucigalpa, March 28, 1936.(1) THE National Constituent Assembly decrees and ratifies the following political constitution: 

PART I. Sole Chapter.-The Nation. ART. 1. Honduras is a free nation, sovereign independent. 
The intervention of a foreign Government in its internal affairs is a violation of its sovereignty. 2. National sovereignty is vested in the Honduranean people as a whole, who delegate its exercise within the powers which this constitution establishes. 3. All public authority emanates from the people. The officials of the State have no other powers than those expressly given to them by the law. Every act which they may execute outside the law is null. 4. The boundaries of Honduras and its territorial divisions shall be determined by law. 5. No authority can conclude covenants, treaties or conventions which compromise the sovereignty and independence of the Republic. The resulting responsibility may at any time be cast on those persons who have entered into such engagements or have contributed to their execution.

PART II.-Nationality and Sovereignty.

Chapter I.-Honduraneans. 
6. Honduraneans are natives or naturalised citizens. 7. The following are natives:(1) Persons born in the national territory, with the exception of the children of diplomatic agents and foreigners in transit. (2) Children of a Honduranean father or mother, born in a foreign country, from the moment they reside in Honduras; and even without this condition when, according to the laws of their place of birth, they are entitled to Honduranean nationality, or may opt for it if they have the right to choose. Treaties may modify the provisions of this paragraph. 8. No Honduranean born within the territory of the nation shall possess another nationality, different from that, of Honduras, so long as he resides in the country. 9. Neither marriage nor its dissolution affects the nationality of spouses or their children. 10. Natives of the other Republics of Central America who, after one year's residence in the country, state in writing, before the competent authority, their desire to be Honduraneans, and comply with the legal requirements, are considered as native Honduraneans, provided that reciprocity exists in the country of origin and within the limits to which it extends. 11. The following are naturalised citizens:(1) Spaniards and Latin-Americans who have more than, 2 years' residence in the country.

  565 1936

566

 

(2) Other foreigners who have resided in the country for more than 4 consecutive years. In both cases the applicant must first renounce his nationality before the competent authority and state his desire to adopt Honduranean nationality. (3) Those who obtain certificates of naturalisation decreed by the National Congress. 12. Honduranean nationality is lost:(1) By voluntary naturalisation in a foreign country. (2) By revocation of the naturalisation certificate. (3) By giving one's services, in time of war, to enemies of Honduras or to allies of those enemies. 13. In the case of No. (3) of the foregoing article, nationality may be recovered by a legislative decree. 14. Every Honduranean is obliged to defend the country, to respect the authorities and to contribute to the maintenance of the nation and to its moral and material aggrandisement. Chapter II.-Aliens. 15. Aliens are obliged, from the time of their arrival in the territory of the Republic, to respect the authorities and to comply with the laws. 16. Aliens enjoy in Honduras all the civil rights of Honduraneans. 17. They may acquire every class of property in the country, in conformity with the law; and they remain subject to all the ordinary and extraordinary obligations of a general character to which Honduraneans are subject. 18. They may not make claims, or demand- any indemnities whatsoever of the State, except in the form and in the cases in which Honduraneans may make them. Neither may they hold public posts or offices, including those of the various religious bodies established in the country, under the penalty of expulsion; but they may occupy posts in education and in the arts, and in any other branch which is not included in the prohibition. 19. Aliens may not have recourse to diplomatic channels except in cases of denial of justice. For this purpose, the fact that a judgment given is not favourable to the complainant shall not be construed as a denial of justice. If in contravention of this provision, claims are not terminated in an amicable manner and are prejudicial to the country, such aliens shall lose their right to reside therein. 20. Extradition may be granted only by virtue of law or treaties, for serious civil offences; never for political

  566 1936

 

56T

offences, even though, as a consequence thereof, a civil offence occurs. 21. The laws shall establish the form and cases in which an alien may be denied permission to enter the national territory, or in which his expulsion may be ordered because he is considered undesirable. 22. Laws and treaties shall regulate the use of these guarantees, but may not alter them. 23. The provisions of this chapter do not modify existing treaties between Honduras and other nations. 

Chapter III.-Citizens. 24. The following are citizens:(1) All male Honduraneans over 21 years of age. (2) All male Honduraneans over 18 years of age who are married. (3) All male Honduraneans over 18 years of age who are able to read and write. 25. The citizen has the right to exercise the vote and to be selected for public office, in accordance with the law. Persons of high rank in the army or the police may not exercise the right to vote; but they may be elected in those cases not prohibited by the law. 26. The quality of citizenship is suspended, lost and regained in accordance with the following provisions: It is suspended: (1) By reason of an order of committal for trial or of official denunciation as a criminal, or when grounds for indictment exist. (2) By reason of a -definitive sentence which deprives a person of political rights. (3) By reason of civil interdiction, by being declared a fraudulent debtor or by reason of vagrancy legally determined. It is lost: (1) By accepting, without due permission, decorations which imply obedience or submission to the Government which grants them. (2) By holding in the country, without the necessary authorisation, employment under a foreign nation of a military or political character. (3) For aiding in opposition to the nation an alien or a foreign Government in any diplomatic claim or before an international tribunal. It is restored: (1) By stay of proceedings which is confirmed. (2) By a final sentence of acquittal. (3) By expiation of the penalty.

  567 1936

568

 

(4) By amnesty or pardon. (5) By rehabilitation in conformity with the law. 27. The exercise of the vote is an obligatory public act and may not be renounced. 28. Voting shall be carried out in a direct and secret form. Elections shall take place in the form and under the conditions prescribed by law. 29. Only adult citizens over 21 years of age, who enjoy the exercise of their rights, may be elected, subject to the exceptions which are established by law.
PART

III.-Rights and Guarantees.

30. The constitution guarantees to all the inhabitants of Honduras, whether nationals or aliens, the inviolability of human life, individual security, liberty, equality before the law and property. Chapter I.-The Inviolability of Human Life. 31. Capital punishment remains abolished in Honduras; but until a penitentiary system is established it shall be applied in the cases determined by law, solely to the perpetrators of parricide, murder and treason when the latter is committed on active service and on campaign. The sentences passed in the prosecutions brought for these crimes shall be discussed with the Courts of Appeals; and the decision of these courts shall be sent for review to the Supreme Court of Justice, if common crimes are concerned, and to the Office of the Commander-in-Chief of the Republic if the case is of a military nature. Both the Supreme Court of Justice and the Office of the Commander-in-Chief of the Republic shall render their verdict solely after perusal of the proceedings. Chapter II.-Individual Security. 32. The constitution recognises the guarantee of Habeas corpus. In consequence, any person illegally detained, or any other on behalf of such person, has the right to apply to the appropriate court, verbally or in writing, and to petition for the production of the detained person. 33. Every person has the right to demand protection in respect of any offence or arbitrary act of which he may be the victim, and, in order to make effective the exercise of all the guarantees which this constitution establishes, whenever he may be unduly limited in the exercise of them

  568 1936

 

569

by laws or acts of any authority, or public agent or official whatsoever. 34. An order of arrest which does not emanate from a competent authority, or which has been issued without legal formalities, is unlawful. 35. Detention for enquiry may not exceed 6 days. 36. The isolation of a person under detention shall not exceed 48 hours. 37. An order of imprisonment shall not be issued without previous full proof that a crime or simple offence has been committed which merits the penalty of deprivation of liberty, and unless reasonable evidence appears as to who is the author. Official denouncement as a criminal shall be made in the same manner. 38. Imprisonment for debt is prohibited except in cases of fraud. 39. Imprisonment or arrest is permitted as a penalty, or by way of judicial compulsion, in the cases and for the term provided by the law. Detention by way of judicial compulsion shall not exceed 30 days. 40. A delinquent caught in the act may be apprehended by any person for the purpose of delivering him to the competent authority. 41. No one may be imprisoned or detained except in the places determined by the law. The prisons shall only be used to guard persons awaiting trial and those who have been sentenced. 42. Even under an order of imprisonment, no one may be committed to prison or detained therein who presents adequate bail, when the penalty for the offence does not exceed 3 years. 43. No person may be judged by special commissions or by judges other than those designated by the law. 44. The right of defence is inviolable. 45. No one may be compelled, in criminal cases, to testify against himself, or against his spouse or relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity. 46. No person may be molested or persecuted for his opinions. Private acts which do not interfere with public order, or which cause no injury to a third person, shall always be outside the action of the law. 47. Whipping, flogging and every kind of torture are absolutely prohibited. Unnecessary shackles and all undue severity are likewise forbidden. 48. The dwelling of every individual is a sacred asylum, which may not be broken into except by the authorities, in the following cases:(1) To remove a criminal caught in the act.

  569 1936

Z70

 

(2) Whenever a crime has been committed within the dwelling, for scandalous disorder which requires prompt remedy, or on request from the interior of the house. (3) In case of fire, earthquake, flood, epidemic or the like; and to carry out any visit or inspection of a purely -sanitary character. (4) To liberate a person illegally abducted. (5) To remove objects sought by virtue of a legal process, preceded by partial proof, at least, of the existence of the said objects; and to execute a judicial writ legally -issued. (6) To apprehend a criminal in respect of whom there exists an order of imprisonment or detention, preceded by at least partial proof that he is hidden in the house to be -entered. In the last two cases entrance may not be effected except by written order of the competent authority. 49. Whenever the domicile which has to be entered is not that of the malefactor who is being sought, the authority or its agents shall previously request the permission of the occupier. 50. No dwelling may be entered between the hours of 7 P.M. and 6 A.M. without the permission of the head of the house. 51. Letters, telegraphic correspondence and private papers are inviolable, without prejudice to the provisions of the law dealing with the state of siege. Neither the Executive Power nor his agents may remove, open or detain the said correspondence. Whatever is abstracted from the mails or-from any other place whatsoever shall not constitute evidence. 52. Private correspondence, private papers and books may only be seized by order of a competent judge, in civil and criminal cases which the law determines, and must be examined in the presence of the owner, or, in his absence, of two witnesses; and the papers which have no relation to the investigation must be returned. 53. It is forbidden to make laws or regulations which are proscriptive, confiscatory, or which order sentences which are opprobious or unlimited as to time. The duration of sentences shall not exceed 12 years, and 20 years in respect of accumulative sentences for various offences. 54. No law shall be retroactive in effect, except in penal matters when the new law is favourable to the delinquent or person prosecuted. 55. The police may only be under the directions of the civil authorities.

  570 1936

 

571

56. The order and the form of proceedings in civil and criminal matters shall be established by law. Chapter III.-Liberty. 57. The Church is separated from the State. The free exercise of all religions which are not contrary to the laws of the country is guaranteed. The grant of subsidies to religious bodies or for religious education is prohibited. 58. No religious document shall serve to establish the civil status of persons. 59. Every person may freely, without previous censorship, express his opinions orally or in writing, by means of the press or in any other manner, without prejudice to the responsibility imposed by law for offences and abuses committed in the exercise of this liberty. In no case may a printing plant or its accessories be seized as a corpus delicto. Instruction 60. Educational liberty is guaranteed. maintained by public funds shall be secular, and primary education, furthermore, shall be free, obligatory, paid for by the municipalities and subsidised by the State. 61. The right of assembly without arms, and that of association for any lawful object is guaranteed. The establishment of any kind of monastic associations is prohibited. The entry into the country of individuals belonging to these societies shall be regulated by the law. 62. Industry and commerce are free; but the following may be monopolised for the benefit of the State: alcohol, spirituous liquors, saltpetre, gunpowder, firearms, munitions of war and the explosives used in military pursuits. The traffic in narcotics or heroic drugs shall be regulated by law and by international conventions. 63. There shall be no monopolies in favour of private persons. Concessions may be granted for a period not exceeding 10 years. Concessions to encourage the introduction or perfection of new industries, immigration, and institutions of credit, and those to open means of communication or colonisation undertakings shall be granted for a period up to 90 years, which may not be extended. In the cases above enumerated, only established duties and taxes may be remitted; but in no wise and in no case will future public charges be remitted in concessions and contracts. The State may not, in the concessions it grants or in the contracts it 6oncludes, remit the payment of municipal charges.

  571 1936

:572

 

When the term of a concession relative to colonisation, immigration or the opening of means of communication has -expired, the undertaking, with all its accessories and in full working condition, shall become the property of the State, without any compensation. 64. Any person may acquire properties and dispose of them by any title, within the limitations established by the law. 65. Entails, and any settlement in favour of religious establishments, are prohibited. 66. Any person, or group of persons, has a right to address petitions to the legally constituted authorities who shall consider them and make known their decision in relation thereto. 67. Any person may enter the territory of the Republic, depart therefrom, travel within its boundaries, and change his residence, in conformity with the laws. 68. The inhabitants of the Republic have the right to possess and carry arms, in accordance with the law.

Chapter IV.-Equality. 69. All Honduraneans are equal before the law. The Republic does not recognise personal exemptions or privileges. 70. The holding of a plurality of remunerated offices or posts is prohibited, even ad interim, except in so far as teachers and military surgeons are concerned; -the latter may hold posts under the health department. 71. The ministers of the various religious bodies may not hold public office.: 72. Proportional payment shall be the basis of direct taxes. Chapter V.-Property. 73. No one may be deprived of his property except by virtue of law or a sentence based on law. "74. The confiscation of real property on account of necessity or public utility must be authorised by law or by a sentence based on law, and shall not take place without previous indemnification. 75. The right of ownership shall not prejudice the supreme right of the State within its territorial boundaries, nor may it override the rights possessed by national institutions or works of a national character. 76. Every inventor enjoys the exclusive' ownership of his work or discovery, for the period determined by law.

  572 1936

 

573

77. The right to make claims for the recovery of confiscated property is imprescriptible. 78. Only Congress may impose taxes and other public charges. 79. Every service which must not be given gratuitously by virtue of law or a legal decision must be remunerated. 80. No person who has the free administration of his property may be deprived of the right to liquidate his civil affairs by negotiation or arbitration. Chapter VI.-Other Guarantees. 81. The enumeration of rights and guarantees made by this constitution does not exclude those which are not enumerated and which arise from the principle of the sovereignty of the people and the republican form of government. 82. The laws which regulate the exercise of such guarantees and rights shall be null in so far as they reduce, restrict or qualify them. Chapter VII.-.The Suspension of Guarantees. 83. The guarantees established in articles 32, 34, 35, 42, 49; 50, 51, 52, 59 and 61, paragraph 1, 67, 73 and 79 may be suspended in the whole of the Republic or part of it, temporarily and when the security of the State so requires, in the event of invasion of the territory, grave disturbance of order which threatens the public peace, epidemic or other calamity. The territory in which the guarantees mentioned are suspended shall be governed, during the suspension, by the law relating to the state of siege; but neither in the said law nor in any other shall the suspension of other guarantees than those already mentioned be prescribed. There shall likewise not be made, during the suspension, proclamations of new offences, nor may other penalties be imposed than those established by the laws in force when the decree of suspension is issued. 84. The suspension of guarantees may only be decreed by Congress, or, when it is not in session, by the Executive Power; but the latter may not decree the suspension for more than 60 days, except by a fresh declaration. In every case account must be rendered to Congress of the acts performed during the suspension of guarantees. 85. If the Executive violates any of the provisions comprised in this chapter, the person prejudiced, or any person on his behalf, may apply for protection.

PART

 

1V.-The Form of Government. Sole Chapter.

86. The government of Honduras is republican, democratic and representative. It is exercised by three independent powers: Legislative, Executive and Judicial. 87. No one of the constituted powers may execute acts by which the established form of government is altered, or the integrity of the national territory or sovereignty impaired. 88. The provisions of this constitution present no obstacle to treaties which may be concluded with one or more sections of the former Republic of Central America with a view to reuniting.
PART

V.-The Legislative Power.

Chapter I.-Its Organisation. 89. The Legislative Power is exercised by a Congress of deputies. The latter shall meet ordinarily in the capital of the Republic, on the 5th December of each year, without the necessity of convocation. Deputies must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, over 25 years of age, Honduraneans by birth, and natives or residents of the Department by which the y were elected. 90. The sessions of the National Congress shall last 60 days and may be extended up to 40 further days when affairs of immediate interest so require. 91. Congress shall also hold extraordinary sessions when it is so agreed by a two-thirds vote of its members, or when it is convoked by the Executive Power. In such cases it shall only consider the matters which formed the reason of the respective decree. 92. After Congress has been opened in the capital, it may decide to move to another city. 93. The deputies in preparatory committees shall meet on the 1st December of each year, and with the attendance of at least five shall organise the directorate with a view to taking the necessary measures for the opening of Congress. 94. Two-thirds of the members composing the Congress shall be sufficient for the holding of sessions. 95. A group of five deputies may convoke Congress extraordinarily anywhere in the Republic, when the Executive has impeded its opening or its sessions, or has dissolved it. 96. Deputies shall be elected for a period of 6 years, which shall be counted from the day on which the Departmental Committees announce or effect their election; they may be re-elected. In the event of the absolute default of a deputy, the substitute chosen by Congress shall terminate his period. 97. The following may not be deputies:(1) The Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of State. (2) The employees of the Executive Power, except those in the teaching profession. (3) Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the Courts of Appeals, professional judges, registrars of property and officers of the Public Prosecutor's Department. (4) Members of the Superior Tribunal of Accounts and the Comptroller-General of the Treasury. (5) Diplomatic and consular officers. (6) Military officers on service. (7) Contractors for spirituous liquors and those for public works or services which are paid for out of public funds; also those who through such contracts have claims against the State. (8) Debtors in default to the Public Treasury and those who have accounts pending by reason of the administration of public funds. (9) Relatives of the President of the Republic and of the Secretaries of State, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity. 98. Deputies, from the day of their election, enjoy the following prerogatives: (1) Personal immunity from detention, accusation or trial, even during a state of siege, if Congress does not previously declare that there are grounds for indictment. (2) They may not be sued civilly from 15 days before until 15 days after the ordinary or extraordinary sessions of the Congress, except in the case of reconvention. (3) They may not be summoned for military service without their consent. (4) They may not be exiled from the Republic, nor confined during the period for which they have been elected. (5) They are not responsible in any case for their parliamentary opinions or initiatives. 99. Deputies are not obliged to accept public offices. If they voluntarily accept any of those included in article 97, they cease ipso facto to be deputies. 100. The election of deputies to Congress shall be effected on the basis of one substantive deputy and one substitute for each 25,000 inhabitants. If there be fractions, one further deputy shall be elected for each fraction in excess of one-half of the basic number. Nevertheless, the Departments having a smaller population shall elect one substantive deputy and one substitute.

  575 1936

 

Chapter II.-The Functions of Congress. 101. The following functions appertain to Congress:(1) To open, suspend and close its sessions. (2) To convoke extraordinary sessions, when it deems fitting. (3) To validate the election of its members, reviewing their credentials, and to receive from them the promise enjoined law. (4) Toby summon the respective substitutes, in case of absolute default or legitimate impediment of the substantive members; and to cause vacancies occurring to be filled. (5) To accept the resignations of its members for lawful reasons duly proven. (6) To draw up its own internal rules. (7) To convoke elections of supreme authorities. (8) To scrutinise the votes for the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and declare elected the citizens who have obtained an absolute majority. (9) To elect, in case there has been no absolute majority, the President and Vice-President from the two citizens who obtained, for each office, the greatest number of popular votes. If Congress does not declare or elect the President and Vice-President within 20 days, counted from its opening, the Supreme Court of Justice shall do so within the 7 days prior to the date fixed for taking possession of those offices; the said court is authorised, in this case, to, receive the oath of office from the persons elected. When a citizen is elected to more than one office, the preference shall be determined in the following order: (1) President; (2) Vice-President; (3) Deputy. Election as substantive deputy takes precedence over that of substitute. (10) To elect for the constitutional period five substantive magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and three substitute magistrates. In the event of absolute default of any of these, to elect the person who shall finish his term of office. (11) To elect the General Auditor and accountants, both substantive and substitute, of the Superior Tribunal of Accounts, the Comptroller-General of the Treasury, and the. Treasurer of Justice. (12) To receive the constitutional promise of office of the officials whom it elects or declares elected, and to accept or refuse the resignations, including those declared elected by the Supreme Court of Justice, in the case of No. (9) of this article. (13) To change the seat of residence of the Supreme Powers, for grave reasons. (14) To declare grounds for indictment against the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the deputies, the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Secretaries of State and the diplomatic agents, while they are in office. (15) To grant an amnesty for political offences. Apart from this case, Congress may not pass resolutions by way of pardon. (16) To grant rewards and material privileges to authors or inventors, and to persons who have introduced new industries or perfected those in existence which are of general utility. (17) To grant or refuse permission to Honduraneans to accept in the country posts or decorations from another nation. (18) To approve, modify or disapprove the contracts concluded by the Executive, in the cases of article 63 or when their effects extend over the following presidential term. (19) To approve or disapprove the conduct of the Executive Power. (20) To declare the Republic or a part thereof to be in a state of siege, in accordance with the law. (21) To confer the ranks, from major to general of division, on the initiative of the Executive Power. (22) To permit or refuse the transit through the Republic of troops of another country. (23) To declare war and make peace. (24) To do everything appropriate for the security and defence of the Republic. (25) To approve or disapprove the treaties concluded with other nations. (26) To fix at each ordinary session the number of the permanent armed forces. (27) To approve or disapprove the accounts of public expenditure, when they exceed the amounts fixed in the general budget of expenditure. (28) To create and abolish posts, and grant honours and pensions for eminent services to the country. (29) To grant subsidies for purposes of public utility: and to decree subsidies to promote new industries or improve those in existence. (30) To fix annually the general budget of expenditure, taking as the basis the probable revenue, with power to extend it for the following year. (31) To decree the weight, fineness and type of the national money and the standard of weights and measures. (32) To exercise supreme control over the public revenues. (33) To impose taxes and other public charges. 

(34) To regulate the payment of the National Debt. (35) To decree loans. (36) To approve or disapprove the alienation of national property or its application to public uses. (37) To regulate maritime, land and air commerce. (38) To establish ports and to create and abolish custom houses. (39) To decree, interpret, reform and repeal laws. (40) To issue laws for the control of international exchange and the stabilisation of the monetary system. (41) To establish the national emblems. (42) To exercise other powers which may be conferred by law. 102. The Legislative Power may not provide documents or declarations relating to the civil status of persons, or grant professional titles. The studies and formalities which the laws of public instruction require for the acquisition of the said titles may not be dispensed with, except by modification of a general character of those laws. 103. The powers of the Legislative cannot be delegated, except those which refer to the inauguration of high functionaries. Chapter III.-The Enactment, Approval and Promulgation of Laws. 104. The deputies, the President of the Republic, acting through the Secretaries of State, and the Supreme Court of Justice have exclusive right to initiate laws, in matters within their competence. When Congress deems it necessary to issue a law, it shall designate a commission from its members to draw up the corresponding draft. 105. No draft law shall be definitively put to the vote until three debates have taken place on different days, except in case of urgency approved by a two-thirds vote. 106. Every draft law, upon being approved by Congress, shall pass to the Executive Power at the latest within 3 days after having been voted, with a view to its approval and promulgation as law. 107. The approval of a law will be effected with the following formula: " Therefore, let it be executed." 108. If the Executive raises objection to the approval of a draft law, he shall return it to Congress within 10 days, with the following formula: " Return to Congress," and explain the reasons on which his disagreement is based. If within the period mentioned it is not objected to, it shall be considered as approved and shall be promulgated as law. When the Executive returns the project, Congress shall


subject it to fresh debate; and if it be ratified by two-thirds of the votes, it shall be sent afresh to the Executive, with the following formula: " Ratified constitutionally," and the latter shall publish it without delay. If the veto is based on the fact that the draft law is unconstitutional, it, may not be subjected to fresh debate without first hearing the opinion of the Supreme Court of Justice. The latter shall issue its report within the period which Congress specifies. 109. When Congress passes a draft law at the end of its sessions and the Executive entertains objections to approving it, the Executive is obliged to give immediate notice to Congress so that it may remain in session for a maximum of 10 days, counting from the date on which the Executive received the draft; and if that is not done, it shall be reviewed in the first 8 days of the following session of Congress. 110. In relation to the following acts and resolutions, approval is not necessary, nor can the Executive impose a veto thereon : (1) The elections which Congress holds or declares, or the resignations which it accepts or refuses. (2) The declarations as to whether or not there is cause for indictment. (3) The budget law. (4) The decrees which refer to the administration of the Executive Power. (5) The rules which it issues for its internal administration. (6) The decisions to move its seat to another place temporarily, and to suspend its sessions, or to convoke extraordinary sessions. (7) The treaties or contracts which Congress disapproves. In these cases the Executive shall promulgate the law with the following formula: " Therefore: let it be published." 111. Whenever a draft law, which has not been initiated by the Supreme Court of Justice, has as its object the modification or repeal of any of the provisions contained in the Codes of the Republic, it may not be discussed without hearing the opinion of that tribunal. The Court shall issue its report in the period which Congress specifies. This provision does not include the laws of a political, economic and administrative order. 112. No draft law rejected, totally or partially, may again be discussed in the same legislature. 113. The law has obligatory force by virtue of its promulgation and after 20 days have passed following its publication in the official periodical La Gaceta.

Nevertheless, the period of time mentioned in this article may be restricted or extended in the law itself, and in special cases another form of promulgation may be ordered.
PART

VI.-The Executive Power. Chapter I.-Organisation.

114. The Executive Power is exercised by a citizen who shall be termed " President of the Republic "; failing him, by a Vice-President; in default of the latter, by the citizen who occupies the presidency of the National Congress or has held that post in the last ordinary legislature; and failing the last-named, by the citizen who is President of the Supreme Court of Justice. 115. To be elected President or Vice-President of the Republic, it is necessary to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, over 30 years of age and Honduranean by birth. 116. The President and the Vice-President of the Republic shall be elected by popular and direct vote, and their election shall be declared or effected by Congress, or by the Supreme Court of Justice, as is prescribed. 117. The presidential term shall be 6 years, and shall commence on the 1st January. 118. The following may not be elected President or Vice-President of the Republic for the following term-(1) The citizen who during the course of a term has held the presidency, substantively or ad interim. (2) The Secretaries of State who held or had held their offices 6 months prior to the holding of elections. (3) The relatives of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity. 119. In the event of the temporary incapacity of the President of the Republic, he will be replaced in his functions by the Vice-President; and, in his absence, by the citizens mentioned in article 114. If the default of the President be absolute, the Vice-President shall exercise the Executive Power for the remaining time of the term; but if the Vice-President should likewise be in definitive default, the person replacing him according to law shall convoke elections one month later, for a constitutional period which shall begin on the 1st January following the convocation. 120. Until the presidency is assumed by the person designated by law, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the Council of Ministers, which shall immediately summon the new official to give him possession, if Congress is not in session.

  580 1936

 

Chapter II.-The Functions of the Executive Power. 121. The President of the Republic has the general administration of the country. His functions are(1) To present at the opening of each ordinary Congress a general report of the acts of his administration. (2) To present, through the respective Secretaries of State, within the first 8 days from the opening of Congress, a detailed report or memorial covering all the branches of the administration. (3) To approve the laws, to use the veto in necessary cases and to promulgate without delay those legislative measures which do not require the approval of the Executive. (4) To execute and enforce the laws, issuing for this purpose appropriate decrees and orders, without altering the spirit of the laws. (5) To see that all the employees of the Republic comply with the duties which the law imposes upon them, without intervening in the exercise of their functions. (6) To appoint the Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of State, Special Treasurers and other employees of the Executive Department, in conformity with the law. (7) To remove the employees of his own free appointment. (8) To maintain intact the independence and honour of the nation and the integrity of its territory. (9) To preserve the internal peace and security of the Republic, and to repel every attack and aggression from abroad. (10) To declare war and make peace; and to permit or refuse the transit through the Republic of land, naval or air forces of another country, during the recess of Congress. (11) To exercise the supreme command of the land, sea and air forces. (12) To dispose of the military forces, organising and distributing them in conformity with the law, according to the necessities of the Republic. (13) To grant letters of marque and letters of reprisal. (14) To confer military ranks from Second Lieutenant to Captain. (15) To convoke Congress to extraordinary sessions. (16) To order the filling of vacancies of deputies, during the recess of Congress, in conformity with the law, not later than one month after they have occurred. (17) To afford the officials of the Judicial Power the aid and forces they need to make their legal decisions effective. (18) To conclude treaties and any other diplomatic

negotiations, submitting them to Congress at its next session for ratification. (19) To direct foreign relations, appoint the diplomatic and consular officers of the Republic, receive the Ministers and accept the Consuls of foreign nations. Diplomatic and consular officers who receive salaries must be Honduraneans by birth, citizens in the exercise of their rights and have the necessary qualifications to carry out their functions. (20) To cause the revenues of the State to be collected and their employment regulated, in accordance with the law. (21) To decree, in cases of invasion or civil war, if the State resources be insufficient, a general and proportional loan, an account of the use of which shall be given to Congress at its next session. (22) To declare during recess of Congress the Republic, or part thereof, in a state of siege, in conformity with the law. (23) To grant certificates of naturalisation, in accordance with the law. (24) To organise, direct and promote public instruction and to extend popular education. (25) To publish monthly a statement of receipts and disbursements of the public revenue. (26) To appoint, when he considers it appropriate, technical commissions in matters of importance or of great consequence to the State. (27) To watch over the legal exactitude of the national money, prohibiting the issue and circulation of coupons and to guard the uniformity of weights and measures. (28) To exercise the supreme direction of the police. (29) To grant pardons and commute sentences in accordance with the law. (30) All other functions which may be conferred by law. 122. The decisions of the Executive Power which are not promulgated by the appropriate Secretary of State must not be carried out. The President of the Republic and the Secretaries of State shall be held responsible for the measures they order in contravention of the constitution and the laws. 123. The Vice-President of the Republic shall enjoy the same prerogatives as the deputies. Chapter III.-The Secretaries of State. 124. For the general administration of the country there shall be from 4 to 7 Secretariats of State, among whom shall be distributed the portfolios of Foreign Relations, Finance, Public Credit, War, Navy, Aviation, the Interior, Justice, Welfare, Health, Public Education, Public Works, Labour, Agriculture and Commerce. 125. The Secretaries of State must be Honduraneans by birth, over 25 years of age and citizens in the exercise of their rights. 126. The following may not be Secretaries of State:(1) The relatives of the President or Vice-President of the Republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity. (2) Persons who have administered or collected public monies, until they hold a full discharge of responsibility in respect of their accounts. (3) Contractors for spirituous liquors and for public works and services for account of the nation; and persons who have claims pending in respect of said contracts. (4) Debtors of the Public Treasury. 127. The Secretaries of State may attend, without vote, at the deliberations of Congress. When, at a motion of a deputy, the Governing Board of Congress summons them, they shall attend and reply to interpellations put to them on matters referring to the administration; except those affecting the portfolios of War and Foreign Relations, if they consider reserve necessary. 128. The Under-Secretaries of State must fulfil the same conditions as the Secretaries, and will act as substitutes for them in accordance with the law.

PART

VII.-The Judicial Power.

Chapter I.-Its Organisation. 129. The Judicial Power of the Republic is exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, the Courts of Appeals, and the lower judges established by the law. The seat of the Supreme Court shall be in the capital of the Republic, and it shall be composed of five substantive judges. It will have, in addition, three substitutes. 130. In order to be a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice, one must be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, a Honduranean by birth and a lawyer over 30 years of age. 131. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be elected by the National Congress. 132. Persons possessing any of the disqualifications laid down for the Secretaries of State may not be elected judges of the Supreme Court of Justice. 

133. The magistrates of the Courts of Appeals shall be appointed from among lawyers who have attained the age of 25. 134. The justices of the peace shall be appointed by the departmental or regional professional judges. 135. Persons related within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity may not sit as magistrates or judges in the same court. 136. The term of office for magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be 6 years, and they shall assume office on- the 1st January. 137. The administration of justice is free of charge in the Republic. 138. A judge may not try the same case in different courts. Judges who are relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second of affinity may not try in the same case. 139. The magistrates, judges and officials of the Public Prosecutor's Department may not be obliged to render military service or to attend military exercises or drills. 140. The tribunals of justice may summon the assistance of the armed forces to assure execution of their decisions, and if this be denied them or is not available, they may demand the help of citizens. Whoever unduly refuses to render aid shall incur the responsibility therefor. 141. The power of judging and executing judgments resides solely in the courts and other tribunals of justice. On them devolves the application of the laws in concrete cases which are legally brought to their cognisance, and it is the right of the courts to refuse to act when such cases are contrary to the constitution. 142. The law shall regulate the organisation and functions of the tribunals of justice. 143. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be presided over by one of the substantive magistrates. The functions of the president shall last for one year, counting from the 1st January, and devolving on the magistrates in turn according to the order of their seniority in the service of the tribunal. Failing this, seniority according to law degree shall prevail. The magistrates shall have the rank and precedence corresponding to their seniority in the service of the tribunal. Whenever the President of the Supreme Court of Justice is called on to assume the presidency of the Republic, he shall be replaced in the former position in accordance with the internal rules of the said tribunal.

  584 1936

 

585

Chapter II.-The Functions of the Supreme Court.

144. The Supreme Court of Justice, in addition to the functions which the law confers upon it, shall exercise the following powers :(1) Make its own internal rules. (2) Try the official and common offences of high officials, when Congress has declared grounds for indictment. (3) Authorise lawyers and notaries, admitted within or without the Republic, to practise their profession and suspend them; all in conformity with the law. (4) Declare whether or not there are grounds for prosecuting against members of the Superior Tribunal of Accounts, against the Fiscal-General of-the Treasury and against the principal national or departmental employees whom the law provides for. (5) Hear prize cases, extradition and other cases which must be judged in accordance with international law. (6) Hear in cassation the judgments rendered in second instance. (7) Appoint the magistrates of the Courts of Appeals, the departmental and regional judges and the officers of the Public Prosecutor's Department in conformity with the, law.
(8) Publish the Judicial Gazette.

The expenses of this publication shall be taken from the judicial funds. (9) It shall accept or refuse the resignation of the officials appointed by them, and grant leave of absence to them as well as to its own members. The departmental or regional judges shall accept or refuse resignations, and grant leave of absence to the justices of the peace.
Chapter III.-Unconstitutionality and Revision.

145. A charge of unconstitutionality in respect of a law which refers to matters which cannot be dealt with by the tribunals may be taken directly to the Supreme Court of Justice by any person who is prejudiced in his rights through its application in a concrete case. The law shall regulate the use of this appeal. 146. No power or authority may transfer to a higher court cases pending or reopen cases that are closed, except in accordance with the provisions of the following article. 147. Criminal cases which have been tried may be revised at any time in favour of the persons sentenced, on their petition, or that of any other person, or of the Public Prosecutor's Department, or on the court's own initiative.


The cases and the form of the revision shall be regulated by law. Chapter IV.-The Treasury of Justice. 148. There is established a Special Treasury of Justice for the payment of the appropriate salaries to the employees of the administration of justice, and of the expenditure of the same department. A law shall determine the income of the said Treasury.
PART

VIII.-National Wealth.

Chapter I.-National Property. 149. The public wealth consists of:(1) All its property, movable and real. (2) All its assets. (3) The proceeds from duties, taxes, imposts and other public charges. 150. The State shall always have the right to impose on private property, whether land or waters, either of nationals or foreigners, such measures as the common interest demands by reason of necessity or public utility, subject to the prior payment of indemnity. 151. In order to create an agricultural heritage the State shall grant title to parcels of land to families of native or naturalised Honduraneans. The law will regulate the terms of acquisition and the obligations of the grantee. 152. In the State is vested direct and imprescriptible dominion over the natural wealth which may be found in the subsoil. Its exploitation and development shall be decided in the respective laws. 153. In the State is vested full dominion, inalienable and imprescriptible, over the waters of the territorial seas to a distance of 12 kilometres from the lowest tide mark, and also full dominion, inalienable and imprescriptible, over its shores, and its lakes, lagoons, estuaries, rivers and rivulets having a constant flow. There are excepted watercourses rising and terminating within private property. 154. The use of the waters to which the previous article refers is vested in the inhabitants of the nation; but the Government may conclude contracts regarding their use, without creating exclusive rights and without prejudice to the general or local ordinances which may be promulgated in the matter. 155. The alienation of the lands specified below from full dominion of the State is prohibited, except in so far as homesteads are concerned.


(1) The zones adjacent to neighbouring States, and the shores of both oceans, to a distance of 40 kilometres towards the interior of the country. (2) The common lands of towns and villages. (3) Islands, keys, reefs, ledges, shoals, rocks and sandbanks. (4) Lands surveyed and belonging to extinct Indian tribes, and those which belonged to villages and municipalities no longer extant. 156. Fiscal property is imprescriptible. 157. The cultural wealth of the nation consists of: (1) All the artistic and historical riches existing in the country. It shall be under the care of the State, which may prohibit its exportation and alienation. In the latter cases it must acquire them itself. (2) The ruins of ancient villages and archaeological objects, which are inalienable and imprescriptible. (3) Places notable for their natural beauty or their artistic or historical value. The State shall compile a register of this cultural wealth -and shall guarantee its safe-keeping, and lay down the respective penal responsibilities. Chapter II.-The Budget. 158. The budget shall be established by Congress; based upon the draft presented by the Executive Power; it may be extended to cover the following year. 159. The estimate of probable receipts shall not exceed the average for the past 5 years, plus a percentage not less than 5, except in the event of the creation of fresh -sources of revenue. 160. The draft budget shall be presented by the Minister for Finance within 8 days following the opening of Congress. 161. Any expenditure incurred outside the budget is illegal, and on being disapproved by Congress, civil and -criminal responsibility shall fall on the person concerned. 162. An organic law shall regulate the framing, execution and liquidation of the budget. 163. There shall be created the General Treasury of the Republic and the Special Treasury of Roads, with revenues as determined by law. Chapter III.-The Financial Control. 164. For the control of the, administration of the National Treasury, there shall be a Superior Tribunal of Accounts, whose functions shall be:

 

(1) To examine, approve or disapprove the accounts of persons who administer public funds. (2) To return to the Executive the orders which are not framed in accordance with the law, for the action which the law may determine. 165. The members of the Superior Tribunal of Accounts must be over 25 years of age, holding the title of lawyer or commercial expert; they must not be creditors or debtors of the Public Treasury, not have accounts pending with it, and not be contractors or concession holders. Their number, organisation and functions shall be defined by the law which regulates their operations. 166. The Executive Power, in order to conclude important contracts involving the national wealth, must previously publish the proposal in the official newspaper La Gaceta, and in the event of no one presenting himself who offers better terms, may conclude the contract. Whenever important public works or services are concerned, contracts must be open to bidding. Those cases are excepted which have as their object the provision of war necessities and those which, by their nature, can only be concluded with a specified person. 167. There shall be a substantive Comptroller-General of the Treasury and a substitute to represent the interests of the Public Treasury, the functions of whom shall be defined by law. The members of the Superior Tribunal of Accounts and the Comptroller-General of the Treasury shall be subject to the same disabilities laid down in respect of deputies. 168. The term of the members of the Superior Tribunal of Accounts and of the Comptroller-General of the Treasury shall be for 6 years and commence on the 1st January.
PART

IX.-The Army.

Sole Chapter. 169. The army is an institution destined for national defence and the maintenance of peace and public order. 170. The public force is essentially obedient. No armed body may hold discussions or exercise the right of petition. Military obedience shall be regulated by law and military ordinance. 171. Military service is obligatory. All male Honduraneans from 25 to 30 years of age form the active army; and those between 30 and 40 the reserve. A special law shall determine the organisation of the militia and the national guard, which shall include

589 individuals from 40 to 50 years of age, and shall establish the grounds for exemption from service. In the event of an international war all Honduraneans able to carry arms are soldiers. 172. Military rank may only be attained by strict promotion. Persons serving in the army may not be deprived of their rank, honours or pensions except in the manner determined by law. 173. Soldiers who hold a grade in the army have the right, after completing 40 years, to resign their appointment and be discharged from the service. 174. Military law is established for military offences. 175. There shall be established a General Staff of the Army. A law shall determine its organisation and functions. Military schools for instruction in different branches of the army shall also be established.
  PART

X.-The Departmental and Municipal Administration. Chapter I.-Departmental Government.

176. For public administration the territory of the nation is divided into departments, the creation and boundaries of which the National Congress shall decree. In each department there shall be such officials as are required by law. 177. Departmental officials shall be Honduraneans, over 25 years of age and citizens in the exercise of their rights. 178. The political, military, judicial and economic administration of the Mosquito territory may differ from that adopted for the rest of the Republic, as the Executive Power may direct. Chapter II.-Municipal Administration. 179. For the administration of the departments, these are divided into autonomous municipalities, represented by municipal councils elected by the people. 180. The law shall regulate the organisation and functions of the municipal governments. These functions shall be purely economic and administrative. 181. In the exercise of their particular functions, they shall be absolutely independent of the other Powers, without violating in any case the general laws of the country; and they shall be answerable for the abuses they may commit, collectively or individually, before the tribunals of justice.



182. The municipal councils shall appoint freely the employees subordinate to them and the police agents whom they pay out of their own funds. 183. Neither the members of the council nor the treasurer may hold any municipal appointment in any subsequent term of office until they hold a full discharge in respect of their official accounts. 184. No member of the municipal governments shall be obliged to accept another appointment, or be called on to perform military service, except in cases of international war. Members of a municipal corporation are prohibited from holding any remunerated municipal employment.
PART XI.-The Responsibilities of Public Officials.

Sole Chapter. 185. Every public official, upon taking up his appointment, shall make the following promise: "I promise to be faithful to the Republic, to comply with and exact compliance with the constitution and the laws." 186. Every employee or public official is responsible for his acts. 187. Congress, in the light of the judicial information placed before it and in conformity with the procedure which its rules define, shall declare whether or not there are grounds for impeachment of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the deputies, the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Secretaries of State and the Diplomatic Agents, for civil or official offences which they may commit during their terms of office, with a view to placing the offender, if necessary, at the disposal of the competent tribunal. 188. Notwithstanding the approval which Congress may give to the conduct of the Executive, the President of the Republic and the Secretaries of State may be indicted for official offences. The period of prescription for these actions shall commence 5 years after the accused person has ceased to discharge his office. 189. Public employees and officials who violate any of the rights and guarantees laid down in this constitution shall be criminally and civilly responsible; they may not obtain pardon or commutation of sentence in the current official term nor in the one following. The prescription of the offences and penalties which they may incur shall not commence until after the said periods. 190. If a public functionary who has been impeached is acquitted, he shall return to the exercise of his functions.

  590 1936

  PART

XII.-Labour and the Family. Sole Chapter.

191. The maximum obligatory salaried working day shall be S hours daily. For each 6 days of work there shall be one of rest. A law on labour accidents shall establish the responsibilities of the employer and the conditions in which they shall be effective. 192. Unhealthy and dangerous labour and industrial night work for women and for persons under 16 years of age is prohibited. The said individuals must not work in commercial establishments after 6 P.M. 193. The labour of persons under 12 years of age may not be the object of a contract, and persons over that age and under 16 years of age shall have 6 hours as a maximum working day. 194. Salaries must be paid exclusively in ready money of legal tender in the Republic. 195. Large industrial companies are obliged to establish at the place of their operations hospitals to deal with the accidents and illnesses of their workers. 196. It is the duty of the State to watch over the public health and the hygienic welfare of the nation. 197. The family, as the basis of society, shall be under the protection of the State. Consequently, the State shall provide for the organisation of its heritage, for effective assistance to maternity, and for the protection of minors. 198. The State shall impart and promote adequate education, so that the inhabitants of the Republic may acquire instruction in agriculture, industry, arts and crafts.
PART

XIII.-The Constitutional Laws. Sole Chapter.

199. The following are constitutional laws: those on the press, agrarian matters, elections, protection (amparo), and the state of siege.
PART

XIV.-Modification and Observance of the Constitution and Constitutional Laws. Chapter I.-Modification.

200. The constitution and the constitutional laws may be partially modified by a Congress in ordinary session, with a two-thirds vote of its members. This decree must be ratified by the next Legislature, in ordinary session; also by a two-thirds vote of its members, in order that the amendment become effective. The amendment of articles 117, 118 and 200, or of one or more of these three, and the total reform of the constitution and the constitutional laws may only be effected by a Constituent Assembly, convoked for that purpose by the National Congress. Chapter IT.-Observance. 201. All the laws, decrees, regulations, orders and other measures which were in force upon the promulgation of this constitution shall continue to be observed in so far as they do not conflict with it and so long as they are not legally repealed or modified. 202. The constitutional presidency and vice-presidency of the Republic, exercised respectively by the citizens General Don Tiburcio Carias Andino, doctor, and General Abraham Williams Calderon, engineer, shall terminate on the 1st January, 1943; and to that end the effects of articles 116, 117 and 118 of the present constitution shall remain in suspense until that date. 203. When the present National Constituent Assembly closes its sessions it shall be converted into an ordinary Legislative Congress, and the deputies who compose it shall finish their term on the 4th December, 1942; the effects of articles 96, paragraph 1, and 100 of the present constitution shall remain in suspense until that date. 204. The present political constitution shall enter into operation on the 15th April of the present year, the one issued on the 10th September, 1924,(2) being repealed on that date. Done at Tegucigalpa in the Chamber of Sessions of the National Constitutional Assembly on the 28th March, 1936.  To the Executive Power. Therefore: Let it be published. Tegucigalpa, the 28th March, 1936. TIBURCIO CARIAS 


