CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Honduras. September 10, 1924. National Constitutional Assembly, Decree No. 7. WE, the representatives of the people of Honduras, met for the purpose of making the fundamental law of the nation, decree and sanction the following: Political Constitution. Section I.-On the Nation. ART. 1. Honduras is a separate State of the Republic of Central America. Consequently, it recognises as of primordial necessity its reunion with the other sections of the disunited republic. To this end, the Legislative Power is authorised to ratify definitely Treaties which tend to realise it (reunion) with one or more States of the old Federation. 2. Honduras is a nation, free, sovereign and independent. Honduras considers as an offence against its sovereignty any intervention of a foreign Government in its internal affairs. 3. National sovereignty resides essentially in the totality of the Honduranean people. 4. All public power emanates from the people. The officials of the State have no other powers than those expressly given to them by the law. Every act executed outside the law is null and void. 5. The limits of Honduras and its territorial division shall be determined by law. 

Section II.-On Honduraneans. 6. Honduraneans are natives or naturalised. 7. The following are natives:(1.) Persons born in Honduras of Honduranean fathers.

(2.) Children born in Honduras of domiciled foreigners and the children of a Honduranean father or mother born abroad who opt for Honduranean nationality. The declaration of option shall be made within one year after reaching the age of majority. Treaties may modify the provisions of this paragraph. (3.) Persons born in Honduras of foreigners who were also born in the country. No Honduranean born within the territory of the nation may possess another nationality distinct from that of Honduras, so long as he resides in the country. S. The nationals of the other countries of Central America domiciled in the country shall be considered as natives, unless they declare before the chief departmental political authority the desire to retain their nationality. Likewise, shall be considered as native Honduraneans persons of Central American origin who declare before the above-mentioned authority their desire to be Honduraneans. 9. The following are naturalised persons: (1.) Spaniards and Latin-Americans who shall have had one year's residence in the country and who declare, before the appropriate authority, their desire to be naturalised in this country. (2.) Other foreigners who shall have had two years' residence in the country and who declare before the appropriate authority their desire to be naturalised in this country. (3.) Those who obtain naturalisation certificates granted by the authority designated by law. 

Section III.-On Aliens. 10. The Republic of Honduras is a sacred asylum for all persons who take refuge within its territory, outside the exceptions determined by law. 11. Aliens are obliged, on their arrival within the territory of the republic, to respect the authorities and observe the law. 12. Aliens enjoy in Honduras all civil rights of Honduraneans. 13. They may acquire all classes of property in the country in conformity with the law; and they remain subject to all the ordinary and extraordinary obligations of a general character to which Honduraneans are subject. 14. They may not make claims nor demand any indemnities whatever of the State, except in the cases and in the form in which Honduraneans may make them. Neither may they hold offices or posts with general, regional or departmental jurisdiction, including those of the different sects established in the country, under the penalty of expulsion; but they may occupy posts in instruction and in the arts and in any other branch which is not included in the prohibition.

15. Aliens shall not have recourse to diplomatic channels except in cases of denial of justice. Under this clause, shall not be construed as a denial of justice the fact that a judgment granted is not favourable to the complainant. If, in contravention to this provision, aliens do not terminate in a friendly manner their claims, and, if the latter cause prejudice to the country, they shall lose the right to reside in the country. 16. Extradition may only be granted by virtue of law or treaties for grave felonies; never for political crimes, although, as a consequence thereof, common law felonies result. 17. The form and cases in which an alien may be denied admission to the country, and in which his expulsion as undesirable may be ordered, shall be established by law. 18. Laws and treaties shall regulate the use of these guarantees, without the power of altering them. 19. The provisions of this Section do not modify existing Treaties between Honduras and other nations. 

Section IV.-On Citizens. 

20. All adult Honduraneans, of the age of 21 years, and adults of the age of 18 years who are married or able to read and write are citizens. 21. The rights of the citizen are : the exercise of the vote; the keeping and bearing of arms; the holding of public office; all in accordance with the law. Soldiers who are on active service in the army or the police may not be electors, but are eligible for election in cases not prohibited by the law. 22. The character of citizens may be suspended, lost and re-established in accordance with the following provisions: Suspended: (1.) By reason of a formal sentence of imprisonment or declaration as a criminal, or the finding of a criminal indictment. (2.) By reason of a binding sentence carrying deprivation of political rights. (3.) By reason of judicial interdiction as a fraudulent debtor or as being guilty of notoriously vicious conduct. (4.) By reason of vagrancy, legally declared. Lost: (1.) For accepting without due permission decorations from foreign countries, unless these distinctions are given as a reward for philanthropic, scientific, literary or artistic work. (2.) For holding, without due authorisation, an office under a foreign nation, of a military or political character. The character of citizenship may be restored: (I.) By expiration. (2.) By an absolute sentence.

(3.) By expiation of the penalty. (4.) By amnesty. (5.) By rehabilitation in conformity with the law. (6.) By renouncing before the competent authority the foreign nationality acquired. 23. The exercise of the vote may not be renounced and is obligatory for citizens. 24. Voting shall be direct and secret. Elections shalt take place in the manner prescribed by law, and the law shall give proportional representation to the minorities. 25. Only adult citizens, 21 years of age, who have the exercise of their rights, are eligible. Section V.-On Rights and Guarantees. 26. The Constitution guarantees to all inhabitants of Honduras, whether nationals or foreigners, the inviolability of human life, individual security, liberty, equality before the law, and property. Inviolability of Human Life. 27. Capital punishment remains absolutely abolished in Honduras. Individual Security. 28. The Constitution recognises the guarantee of Habeas Corpus. In consequence thereof, any person illegally detained or any one else in the name of such a person has the right of recourse to the Courts, verbally or in writing, and to petition the exhibition of the person. 29. All persons have the right to require protection against any unwarranted proceeding or arbitrary act of which they may be victims, and to make effective the exercise of all the guarantees which this Constitution establishes, whenever they may be unduly limited in the exercise of them, by the laws or acts of any authority, public agent or public official whatsoever. 30. An order of arrest which does not emanate from a competent authority, or which has been dictated without legal formalities, is ultra vires. 31. Detention for examination shall not exceed six days. 32. The isolation of a prisoner shall not exceed forty-eight hours. 33. An order of imprisonment shall not be issued without previous proof that there has been committed a crime or simple offence which merits the penalty of deprivation of liberty, and unless there results therefrom reasonable evidence as to who is the author. Indictments shall be made

in the same manner. Imprisonment for debt is prohibited except in cases of fraud. 34. Imprisonment and arrest are permitted as a penalty, or by way of judicial compulsion, in the cases and for the term provided by the law. Detention by way of judicial compulsion shall not exceed thirty days. 35. The law breaker may be apprehended, in the act, by any person for the purpose of handing him or her over to the authority which has the power to make an arrest. 36. No one may be a prisoner or detained except in the places determined by the law. In no case shall it be permitted that the prisons be used for maltreatment, but only to guard the accused and condemned. 37. Even with an order of imprisonment no one may be taken to prison or detained therein who presents sufficient bond, whenever the penalty for the offence does not exceed three years. 38. No one may be judged by special commissions nor by judges other than those designated by the law. 39. The right of defence is inviolable. 40. No one shall be compelled, in criminal cases, to testify against oneself, nor against one's wife or husband or one's relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity. 41. No one may be disturbed or persecuted for his opinions. Private acts which do not interfere with public order and which cause no injury to a third person shall always be outside the action of the law. 42. Whipping, flogging and every kind of torture are absolutely prohibited. Unnecessary shackles and all undue rigour are likewise forbidden. 43. The habitation of every individual is a sacred asylum which may not be broken into, except by the authorities in the following cases:(1.) To remove a criminal caught in flagrante delicto. (2.) When a crime is being committed inside the habitation, whenever scandalous disorders demand a prompt remedy, or on request from the interior of the house. (3.) In case of fire, earthquake, flood or epidemic or the like; and to carry out any visit or inspection whatsoever of a purely sanitary character, provided that this is always done in accordance with the law. (4.) To liberate a person illegally abducted. (5.) To remove objects sought by virtue of a process of law, preceded by at least imperfect proof of the existence of the said objects; and to carry out a judicial writ legally issued. (6.) To arrest a criminal against whom an order of imprisonment or detention has been issued, preceded by at


least imperfect proof that he is hiding in the house which must be broken into. In the last two cases, the breaking in may not take place without a written order from the competent authority. 44. Provided the domicile which must be broken into is not that of a criminal who is being prosecuted, the authority or its agents shall first request the permission of the inhabitant. 45. The breaking into of a domicile shall not take place between the hours of 7 at night and 6 in the morning, without the permission of the head of the house. 46. Letters, telegrams, private papers and commercial books are inviolable. In no case may the executive power or its agents seize, open or detain letters or telegraphic correspondence. Matter abstracted from the mails or any other place whatsoever shall not constitute evidence. 47. Private correspondence, private papers and books, may only be seized by virtue of an order of a competent judge, in criminal and civil cases determined by law; in which cases they must be registered in the presence of the owner or, in his absence, in the presence of two witnesses, and they must be returned when they have no further relation to the matter being investigated. 48. It is forbidden to make laws or to take proscriptive or confiscatory measures, or any others which order infamous or perpetual penalties. The duration of penalties shall not exceed twelve years, and the accumulated penalties for various offences shall not exceed twenty years. 49. Laws may not be retroactive, except in penal matters when they are favourable to the delinquent or prosecuted. 50. The civil authorities shall be entrusted with the surety police. 51. The forms of procedure in civil and criminal matters shall be fixed by law. Liberty. 52. The slave who sets foot on Honduranean territory remains free. The slave trade is a crime. 53. The free exercise of all religions which do not violate the laws of the country is guaranteed. The Church is separate from the State, which cannot give subventions in any case to any cult. 54. A religious belief shall not be required of persons in the matter of public registries or records. 55. All persons may freely, and without submission to previous censorship, express their thoughts by word of mouth or in writing, by means of the press, or by any other means whatsoever, without prejudice to the responsibilities imposed

by law, whenever by any of these means the honour of persons, social order or public tranquillity is menaced. In no event may the press or its accessories be sequestrated as an instrument of the offence. 56. Free instruction is guaranteed. Instruction which is paid for with public funds shall be secular; and primary, as well as instruction in the arts and crafts, shall, moreover, be free, obligatory and subventioned by the State. The law shall regulate instruction, without restricting the freedom thereof nor the independence of the teachers. 57. The right of meeting without arms and of association for any legitimate purpose whatever is guaranteed. The establishment of all classes of monastic or conventual associations is prohibited. The entry into the country of individuals belonging to these associations shall be regulated by law. 58. All industry is free. The State alone is allowed a monopoly in aguardiente, gunpowder and saltpetre. The law will regulate labour and the pursuit of professions and industries. 59. Monopolies and privileges may only be established for a period of ten years which may not be extended; and concessions for the development, introduction, or perfecting of new industries; for colonisation or immigration; for the opening of ways of communication and institutions of credit for a period up to ninety years, likewise not subject to extension. In no case may the payment of municipal taxes be dispensed with. At the end of the term of a concession affecting colonisation or immigration enterprises or to the opening of ways of communication, the enterprise with all its accessories shall pass to the domain of the State without compensation. 60. All persons may acquire property and dispose of it by any title, within the limitations established by the law. 61. Entail and settlements in favour of religious establishments are prohibited. 62. Any person or gathering of persons has the right to address petitions to the legally constituted authorities, who shall consider them and communicate the corresponding decisions. Stamped paper shall not be required for petitions addressed to the Legislative Power or to the Executive Power and the administrative authorities, except in cases of concessions and State contracts, and the deeds which are issued in consequence thereof. 63. All persons may enter the territory of the Republic, depart therefrom, travel within its limits and change their residence, without the necessity of a passport or other similar requisite, except in accordance with the laws on


immigration and public health, and the power attributed to the authorities in matters of civil or criminal responsibility. 
Equality. 
64. All Honduraneans are equal before the law. The Republic does not recognise personal exemptions nor privileges. In the making of public appointments, attention shall be paid to the fitness of the appointee and the other conditions which are indicated by the law for the offices to be filled. The accumulation of offices or posts which are remunerated, even of a temporary character, except those of instruction, is prohibited. The Ministers of the various religions may not hold public .offices. 65. Proportional payment shall be the basis of direct taxes. 

Property. 66. No one shall be deprived of his property except by virtue of law or of a sentence founded on law. The expropriation of real estate for reasons of public necessity or utility must be qualified by law or by a decision founded on law, and shall not take place without previous compensation. 67. The right of property shall not prejudice the right of -eminent domain of the State within its territorial limits, not shall it infringe the rights which national institutions or works of a national character may have. 68. Every author or inventor enjoys exclusive property rights to his work or discovery during a period determined by law. 69. The right to make claims on account of confiscated property passes under prescription after fifty years. 70. Only Congress imposes national taxes. 71. No personal service may be required except by virtue of the law or a decision founded on the law. 72. No person who has the free administration of his property may be deprived of the right to wind up his civil affairs by transaction or by arbitration. Suspension of the Constitutional Guarantees. 73. The guarantees established in Articles 28, 30, 31, 37, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 57 part one, 63, 66 and 71, may be temporarily suspended in the whole or in part of the Republic, whenever the security of the State demands it, .as, in the case of an invasion of the territory, of a great disturbance of order which menaces the public peace, of an

epidemic or any other calamity. The territory in which the said guarantees may be suspended shall be governed during the suspension by the law of the state of siege; but neither in the said law nor in any other may any further guarantees be suspended other than those already mentioned. Nor, during the suspension, shall declarations be made of new offences, nor shall other penalties be imposed than those established in the laws in force when the suspension is decreed. 74. The Executive Power is forbidden, even during the period of the suspension of guarantees, to expel or deport citizens, or to confine them further than 25 kilom. from their domicile, to detain them more than ten days without handing them over to the judicial authority, or to repeat the detention during the period of the same suspension of guarantees. Prisoners shall not be kept in places distinct from the, establishments destined for the detention of the authors of common offences. 75. The suspension of guarantees provided for in Article 73: may only be decreed by Congress, or, if it is not in session by the Executive Power. But he may not decree the. suspension more than once during the period between two legislatures, nor for an indefinite period, nor more than thirty days, without convoking Congress in the same decree of suspension. In every case he must render an account of acts executed during the suspension of guarantees. If the Executive violates any of the provisions included' in this section, the wronged party or anyone in that party's.: name may have recourse for protection. 

General Provisions. 76. The enumeration of guarantees and rights, made by this Constitution, does not exclude those which are not enumerated, but which arise out of the principle of the sovereignty of the people and the republican form of Government. 77. The laws which regulate the exercise of such guarantees and rights shall be void in so far as they diminish, limit or vitiate it. 

Section VI.-On the Form of Government 78. The Government of Honduras is republican, democratic and representative. It is exercised by three independent powers: Legislative, Executive and Judicial. 79. No one of the constituted powers may execute acts which alter the established form of government or impair the integrity of the national territory or sovereignty.
Section VII.-On the Legislative Power. 80. The Legislative power is exercised by a Congress of Deputies, which meets in the capital of the Republic on the first of January of each year, without the necessity of convocation. Deputies must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, adults of 25 years and natives or inhabitants of the department in which the election takes place. It is not necessary that this last condition be fulfilled by Deputies for the minorities. 81. Sessions of Congress shall last sixty days, and may be -extended for forty days more, whenever subjects of immediate interest require this. 82. Congress shall also hold extraordinary sessions whenever convoked by the Executive or by the Permanent Committee and, in those cases, may only take up the subjects mentioned in the decree of convocation. 83. After Congress has been opened in the capital it may move to another town. 84. On the 21st day of December of each year the Deputies shall meet in preparatory committee, and, with the attendance of at least five, the Directory shall be organised in order to make the necessary arrangements for the installation of Congress. 85. Two-thirds of the members composing the Congress shall constitute a quorum. 86. Five Deputies shall be able to convoke extraordinarily the Congress in any part of the Republic whatsoever, whenever the Executive may have prevented its installation or its sessions, or may have dissolved it. 87. Deputies shall be elected for four years and may be re-elected indefinitely. Every two years half of the Congress shall be elected. The first half of the Deputies to present themselves for re-election shall be chosen by lot; thereafter by order of seniority. In case of the absolute incapacity of a Deputy, his term of office shall be finished by the substitute -chosen by Congress. 88. The following may not be Deputies:(1.) Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of State. (2.) Employees of the Executive Power, except those of Instruction. (3.) Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Appellate Courts, Examining Magistrates, and Recorders of Property and officers of justice. (4.) Members of the Superior Court of Accounts and the Fiscal-General of the Ministry of Finance. (5.) Diplomatic and consular agents. (6.) Persons in the military service.
 (7.) Contractors for public works or services which are paid for out of public funds, and those who have, on account of such contracts, claims against the State. (8.) Delinquent debtors of the Public Treasury and those who have accounts pending by reason of their administration of public funds. (9.) Relatives of the President of the Republic and of the Secretaries of State within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity. The prohibitions referred to in numbers 3 and 4 of this Article apply only to officials elected or appointed with the character of titulary incumbents; but the respective substitutes, or ad interim occupants of these posts, may not at the, same time exercise the functions of Deputy. 89. Deputies, from the day of their election, shall enjoy the following prerogatives:(1.) Personal immunity from being detained, accused or judged even during the State of Siege, if Congress or the Permanent Committee does not first declare them indictable. (2.) Exemption from civil suit for fifteen days before until fifteen days after the ordinary or extraordinary sessions of Congress, except in the case of a reconvening. (3.) Exemption from call to military service without. their consent, from the day of election until the termination of their term of office. (4.) Exemption from deportation from the Republic, or confinement during their term of office. (5.) Exemption from responsibility at any time for their opinions or parliamentary initiative. 90. Deputies shall not be obliged to accept public offices. If they accept voluntarily any of those included in Article 88, they cease at the same time to be Deputies. 91. The election of Deputies to Congress shall be made on the basis of one titulary Deputy and one substitute for each 15,000 inhabitants. If there are fractions, there shall be elected an additional Deputy for each fraction in excess of one-half of the basic number.

Section VIII.-On the Attributions of the Legislative Power. 92. The following are the attributions of Congress:(1.) To open and close its sessions, and to extend them whenever it considers this proper; to validate the elections of its members, with examination of their credentials, and to receive the oath of office. (2.) To call on the respective substitutes in case of absolute default or of a legitimate impediment of the titulary office holder, and to order the filling of vacancies which occur.

(3.) To accept the resignation of its members for legal reasons duly established. (4.) To make its own rules and those of the Permanent Committee. (5.) To decree, interpret, amend and repeal laws. (6.) To create and suppress offices, grant pensions and decree honours. (7.) To grant amnesty for political offences. Beyond this, Congress may not pass acts of grace. (8.) To make all necessary provisions for the security and defence of the Republic. (9.) To scrutinise the votes in the elections for President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to declare elected those citizens who shall have obtained an absolute majority. (10.) In case there is not an absolute majority, Congress shall elect the President and the Vice-President from the two citizens who shall have obtained for each office the greatest number of popular votes. And, if Congress should not make the declaration of the election of a President and Vice-President of the Republic within twenty days, dating from its opening, the Supreme Court of Justice shall make it within ten days before the date prescribed for the assumption of these offices; in which case the said Court shall receive the oaths of office of the candidates elected. (11.) Whenever an individual is elected to more than one office, preference shall be determined in the following order: (1) President; (2) Vice-President; (3) Deputy. Election as titulary incumbent of an office shall have preference over election as substitute. (12.) Congress shall receive the Constitutional oath of office of the officials whom it elects or declares elected, and shall accept, or not, their resignations, including those who are declared elected by the Supreme Court of Justice, in the case of No. 10 of this Article. (13.) To impeach the President, Vice-President, Deputies, Magistrates of the Supreme Court., Secretaries of State and Diplomatic agents during their term of office. (14.) To change the seat of the Supreme Powers for serious causes. (15.) To decree rewards and to grant temporary privileges to authors and inventors, and to those who may have introduced or perfected new industries of general utility. (16.) To decree subsidies for the promotion of new industries and the improvement of existing ones. (17.) To grant subventions for objects of public utility. (18.) To grant or refuse permission to Honduraneans to accept posts or honours from other nations. (19.) To approve or disapprove the conduct of the Executive.

(20.) To approve, modify or disapprove contracts concluded by the Executive in the cases of Article 59, or whenever their effects extend over the following Presidential term. (21.) To approve, modify or disapprove Treaties concluded with other nations. (22.) To regulate land and maritime commerce. (23.) To approve, or disapprove, the accounts of public expenditures whenever they exceed the allotments established in the General Budget of Expenditures. (24.) To fix annually the budget of expenditures, taking as a basis the probable receipts, and with power to extend it for the following year. (25.) To impose taxes. (26.) To regulate the payment of the national debt. (27.) To decree the alienation of national property or its application to public uses. (28.) To decree loans. (29.) To establish ports, create and suppress customs-houses. (30.) To decree the weight, legal standard and type of the national money, and the standard of weights and measures. (31.) To declare war and make peace. (32.) To fix in each ordinary session the number of the personnel of the permanent army. (33.) To permit or refuse the transit by troops of another country across the territory of the republic. (34.) To declare the republic, or a part of it, under a state of siege in conformity with the law. (35.) To confer grades from major to major-general upon the recommendation of the Executive. (36.) To elect for the constitutional period five titulary and three substitute Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. In case of an absolute incapacity, to elect the one who shall complete the period. (37.) To elect the members of the Superior Court of Accounts and the Fiscal-General of Finance; to appoint the officials referred to in Article 151; and to approve or disapprove the appointments of Diplomatic agents and Consuls receiving salaries. (38.) To pass votes of censure against Secretaries of State. 93. The Legislative Power shall not furnish documents nor make declarations appertaining to the civil status of persons, nor shall it grant professional titles. The studies and formalities required by the laws on public instruction in order to obtain the said titles cannot be dispensed with except by a reform of a general character of those laws. 94. The powers of the Legislative Power may not be


delegated except those which refer to the inauguration of high officials. 

Section IX.-On the Permanent Committee. 95. Congress, before closing its sessions, shall elect from among its members five titulary Deputies and five substitute Deputies to form the Permanent Committee, which shall in its first session elect its President and Secretary. 96. The attributions of the Permanent Committee during the recess of Congress are:(1.) To impeach the President, Vice-President, Deputies, Magistrates of the Supreme Court, Secretaries of State and Diplomatic agents during the exercise of their functions. (2.) To receive the constitutional oath of office of officials required to make it before Congress. (3.) To make reports and carry on other proceedings in matters which have remained pending, in order that they may be considered. (4.) To convene Congress in extraordinary sessions, on the initiative of the Executive whenever the exigency of the case requires it. (5.) To prepare for submission to Congress projects of laws which in its judgment are required by the necessities of the country. (6.) To receive from the Executive the decrees issued in the last ten days of the sessions of Congress, with or without sanction. (7.) To receive denunciations of violations of the Constitution. (8.) To keep in its custody and under its responsibility the archives of the Secretary of the Congress. (9.) To publish an edition of all the decrees and resolutions issued by Congress in its previous sessions within three months following the adjournment thereof. (10.) To present to Congress a detailed report of its work during the year. (11.) To elect interim members of the Court of Accounts, the Fiscal-General of Finance, the Treasurers of Roads, Charities, Public Instruction, Public Health, and any others who handle special funds of a national character, and to approve or disapprove, during the interim, the appointments of Diplomatic agents and Consular agents receiving salaries. (12.) To call and appoint other Deputies, in the absence of members of the Committee. (13.) To grant or refuse permission to Honduraneans to accept posts or honours from other nations. 97. The Permanent Committee shall meet and perform its duties in accordance with its own internal regulations.

Section X.-On the Making and Sanctioning and Promulgation of the Law. 98. The initiating of laws is reserved exclusively to Deputies, the President of the Republic, by means of the Secretaries of State, and the Supreme Court of Justice in matters within its jurisdiction. Whenever Congress deems it necessary to make a law, it shall have power to name a committee of its members to elaborate the project. 99. No project of law shall be definitely voted, except after three deliberations, held on different days, except in case of urgency approved by a two-thirds vote. Any motion declaring the urgency of a law must be preceded by an expos6 of the grounds on which it is based. 100. Any project of law, once approved by Congress, shall be transmitted to the Executive, at the latest within three days after it has been voted, in order that he may give it his approval and have it promulgated as law. 101. The sanction of the law shall be made with this formula: " Por Tanto: Ejecutese." (Therefore, be it enacted.) 102. If the Executive Power objects to sanctioning a project of law, he shall return it to Congress within ten days, with this formula: " Returned to Congress," explaining the reasons on which he-bases his disagreement. If, within the term stated, he does not object to the law, it shall be held as sanctioned and shall be promulgated as law. Whenever the Executive returns the project, Congress shall subject it to a fresh deliberation, and, if it is ratified by a two-thirds vote, it shall transmit the law again to the Executive with this formula: " Constitutionally Ratified," and the latter shall publish it without delay. In case objection is made to the law on the ground of unconstitutionality, it shall not be submitted to a new deliberation without hearing, beforehand, the opinion of the Supreme Court of Justice. The Court shall deliver its report within the period which Congress assigns to it. 103. Whenever Congress votes a project of law on the termination of its sessions and the Executive objects to sanctioning it, he is obliged to inform Congress immediately, in order that it may remain in session for ten days from the date on which he received the project, and if it does not do this, it shall communicate its resolution to the Permanent Committee. 104. The Executive shall not use the veto in the following acts and resolutions:(1.) In the elections which Congress shall make or declare, or in the resignations which it may accept or refuse. 


(2.) In impeachment. (3.) In the law of the budget. (4.) In the decrees which refer to the conduct of the Executive. (5.) In the regulations which it issues for its own procedure and that of the Permanent Committee. (6.) In resolutions to transfer its seat temporarily to another place and to suspend or extend its sessions. (7.) In the treaties or contracts which Congress may disapprove. In these cases the Executive shall promulgate the law (Therefore, with this formula: " Por tanto: Publiquese." be it published.) 105. Whenever a project of law, which has not been initiated by the Supreme Court of Justice, has for its object the reform or repeal of any of the provisions whatsoever contained in the Codes of the republic, it may not be discussed without hearing the opinion of that Tribunal. The Court shall deliver its report within the period which Congress shall assign to it. This provision does not include laws of a political, economic and administrative order. 106. No project of law completely rejected may be discussed again by the same Legislature. Section XI.-On the Power of the Executive. 107. The Executive Power is exercised by a citizen, who shall be called President; in his absence, by a Vice-President; in default of the latter, by the citizen who occupies the post of President of the Supreme Court of Justice; in default of the latter, by the citizen who occupies the post of President of Congress or who has held this position in the last Legislature. 108. In order to be elected President or Vice-President of the Republic, it is necessary to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, not under 30 years of age or more than 65, and Honduranean by birth. In cases where the President of the Supreme Court of Justice or the President of the Legislative Power come to occupy the Presidency of the Republic, the requirement as to age shall not be applicable. 109. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be elected by popular and direct vote, and their election shall be declared or made by Congress or by the Supreme Court of Justice as is prescribed. 110. The presidential period shall be four years and shall begin on the 1st February. The citizen who shall have held the Presidency as a titulary or interim incumbent, during the course of one term, may not be elected President or Vice-President for the
following period. Neither may his relations within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity be elected as President or Vice-President. 111. In case of the temporary incapacity of the President, the Vice-President shall replace him in the discharge of his duties; and, in his absence, the citizens specified in Article 107. If the incapacity of the President be absolute, the Vice-President shall exercise the Executive Power for the time remaining of the term; but if there has also been an absolute incapacity of the Vice-President, the President's substitute shall convoke, within one month afterwards, elections for a -constitutional period.. 112. While the individual designated by the law is holding the Presidency, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the Council of Ministers; and the latter shall summon immediately the new official to give him possession if Congress is not in session. Section XII.-On the Duties and Attributions of the Executive Power. 113. The President of the Republic has the general -administration of the country. His attributions are: (1.) To submit, on the opening of each ordinary Congress, a general report of the acts of his administration. (2.) To exercise the command-in-chief of the land and sea forces. (3.) To defend the independence, the honour of the nation and the integrity of its territory. (4.) To execute and have enforced the laws, issuing to this end the appropriate Decrees and Ordinances, without altering the spirit thereof. (5.) To appoint Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of -State, and the other employees of the Executive Department in conformity with the law. (6.) To preserve peace and the internal security of the -republic and to repel all attacks and invasions from abroad. (7.) To give to the officials of the Judicial Power the aid -and force which they require to make their decisions effective. (8.) To remove employees of his own free appointing. (9.) To see to it that all employees of the republic carry -out the duties which the law imposes upon them, without intervening in the exercise of their functions. (10.) To grant pardons and to commute penalties in conformity with the law, with the favourable report of the Supreme Court of Justice. (11.) To convoke Congress in extraordinary sessions by means of the Permanent Committee, or to postpone the extension of the ordinary sessions.
 (12.) To declare war and make peace and to permit or not the transit of troops of another country across the territory of the republic whenever circumstances do not permit the meeting of Congress to decide the matter. (13.) To present by means of the respective Secretaries of State, within eight days after the opening of Congress, a report or detailed memorandum of all the branches of the Administration. (14.) To conclude treaties and any other diplomatic negotiations whatsoever, which shall be submitted for the ratification of Congress in the next session. (15.) To conduct the foreign relations, appoint diplomatic and consular agents of the republic; to receive Ministers and admit consuls of foreign nations. The appointment of diplomatic agents and that of consuls who receive salaries shall be submitted for the approval of Congress or the Permanent Committee in its stead. (16.) To have the revenues of the State collected and regulate their disposal in accordance with the law. (17.) To decree, in cases of invasion or rebellion, if the resources of the State should be inadequate, a general and proportional loan, concerning the disposal of which he shall give account to Congress in its next sessions. (18.) To confer military grades from second lieutenant up to captain inclusive. (19.) To dispose of the military forces; to organise and distribute them in conformity with the law, according to the necessities of the republic. (20.) To declare, during the recess of Congress, the republic, or a part of it, in a state of siege, in accordance with the law. (21.) To grant certificates of naturalisation in conformity with the law. (22.) To construct, annually, at least 20 kilom. of the projected Interoceanic Railway. (23.) To direct and promote public instruction and extend popular education. (24.) To sanction laws, to make use of the veto in appropriate cases and to promulgate without delay those legislative provisions which do not require the sanction of the Executive. (25.) To order the filling of vacancies of Deputies, during the recess of Congress, in conformity with the law, within one month after they have occurred. (26.) To take cognisance of renunciations of foreign nationality acquired by Honduraneans. (27.) To publish monthly a statement of receipts and disbursements of the public revenues. (28.) To watch over the legal exactitude of the coinage;
to take care of the uniformity of weights and measures, as well as to prohibit the issue and circulation of coupons. (29.) To exercise the supreme direction of the security police. 114. The decisions of the Executive Power which are not promulgated by the appropriate Ministry, must not be The President and the Ministers shall be carried out. responsible for the measures which they order in contravention of the Constitution of the laws. 115. The Vice-President of the Republic shall enjoy the .same prerogatives as Deputies. Section XIII.-On Secretaries of State. 116. For the administration of public business there shall be from four to seven Secretaries of State, among whom shall be distributed the branches of Foreign Relations, Finance and Public Credit, War and Marine, Government and Justice, Public Instruction, Public Works, Labour and Public Health, Agriculture and others which may be considered necessary. 117. Secretaries of State must be native-born Honduraneans and in the exercise of their rights and 25 years of age. 118. The following may not be Secretaries of State: relatives of the President, or of the Vice-President of the Republic, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity; those who, having administered or collected public funds, have not received a full discharge of responsibility on their accounts; contractors of public works or services for the account of the nation, or those who for such contracts have claims pending; and debtors of the Public Treasury. 119. Secretaries of State may take part, without vote, in the deliberations of Congress. Whenever, on the initiative of a Deputy, the President or presiding officer of Congress calls on them, they must present themselves and reply to interpellations which may be made to them upon, subjects referring to the administration; excepting those affecting the branches of War and Foreign Relations if reserve is judged necessary. 120. Whenever Congress passes a vote of censure against the Ministry or against any one of the Secretaries of State, the Secretary or Secretaries who are the object of the censure shall cease to hold their respective offices, and the President of the Republic must replace them immediately. 121. The Under-Secretaries of State must fulfil the same conditions as the Secretaries, and take their places in accordance with the law.



Section XIV.-On the Judicial Power. 
122. The judicial power of the republic is exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, composed of five magistrates, who shall reside in the capital, and by the lower tribunals and judges established by law. 123. In order to be a magistrate, it is necessary to be a Honduranean citizen in the enjoyment of his rights, an advocate and more than 30 years of age. 124. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be elected by Congress from among attorneys who have practised in the Court of Appeals for at least one year. 125. No one may be elected a magistrate who possesses any of the disqualifications established for Secretaries of State. 126. The Supreme Court of Justice shall appoint, transfer and, with just cause, remove magistrates from the Courts of Appeal, departmental and. regional judges, and the officers of justice, in conformity with the law. Magistrates of the Courts of Appeal shall be appointed from among attorneys who shall have held the office of examining magistrate for at least one year. 127. Justices of the Peace shall be appointed by departmental or regional examining magistrates, from a list submitted by the respective municipal councils. 128. No persons may hold the office of magistrate or judge in the same court who are related to each other within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. 129. The term of magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be four years and they shall come into office on the 1st February. 130. The Supreme Court of Justice shall accept or reject the resignation of the officials of its own appointing and shall grant leave to them as well as to its own members. The departmental or sectional judges will admit or reject resignations and grant leave to the Justices of the Peace. 131. The organisation and attributions of the Courts of Justice shall be regulated by law. 132. The power of judging and carrying out judgments belongs to the Courts and other tribunals of justice. Upon them devolves the enforcement of the laws in concrete cases which are legally brought to their knowledge, and the refusal of sanction whenever they are contrary to the Constitution. 133. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be presided over by one of the titulary magistrates. The functions of the president shall continue for one year, counting from the 1st February, devolving by turns upon the magistrates according to the order of seniority in the

service of the Court.

If this should not be possible, then according to seniority determined by the dates of their law degrees. Magistrates shall have rank and precedence corresponding to their seniority in the service of the Court. Whenever the President of the Supreme Court of Justice happens to fulfil the functions of the Executive, he shall, during the exercise of the duties of President of the Republic, be replaced in accordance with the internal regulations of the said Court. 134. The Supreme Court of Justice, in addition to the attributions which the law confers upon it, shall exercise the following powers:(1.) Make its own internal rules. (2.) Take cognisance of official and common offences of high officials, whenever Congress or the Permanent Committee shall have declared an impeachment. (3.) Authorise attorneys and notaries, admitted to practice within or without the Republic, to exercise their profession and to suspend them, in accordance with the law. (4.) To declare that there is ground for prosecution (present an impeachment) against members of the Court of Accounts, the Fiscal-General of the Ministry of Finance, and against the principal employees of the Nation and of the Departments, who are provided for by law, for offences which they may commit. (5.) To take cognisance of prize cases, of extradition cases and others which must be judged in accordance with international law. 135. An appeal against the constitutionality of a law which applies to matters which may not be brought before the Tribunals, may be made directly to the Supreme Court of Justice by any person who, in making the appeal, presents a concrete case and is injured in respect of his legal rights. The use of this resort shall be regulated by law. 136. The administration of justice is free in the Republic. 137. Tribunals of Justice may require the aid of the armed forces in the execution of its decisions, and if this be denied or not available, may demand it of citizens. Whoever unduly refuses to give aid, incurs responsibility. 138. A Judge may not judge the same case in different Courts. 139. No power or authority may defer to a higher Court pending cases nor reopen judgments that are terminated, except in accordance with the provisions of the following Article. 140. Cases which are judged in accordance with criminal, common or military procedure, may be revised at any time in favour of the condemned, on their petition, that of any

  610 1924



other person, of the Ministry of Justice or officially. The cases and form of revision shall be regulated by law. 141. Magistrates, Judges and officials of the Ministry of Justice may not be obliged to render military service nor to take part in military exercises or drills. 142. There is established a Special Treasury for the payment of the salaries of employees of the Administration of Justice, and the expenses of this branch. The revenues of the said Treasury shall be determined by law.. 

Section X.-On the Budget. 143. The budget shall be voted by Congress in view of the project submitted by the Executive Power. 144. The project of the budget shall be presented by the appropriate Ministry within fifteen days subsequent to the opening of Congress. 145. Any expenditure which may be outside the budget is illegal. Once disapproved by Congress criminal or civil responsibility shall be placed where it belongs. 146. The budget of expenditures of the public administration shall not exceed the probable receipts calculated by the National Congress. Section XVI.-On the Public Treasury. 147. The Public Treasury of the Nation is constituted by: (1.) All its property, movable or immovable. (2.) All its assets. (3.) The product of the duties, imposts and taxes. 148. In order to create an agricultural patrimony, the State shall give property rights to land lots to native or naturalised Honduranean families. The conditions of acquisition and the obligations of the recipient shall be regulated by law. 
149. The Executive Power shall not conclude contracts of importance which bind the National Treasury without previous publication of the proposal in the Official Gazette and public bidding. Exception is made of contracts whose object is to provide for the necessities of war, and those which, by their nature, may not be concluded except with a certain person. 150. For the auditing of the administration of the National Treasury, there shall be a Superior Court of Accounts, whose attributions shall be to examine, approve or disapprove the accounts of those who administer public funds, and to return to the Executive the orders of payment which may not have been settled in accordance with the law, to the ends indicated by the law.

  611 1924



151. The Treasurers of Justice, Roads, Charities, Public Instruction and Public Health and any others which handle special funds of a national character shall be appointed by Congress. No special treasurer shall pay any attention to orders of payment which do not correspond to the branch of which he has charge. The employee or official who diverts the funds of the special treasuries for matters distinct from those for which they were created shall be personally responsible for the sums diverted. 152. Members of the Superior Court of Accounts must be at least 25 years of age, possess the title of advocate or Mercantile Expert, not be creditors or debtors of the Ministry of Finance, nor have pending accounts therewith. Their number, organisation and attributions shall be determined by law. 153. There shall be a Fiscal-General who shall represent the interests of the Public Treasury, and his attributions shall be determined by law. The members of the Tribunal of Accounts, and the Fiscal-General of Hacienda shall have the same disabilities as those established for Deputies. 

Section XVII.-On the Army. 154. The public force is instituted to assure the rights of the Nation, the carrying out of the law and the maintenance of public order. 155. No armed body may hold discussions. Military obedience shall be regulated by law and military ordinance. 156. Military service is obligatory. All Honduraneans between the ages of 21 and 30 years form the active army and those between 30 and 40, the reserve. The organisation of the militia and of the National Guard, which shall include individuals from 40 to 50 years of age, shall be provided for by law, which shall also establish the grounds for exemption from service. 157. Persons in the military service who hold a grade in the army have a right, after completing forty years, to resign their posts and remain separated from the service. 158. Military grades may only be acquired by strict seniority. Persons in the military service may not be deprived of their grades, honours and pensions except in the manner determined by law. 159. Military law is established for military offences. 160. A general staff of the army is created. A law shall determine its organisation and attributions. Likewise shall.be established military schools for training and instruction in the different arms of the military service.

  612 1924

 

Section XVIII.-On Departmental and Municipal Government. 161. For the purpose of public administration, the territory of the nation is divided into departments, whose number and limits shall be fixed by law. 162. The municipality is autonomous and shall be represented by municipal councils elected directly by the people. The law shall regulate the organisation and attributions of municipal councils. The number of the municipal councillors shall be proportional to the population. The attributions of the municipal council shall be purely economic and administrative. 163. Municipal councils shall decree, in accordance, with the law, local taxes, and shall administer the funds and property of the community, for the benefit thereof, giving account of its administration before the Tribunal designated by law. They shall publish monthly a detailed report of the receipts and disbursements of their funds. 164. Municipal councils shall appoint freely the employees -under their control, and the police agents whom they pay out of their funds. 165. In the exercise of their particular functions, they shall be absolutely independent of the other powers, without violating in any case the general laws of the country; and they shall be responsible, before the tribunals of justice, for abuses they may commit, collectively or individually. 166. Municipal councils, in complying with the Constitution and the general laws on administration, police, hygiene, sanitation and public instruction, must co-operate efficaciously in the labours of the authorities of the said branches, and they have power to issue ordinances, without violating the' laws. Likewise, they have power, in conformity with the law, to commute penalties for infractions. 167. No member of the municipal councils shall be obliged -to accept any other appointment, nor to be called upon to perform military service. Members of a municipal corporation are prohibited from holding any remunerated municipal employment. Section XIX.-On the Responsibility of Public Servants. 168. Every public servant, on taking possession of his post, shall make the following promise: "I promise to be faithful to the republic, to carry out and have carried out the Constitution and the laws." "169. -Every employee and public official is responsible for his acts. 170. The President of the Republic, the Vice-President, Deputies, Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice,

Secretaries of State and Diplomatic Ministers shall answer to Congress for offences which they may commit during their terms of office. Congress, or the Permanent Committee in case of the recess of Congress, after compliance with the formalities established by its regulations, shall declare whether or not there are grounds for prosecution against them, with a view to placing the offender at the disposal of the competent tribunal. 171. Notwithstanding the approval which Congress may give to the conduct of the Executive, the President and the Secretaries of State may be accused of official offences. The term of prescription for these actions shall begin to run five years after the accused person has left office. 172. Public employees and officials who violate any one of the rights and guarantees established in this Constitution shall be responsible civilly and criminally. They may be accused without necessity for a calumny bond. They may not obtain pardon or commutation of sentence during the constitutional period nor during the one following. The prescription of offences and penalties which they may incur only commences after the said periods. 173. Whenever a public official, against whom there shall have been declared ground for prosecution shall have been absolved, he shall return to the exercise of his functions. Section XX.-Social Co-operation and Labour. 174. The State shall regulate the obligatory savings in the educational establishments, and public offices and workshops, of a civil or military character; and it shall foster the creation of all classes of savings centres. 175. There shall be established a Technical Centre called the Institute of Social Reforms with the following attributions and duties :(1.) To harmonise the relations between capital and labour. (2.) To promote and stimulate the formation of co-operative societies of production, savings, consumption and credit; the construction of cheap and hygienic houses, as well as the establishment of assurance against accidents and life insurance and the creation of asylums for the poor. (3.) Others, such as those of public health, and those which may be compatible with the objects of this section, shall be established by special law. 176. The obligatory, maximum, salaried workday shall be eight hours. For every six days of labour there shall be a day of rest. A law on labour accidents shall establish the responsibilities of the employer and the conditions in which they are effective.

  614 1924

 
177. The labour of women and that of males under 14 years of age merits special protection. A law shall regulate it. Section XXI.-On the Constitutional Laws. 178. The following are constituent laws: Law of the Press, the law of the state of siege, the law of protection, the election law and the agrarian law. Section XXII.-On Reforms of the Constitution and Constituent Laws. 179. One or several of the Articles of this Constitution ,and of the Constituent laws may be amended or repealed by Congress in ordinary session, by a two-thirds vote; this Decree must be ratified by the following Legislature, likewise in ordinary session, and by a two-thirds vote, in order that the amendment or repeal be effective. 180. An amendment which may be made to the Articles of the Constitution wherein the re-election of the President or of the individuals who take his place is prohibited; to the law which fixes the age limit for elections; and to the law which establishes the duration of the presidential period, shall not become effective in the current period nor in the following period. 181. All laws, decrees, regulations, orders and other provisions which were in force on the promulgation of this ,Constitution shall continue to be observed in so far as they -are not opposed to it, and as long as they are not legally -repealed or modified. 182. The present Constitution shall come into effect on -the 3rd October of the present year, and on that date the Constitution of the 14th October, 1894, shall be repealed. Done at Tegucigalpa, in the Chamber of Sessions of the National Constituent Assembly, on the 10th September, 1924. 