INTERNATIONAL BUREAU OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLICS
WASHINGTON, D. C.

AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONS
A COMPILATION . OF THE POLITICAL CONSTITUTIONS OF THE INDEPENDENT NATIONS OF THE NEW WORLD WITH SHORT HISTORICAL NOTES AND VARIOUS APPENDIXES

By JOSE IGNACIO RODRIGUEZ
Chief Translator and Librarian

VOLUME I	

JULY, 1905

WASHINGTON

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1906

While the utmost care is taken to insure accuracy in the publications of the International Bureau of the American Republics, no pecuniary responsibility is assumed on account of errors which may be found in them.

CONSTITUTION.
(Promulgated September 2, 1904.)

The National Constitutional Assembly does hereby decree the following political Constitution of the Republic of Honduras:
TITLE I. ARTICLE 1. Honduras is a State disgregated from the Central American Confederation. In consequence thereof it recognizes as its principal duty and its most pressing necessity to return to the union with the other States of the dissolved Republic. To attain this capital object the present Constitution shall not be an obstacle, as it may be amended or abolished by Congress in order to facilitate the ratification of any compacts, treaties, or conventions tending to obtain or having for their result the national reconstruction of Central America: ART. 2. Honduras is a free, sovereign, and independent Nation. ART. 3. The sovereignty is essentially vested in the Nation, and the exercise thereof in its representatives. ART. 4. All public power emanates from . the people. The functionaries of the State are its delegates, and have no other faculties than those expressly given them by the law. Under the law they legislate, administer the government, and administer justice, and according to it, they shall give an account of their acts. ART. 5. The boundaries of the Republic and its territorial Sion shall be fixed by law.

TITLE II.
HOND U RANEANS.

ART. 6. Honduraneans are either native or naturalized. ART. 7. Native Honduraneans are: 1. All persons born or who may be born in the territory of the Republic. The nationality of the children of foreigners born in Honduranean territory and that of the children of Honduraneans born in foreign territory shall be determined by treaty. In the absence of a treaty the children of foreign fathers born in Honduras, or foreign fathers domiciled in the country, shall be Honduraneans. 2. Natives of the other Central American Republics shall be considered native Honduraneans by the mere fact of residing in any part of the territory of Honduras, unless, by declaration duly made before the proper authority, they declare their intention to retain their own nationality. ART. 8. Naturalized Honduraneans are: 1. All Spanish Americans who have resided one year in the country and declare before the respective authorities their desire to become naturalized. 2. All other foreigners who have resided two years in the country and declare before the proper authority their desire to become naturalized. 3. Those who have obtained naturalization papers from the authority designated by law for that purpose. TITLE III.
FOREIGNERS.

ART. 9. The Republic of Honduras is a sacred asylum for all persons who take refuge in its territory. ART. 10. Foreigners shall be bound from the time of their arrival in the territory of the Re-

public to obey the laws and respect the authorities. ART. 11. Foreigners shall enjoy in Honduras all the civil rights of Honduraneans. ART. 12. They- can acquire all kinds of property in the country, subject, however, to all the ordinary and extraordinary burdens of general character which may be imposed upon the property of Honduraneans. ART. 13. Foreigners domiciled in Honduras shall be permitted to hold municipal offices and those purely administrative. ART. 14. Foreigners shall not present claims against the State or demand the payment by it of any indemnity, except in the cases and in the manner in which Honduraneans may do so. ART. 15. Foreigners shall not resort to diplomatic intervention except in case of manifest denial of justice, abnormal delays, or self-evident violation of the principles of international law. The fact that a final decision is not favorable to the claimant shall not be construed as a denial of justice. If in violation of this provision claims are presented, and not amicably adjusted, injury to the Government being sustained thereby, the claimant shall lose the right to inhabit the country. ART. 16. Extradition shall only be granted by virtue of law or treaty, for grave common offenses; but never for offenses of political character, even in case that a common offense has resulted therefrom. ART. 17. The' laws shall establish the manner and the cases in which a foreigner can be refused admission to the territory of the Nation or expelled therefrom for being deemed pernicious. ART. 18. The laws and treaties shall regulate the use of those guaranties, without abridging or modifying them.	

ART. 19. The provisions of this title shall not affect the stipulations made by existing treaties between Honduras and other nations. TITLE IV.
CITIZENS.

ART. 20. All Honduraneans over twenty-one years of age, and

those over eighteen who are married, or know how to read and write, shall be citizens. ART. 21. The rights of citizenship shall be suspended: 1. By an order of arrest or a declaration that criminal proceedings should be instituted against a citizen. 2. By conviction of vagrancy. 3. By insanity judicially declared. 4. By judicial decision disqualifying a citizen temporarily from the exercise of political rights.
ART. 22. Citizenship shall be lost: 1. By those accepting employment from foreign nations without permission of the respective Honduranean authorities. The Republics of Central America shall not be considered foreign nations. 2. By those who should become naturalized in a foreign country. No Honduranean, even if acquiring foreign citizenship, shall be exempted from the duties imposed upon them by the Constitution and the laws as long as they remain domiciled in the Republic. ART. 23. The right to vote shall not be waived, and is compulsory for all citizens. The suffrage is ; public and direct. The elections shall be held in the manner and form provided by law. ART. 24. Only citizens in the exercise of their rights shall be legally eligible for public positions.

TITLE V.
RIGHTS AND GUARANTIES.

ART. 25.. The Constitution guaranties to all the inhabitants of Honduras, whether natives or foreigners, in violability of human life, individual safety, liberty, equality, and property.

_Inviolability of human life.
ART. 26. The penalty of death is abolished in Honduras; but as the penitentiary system is not yet established, the said penalty shall continue to be imposed in the cases determined by law upon persons convicted of parricide, murder, piracy, and military ofenses of grave character and in no other.

Individual safety.
ART. 27. The Constitution recognizes the habeas corpus guaranty. In consequence thereof, any one unlawfully detained has the right to apply to the court, orally or in writing, by himself or through someone else, and request the exhibition of his person. ART. 28. Every one shall have

the right to request protection against any outrage or arbitrary act perpetrated against him, and to secure the exercise of all the guaranties which the present Constitution establishes, when unduly coerced or deprived of their enjoyment by laws or _acts of any authority, public agent, or functionary. . ART. 29. An order of arrest not - issued by competent authority, or issued without the legal formalities, is wrongful.
ART. 30. The detention of a person for purposes of investigation shall never exceed six days.

ART. 31. The keeping of a pi is oner in close confinement without communication with the outside world shall not exceed three days. ART. 32. No order of arrest shall be issued except upon full proof that an offense deserving deprivation of liberty has been committed, and sufficient indication of the guilt of the party to be detained. ART. 33. The arrest or imprisonment of a person as a compulsory measure, or as a punishment, shall be permitted in the cases and for the time established by law, provided that it does not exceed thirty days. Imprisonment for debts is forbidden. ART. 34. Offenders may be arrested in fiagranti delicto by any person whatever; but they shall be immediately delivered to the functionary who has power to commit. ART. 35. No prisoner shall be confined except in the places es tablished by law. Every kind of torture, unnecessary putting in irons, and undue rigorous treatment are absolutely forbidden. Beating with whips or sticks is a criminal offense. ART. 36. Even in case that an order of arrest has been , issued against some one, he shall not be taken to jail or detained therein, if he gives sufficient bail, when the penalty for the offense does not exceed three years. ART. 37. No one shall be tried by special commissions, or by other judges than those designated by law. ART. 38. The right of defense in court is inviolable. ART. 39. No one shall be compelled in criminal cases to testify against himself or against his consort, or against his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity.

ART. 40. No one shall be molested or prosecuted for his opinions. Private actions not affecting public morals or order, or doing no injury to third parties, shall be always beyond the action of the law. ART. 41. Domicile is inviolable; it can not be entered except in the cases and in the form provided by law. ART. 42. Private correspondence, by letter or telegraph, private papers and commercial books are inviolable. In no case shall the Executive or the agents thereof have power to intercept, open or detain private letters or telegrams. Correspondence intercepted, whether at the post-offices or any other place, shall not be admitted in evidence. Private correspondence, papers and books shall not be seized except by order of a competent court, in the cases, whether civil or criminal, which the law may determine. ART. 43. The enactment of laws providing for proscription, confiscation, or the establishment of infamous or perpetual penalties is hereby forbidden. The terms of imprisonment shall not exceed twelve years, and in the case of accumulation of sentences for several offenses twenty years. ART. 44. Laws shall not have retroactive effect except in criminal cases and when they prove to be favorable to the guilty party. ART. 45. The police shall depend on the civil authority.

Liberty.
ART. 46. The free exercise of all religions shall be guaranteed. There shall be no other limit to this liberty than the requirements of morals and public order. ART. 47. The acts affecting the civil status of a person shall be

long to the exclusive jurisdiction of civil functionaries and authorities, in the manner provided by law. ART. 48. The expression of thoughts, orally or in writing, shall be free, except in cases where public morals or private reputation are injured by it, or when the commission of criminal offenses or the disturbance of social order are thereby incited. ART. 49. Free education is guaranteed. Education supported by public funds shall be laical. Primary instruction shall be gratuitous, compulsory, and subsidized by the State. The law shall establish rules for the imparting of public instruction, without restricting the liberty of teaching or the independence of the teachers. ART. 50. The freedom of reunion without arms and of association for any lawful purpose is guaranteed; but only the citizens of the Republic can take part in meetings to discuss the political matters of the Nation. The establishment of all kinds of monastic institutions is hereby forbidden. ART. 51. Everyone is free to engage in the practice of the profession, industry, or labor which best suits his purposes, provided that it is useful and honest. Everyone is likewise free to profit by the products of his labor. No one shall be prevented from exercising these rights, except by judicial decision when they encroach upon the rights of third parties, or by Executive order when in conflict with the rights of society. ART. 52. There shall not be monopolies of any kind. The manufacture of brandy and fermented beverages, gunpowder, dynamite, and other explosives; saltpeter and tobacco may be, however, monopolized by the Government to the benefit of the

State. The coinage of money and the postal, telegraphic, and telephonic services correspond to the State. Monopolies, privileges, and concessions in favor of private parties can only be granted for a limited time, in order to promote the introduction or improvement of industries, colonization, immigration, institutions of credit, and the opening of ways of communication. ART. 53. Everyone is free to dispose of his property according to law. ART. 54. The entailment of property and endowments in favor of religious institutions are forbid den. ART. 55. Every person or reunion of persons have the right to address petitions to the legally established authorities, have them acted upon, and be informed of the result. But in political matters this right can only be exercised by citizens of the Republic.
ART. 56. Everyone is free to enter, remain in, travel through, or leave the territory of the nation without passports.

Equality.
ART. 57. There are no personal privileges before the law; but ministers of all religious associations are disqualified from exercising public functions. ART. 58. The basis for direct taxation shall be proportionality.

Property.
ART. 59. No one can be deprived of his property except by law, or by judicial decision founded on law. The condemnation of private property for public use has to be or dered by law or by judicial decision founded on law, and shall not be carried into effect without previous indemnification. In ease

of war the indemnification need not be previous. ART. 60. Authors and inventors shall enjoy the exclusive ownership of their works or discoveries for the time to be determined by law. ART. 61. The right to recover confiscated property is barred by limitation at the end of fifty years. ART. 62. Congress alone can levy national taxes. ART. 63. No personal service can be demanded except by virtue of a law or of a judicial decision founded on law.
TITLE VI.
THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT. ART. 64. The Government of Honduras is republican, democratic, and representative. It is exercised by three independent powers—legislative, executive, and judicial. ART. 65. None of the constituted powers shall perform any act by which the established form of government may be modified, or by which the integrity of the territory or the national sovereignty may be affected.

TITLE VII.
THE LEGISLATIVE POWER.

ART. 66. The legislative power is vested in a Congress of deputies which shall meet, even if not called, in the capital of the Republic, every two years between the first and fifteenth of January. Congress shall be in session for ninety days, but it may, before the expiration of that time, adjourn its meetings, finally or tempora rily, with the advice and consent of the Executive. It shall meet in extra session when called for that purpose; but in this case it shall deal with no other subjects than those mentioned in the call.

ART. 67. A number of deputies, consisting of not less than five, shall have power to compel the attendance of the other members until a quorum is secured. Congress can do business with a quorum consisting of two-thirds of the elected deputies, and as a general rule all measures shall be passed by absolute majority of votes. ART. 68. The deputies shall be elected for four years, and may be reelected indefinitely. At the expiration of the first two years they shall be renewed by half. Those who are to leave shall be chosen by lot before adjournment. Subsequent renewals shall be made by order of seniority. ART. 69. To be a deputy the following shall be required: To be a citizen in the full enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; to be over twenty-five years of age; and to be a native or resident of the department where the election is held. ART. 70. The following shall not; be deputies: 1. The secretaries and assistant secretaries of state. 2. Military men in active service. 3. Political governors and collectors of revenue in the department or electoral district in which they exercise their functions. ART. 71. A deputy is inviolable. At no time shall he be responsible for the ideas which, orally or in writing, he may have expressed in the performance of his functions. ART. The election of deputies shall be made upon the basis of one deputy and one substitute for every ten thousand inhabitants. In cases of fractions of this number, the representation thereof shall be determined by law.

TITLE VIII.
THE FACULTIES OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER.

ART. 73. The following powers belong to Congress: 1. To open and close its sessions; to be the judge of the election of its members, upon examination of , and to receive their credentials from them the promise of law. 2. To call the respective substitutes to fill the places of the deputies, in cases of absolute vacancy, or of legal impediment, and to order elections to be held to fill the vacancies. 3. To accept the resignations of its members when made upon legal causes duly proven. 4. To make rules for its interior government. 5. To enact, interpret, amend, and repeal the laws. 6. To create or abolish offices and grant pensions and honors.

7. To grant amnesties when public utility may demand it. 8. To grant pardons and commutations of sentences upon just and equitable reasons. 9. To appoint justices of the supreme court and accept or refuse to accept their resignations. 10. To provide everything relating to the safety and defense of the Republic. 11. To count the votes for President of the Republic, and to declare elected the citizen who obtained absolute majority. 12. If no absolute majority has been obtained, Congress shall elect President one of the three citizens having the greatest number of popular votes. 13. To receive the constitutional promise from the functionaries elected or declared elected by it, and to accept or refuse to accept their resignations. 14. To declare that the President, deputies, justices of the su

preme court, secretaries of state, and diplomatic agents should be criminally prosecuted during the exercise of their functions. 15. To change for grave reasons, the residence of the supreme powers. 16. To grant rewards and temporary privileges to authors and inventors, and to those who have introduced or improved industries of general utility. 17. To grant subsidies for objects of public utility. 18. To grant or refuse permission to Honduraneans to accept office from another nation. 19. To approve or disapprove the conduct of the Executive. 20. To approve, amend, or disapprove the contracts entered into and the concessions granted by the Executive for the purposes stated in article 140, or when the said contracts and concessions cover a period extending to the next presidential term. 21. To approve, amend, or disapprove the treaties concluded with other nations. 22. To regulate the commerce by land and sea. 23. To approve or disapprove the accounts of the public expenses. 24. To prepare every two years the budget, taking as a basis the probable receipts. 25. To levy or abolish taxes. 26. To contract national debts, provide for the payment of those in existence,-and order loans to hr made. 27. To order the sale of national property, or the application there of to public uses. 28. To establish ports of entry and create or abolish custom houses. 29. To fix the weight, fineness and type of the national coin. 30. To declare war and make peace.

31. To fix in each ordinary session the strength of the permanent army. 32. To grant or refuse permission to foreign troops to pass, through the territory of the 	Republic. 33. To declare, according to law, the whole Republic, or a portion thereof, in a state of siege. 34. To appoint brigadier-generals and major-generals, upon nomination by the Executive. 35. To grant letters of naturalization. 36. To appoint the members of the tribunal of accounts. 37. To summon the secretaries of state to appear before it and give information upon subjects within the jurisdiction of Congress, but the object of the inquiry shall be mentioned in the summons. ART. 74. The legislative power shall not make or complete any declaration in regard to the civil status of any person, nor shall it grant academic or literary degrees. ART. 75. Congress may delegate to the Executive the power to legislate stating distinctly the laws which necessity or public good may peremptorily demand. TITLE IX.
THE ENACTMENT, APPROVAL AND PROMULGATION OF LAWS.

ART. 76. The initiative in legislative matters exclusively belongs to the deputies, the President of the Republic through the secretaries of state, and the supreme court of justice in matters belonging to its jurisdiction. ART. 77. No bill shall become a law without having been discussed three times on different days, except in case of urgency declared to exist by a two-thirds vote. Every resolution introduced for the purpose of declaring the discussion of the bill to be urgent shall be pre-

ceded by an explanation of the reasons upon which it is founded. ART. 78. Every bill after having been passed by Congress shall be sent to the Executive, at the . latest within three days after its passage, in order that it may be approved and promulgated as law. ART. 79. The promulgation of laws shall be made in this form: "Therefore let it be executed." ART. 80. If the Executive finds it inadvisable to approve a bill it shall return it to Congress within ten days, using this form: "Let it be returned to Congress," and explaining the reasons upon which its action is founded. If no objection is made to a bill within the period just stated, it shall be considered approved and shall be promulgated as law. When the Executive returns a bill, Congress shall submit it to a new discussion, and if passed, by a two-thirds vote, it shall be forwarded to the Executive using this form: "Constitutionally ratified." The Executive shall then publish it without delay. ART. 81. When Congress passes a bill at the end of its session and the Executive does not deem it advisable to approve it, notice thereof shall be given immediately to Congress, in order that it may remain in session ten days longer, said period to be counted from the date on which the Executive received the bill. Should the Executive fail to comply with this provision, the bill shall be considered approved. ART. 82. The following measures of Congress shall not require the approval of the Executive: 1. Elections which Congress makes or declares, and the acceptance or non acceptance of resignations. 2. Resolutions allowing criminal proceedings to be instituted. 3. Appropriation laws.

4. Decrees relating to the conduct of the Executive. 5. Rules for the interior government of Congress. 6. Resolutions transferring the residence of Congress temporarily to some other place, or adjourning its meetings. 7. Resolutions disapproving treaties, contracts, and concessions. ART. 83. Whenever a bill not originally emanating from the supreme court has for its object the reform or repeal of any provision in the codes of the Republic or of any law relating to the administration of justice, the opinion of that court shall be requested, before entering into its discussion. The court shall give its opinion within the time which Congress may fix. TITLE
THE EXECUTIVE POWER.

ART. 84. The executive power is vested in a citizen who shall be called the President of the Republic. ART. 85. The President of the Republic shall be a native Honduranean and a citizen in the full exercise of his rights, and over thirty years of age. ART. 86. The President of the Republic shall be elected directly by the people, and his election shall be declared or made by Congress, as has been prescribed. ART. 87. The presidential term shall be six years, to begin on the first of February. The citizen who has been President can not be reelected for the following period.
ART. 88. In case of temporary impediment of the President of the Republic, the executive power shall be vested in the council of secretaries of state, or in any one of the secretaries, as the President may prefer.

If the vacancy is absolute, the executive power shall be vested in the council of secretaries of state, who shall immediately order a presidential election to be held, at the latest one month after the vacancy occurred. The Council shall also call an extra session of Congress, to be held one month after the election, and the President elect shall take possession of his office within one month after his election is declared or made; and in this case the presidential period shall begin on the day of his inauguration.
ART. 89. The President of the Republic shall have for the transaction of business from three to six secretaries, to whom the respective departments of the Government shall be entrusted. ART. 90. To be a secretary of state the following shall be required: to be over twenty-five years of age, to be a native I-Ionduranean, and to be a citizen in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship. ART. 91. The secretaries of state shall countersign the acts of the President of the Republic, which, if lacking this requisite, shall have no validity. The secretaries do not exercise authority by themselves, and are jointly responsible with their colleagues, except in case of protest, for all the acts countersigned by them or agreed upon with the other members of the cabinet. ART. 92. The secretaries of state shall submit to Congress during the first fif teen days of the ordinary session a report, supported by the proper vouchers, upon the acts of the Executive in every branch of the public administration. These reports shall serve Congress as a basis for passing judgment upon the conduct of the Executive on all matters which, according to the

Constitution, are subject to Congressional approval or disapproval. ART. 93. The secretaries of state are bound to give Congress, in the cases set forth in clause 37 of article 73, all the information requested of them, except in matter belonging to the departments of war and foreign relations, which the President of the Republic may consider advisable to keep secret. They may attend the meetings of Congress and take part in the debates, but shall have no vote. ART. 94. No secretary of state shall be a candidate for the Presidency of the Republic as long as he remains in the exercise of his functions. ART. 95. The assistant secretaries of state shall have the same qualifications as the secretaries. When, through absence of a secretary, an assistant secretary is called to countersign the acts of the Executive, he shall be responsible for said acts in the same way as a secretary.
TITLE X I.
FACULTIES OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER.

ART. 96. The President of the Republic shall have the administration of the general government of the country. His powers are: 1. To execute and cause others to execute the laws, issuing to that effect whatever orders and decrees may, without changing their spirit, be conducive to said purpose. 2. To accept during the recess of Congress the resignations of the justices of the supreme court and to appoint ad interim those who shall replace them. The same faculties shall be exercised in cases of death or absolute impediment of the same justices.

3. To appoint, according to law, the employees of the Executive Department. 4. To see that every employee of the Republic fulfils the duties which the law imposes upon him, respecting, however, the independence of their functions. 5. To remove the officers whose appointment solely belongs to him. 6. To grant amnesties, pardons, and commutations of sentences during the recess of Congress. 7. To grant to the executive employees leaves of absence and pensions of all kinds, and place them, according to law, on the retired list. 8. To call an extra session of Congress when matters of grave general interest may require it. 9. To report to Congress, by means of a message, at the opening of the ordinary session, on the general condition of public business and the use he may have made of the powers, if any, granted him. 10. To render to the functionaries of the judicial power the assistance which may be needed to enforce their decisions. 11. To grant naturalization during- the recess of Congress. 12. To grant or refuse permission to Honduraneans, during the recess of Congress, to accept employment from another nation. 13. To approve the laws, veto them, when proper, and prom 01, gate without delay the legislative acts which do not require Execu tive approval. 14. To cause during the recess of Congress, the vacant seats of deputies to be filled according to law, one month at the latest after the vacancy occurred. 15. To appoint ad interim, dur-. ing the recess of Congress the members of the tribunal of accounts. 16. To watch over the legal exactness of the coin, and the and formity of weights and measures

17. To exercise the supreme direction of the police. 18. To give military positions, from second lieutenant to colonel, to military men who distinguish themselves for their services. The positions of brigadier-general and General of Division can be granted by him on the battlefield. 19. To dispose of the organized military forces and distribute them according to law and as the necessities of the Republic may require. 20. To declare war and make peace, and to allow or refuse foreign troops to cross the territory of the Republic, when circumstances do not permit the assembling of Congress. 21. To declare the whole Republic or a portion thereof in a state of siege, in conformity with the law, durin g recess of Congress; but he shall have to report to Congress at its first meeting on the use made by him of this power. 22. To defend the independence and honor of the Nation and the integrity of its territory. 23. To preserve the peace and internal security of the Republic and to repel external attacks or aggression. 24. To grant letters of marque and reprisal. 25. To conclude treaties and all other diplomatic compacts, submitting them for ratification to Congress at its next session. 26. To conduct the foreign relations of the Republic, appoint its diplomatic and consular agents, receive foreign ministers, and admit consuls of other nations. 27. To cause the revenues of the state to be collected, and make rules for their disbursement according to law. 28. To order in cases of invasion or rebellion, if the resources of the state are insufficient, gen-

eral and proportional loans, voluntary or forced, to be contracted, and Congress shall be informed at its next session of the disbursement of the moneys so acquired. 29. To publish monthly a statement of the Government receipts and expenditures. 30. To make rules for the nationalization and registration of ships. ART. 97. The President is the commander in chief of the land and sea forces of the Republic. ART. 98. Whenever the President of the Republic should deem it advisable to place himself at the head of the army, he shall intrust the Executive power to one of the secretaries of state, who shall constitutionally replace him; and the President shall then remain vested with only the character and powers of commander in chief.
TITLE XII.

THE JUDICIAL .POWER

ART. 99. The judicial power of the Republic is vested in a supreme court, which shall reside in the capital, and in the tribunals and interior courts which the law may establish. ART. 100.. The supreme court, shall consist of five justices elected by Congress, said justices to be citizens in the full exercise of their rights of citizenship, lawyers of the Republic, and over thirty year s of age. Congress shall elect every year three substitute justices, who shal l take the places of the justices when ever required, and shall have the same qualifications. ART. 101. The supreme shall appoint, according to law, the justices of the courts of appeals the judges who shall preside over the departmental and	 ailI

courts, and the employees of the attorney-general's office. The justices of the peace shall be elected by the people in the respective municipal districts. ART. 102. Persons related to each other by blood, within the fourth degree, and by affinity within the second, shall not be members of the same tribunal. If two or more relatives within the said degrees are appointed, the one first appointed shall be preferred; but if all have been appointed at the same time, preference shall be given to the one first admitted to the bar. ART. 103. The term of office of the justices, departmental and sectional judges, and all the functionaries of the attorney-general's office, shall be six y ears, this period to continue, however, in case of its expiration until the appointment of their successors. They shall take possession of their offices on the first of February. ART. 104. The supreme court shall accept or refuse to accept the resignations of the functionaries appointed by it, and grant leaves of absence both to these functionaries and to its own members. The judges presiding over the departmental or sectional courts shall have power to accept or refuse to accept the resignations of the justices of the peace, and grant them leaves of absence. ART. 105. The law shall regulate the organization and powers of the tribunals of justice. ART. 106. The power to render judicial decisions, and to enforce them, belongs to the courts of justice. They shall apply the law to the concrete cases legally submitted to their cognizance, and shall refuse to comply with any law when it is contrary to the Constitution. ART. 107. The supreme court shall have, in addition to the

powers granted to it by law, the following faculties: 1. To make rules for its interior government. 2. To take cognizance of the cases of impeachment, and the cases for common offenses instistuted against high functionaries, when Congress has permitted to proceed against them. 3. To admit lawyers and notaries, whether of the Republic or of foreign countries, to the practice of their profession, unless something else has been stipulated by treaty, and to suspend them according to law. 4. To permit criminal proceedings to be instituted against. the members of the tribunal of accounts, the attorney-general of the Republic, and the principal national, departmental, and sectional employees determined by law, for crimes and offenses committed by them in the exercise of their functions. 5. To take cognizance of prize cases, cases of extradition, and all others to be settled according to international law. 6. To suspend and remove public functionaries for misconduct and for grave faults in the exercise of their functions, provided that a summary investigation of the facts and the proper hearing of the accused functionary have taken place. ART. 108, The administration of justice is gratuitousintheRepublic. ART. 109. The members of the tribunals of justice shall be disqualified during their term of office from serving any other position carrying with it jurisdiction. ART. 110. The same judge can not take cognizance of the same case in different instances. ART. 111. The courts of justice shall have the power to demand the assistance of the armed forces to carry their decisions into effect. ART. 112. No power or author-

ity shall assume jurisdiction over any pending case, or reopen cases terminated and settled. TITLE XIII. THE ARMY. ART. 113. The public force is established to insure the rights of the Nation, the compliance with the law, and the preservation of public order. ART. 114. Military service is compulsory. Every Honduranean from twenty-one to thirty years of age is a soldier in the active army, and from thirty to forty in the reserve. The law shall provide for the organization of the militia. Military officers, after completing forty years of age, shall be permitted to resign their commissions and reenter civil life. ART. 115. Military offenses shall be subject to military jurisdiction. ART. 116. The public force is essentially obedient. No armed body shall deliberate. TITLE XIV. THE BUDGET. ART. 117. The budget shall be voted by Congress upon estimates submitted to it by the executive power. ART. 118. The estimates shall be presented by the respective secretaries of state during the first fifteen days immediately following the opening of Congress. ART. 119. Expenditures not authorized in the budget are illegal, and the President, the respective secretary of state, the members of the tribunal of accounts, and all the employees having had intervention in the matter, shall be, in their respective cases, jointly responsible for the amounts so expended.

ART. 120. The appropriations made to meet the ordinary expenses of the public administration shall not exceed the amount of the probable receipts. TITLE XV.
THE PUBLIC TREASURE.

ART. 121. The public treasure consists of the following: 1. All property, real and personal, belonging to the Nation. 2. All its claims. 3. The duties on imports and exports and all other national taxes, and imposts. ART. 122. The executive power shall not enter into any contracts or grant any concession of importance pledging the national treasury, without previous publication of the proposals in the official newspaper and a call for bids. Operations undertaken to meet necessities of war, and business which according to its nature can only be transacted with determined persons, shall be exempted from this rule. ART. 123. There shall be a superior tribunal of accounts, which shall control the management of the national treasure, and whose principal power shall be to examine, approve, or disapprove the accounts of all those who administer public funds, and to allow or disallow and return to the Executive, according to law, any requisition for funds. ART. 124. The members of the tribunal of accounts shall be over twenty-five years of age, neither creditors nor debtors of the public treasury, and having no account pending with it. ' The organization and powers of this court and the number of its members_ shall be determined by law. ART. 125. There shall be a solicitor of the treasury, appointed by the Executive, who shall rep-

resent and defend the interests of the Government. His powers shall be determined by law. TITLE XVI. THE DEPARTMENTAL GOVERNMENT. ART. 126. For the proper administration of the government the territory is divided into Departments, the number and limits of which shall be determined by law. Each Department shall have the functionaries which the same law may determine. ART. 127. In the departmental government no one shall be .permated to exercise at the same time, unless ad interim, and for a period not to exceed three months, political, military, and treasury functions. ART. 128. The political, judicial, military, and economical regime of the territory of Mosquitia may be different from that adopted for all the other places of the Republic. TITLE XVII. THE MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT. ART. 129. The municipal government is autonomic, and shall be vested in municipal corporations directly elected by the people. The law shall regulate the organization and powers of the municipal corporations. The number of their members shall be in proportion to the population. The powers of the municipal corporations shall be purely economical and administrative. ART. 130. The municipal corporations shall levy, according to law, local taxes, and shall manage the property of the community for the benefit of the same, rendering an account of their management to the tribunal established by law. They shall

publish annually an itemized report of receipts and expenditures. ART. 131. The municipal corporations shall freely appoint their own employees and those police agents whose salaries are to be paid out of municipal funds. ART. 132. In the exercise of their , own functions the municipal corporations shall be independent of the other powers, but in no case shall they violate the general laws of the country. They shall be responsible before the authorities designated by law for any abuses committed by them, collectively or individually. ART. 133. The municipal corporations shall have the power of commuting, according to law, sentences imposed for misdemeanors. The municipal corporations shall also have the right to take action on matters of police, hygienics, and public instruction, provided that said action is not in opposition to the Constitution and general laws. ART. 134. No member of the municipal corporations shall be compelled to accept another position or be called to the military service. TITLE XVIII.
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS.

ART. 135. The enumeration of rights and guaranties in this Constitution does not exclude other rights and guaranties not enumerated, but derived from the principle of the sovereignty of the people and the republican form of government. ART. 136. The laws regulate the use of these guaranties, but no law shall be enacted which, under pretense of regulating or organizing their exercise, should abridge, restrict, or adulterate them. ART. 137. Every person or reunion of persons assuming with,

out authority the representation of the people, arrogating the rights thereof, or speaking in its name, shall be guilty of sedition. ART. 138. All usurped authority is illegal, and the usurpation of authority a crime. The acts of the usurper are null. All measures taken through direct or indirect pressure of an armed body or a reunion of people are null de jure and shall be inoperative.
ART. 139. The President of the Republic, deputies, justices of the supreme court, secretaries of state, and diplomatic ministers, shall respond before Congress for the offenses committed by them in the exercise of their functions. Congress, after following the course of proceedings for such cases determined by its rules, shall declare whether or not there is ground to institute proceedings against them and place them at the disposal of the tribunal of competent jurisdiction. The same declaration of Congress shall be required before instituting proceedings against the President of the Republic, the secretaries of state, and the justices of the supreme court, for common offenses. ART. 140. The Government shall provide all that may be conducive to the welfare and progress of the Republie, promote public instruction in its different branches, the progress of agriculture, industry and commerce, immigration, colonization of vacant lands, con Aruction of roads and railways, establishment of new industries and institutions of credit, introduction of foreign capital, exploitation and canalization of the rivers and lakes, all of which shall be done by means of laws of protective character and temporary concessions of privileges and other inducements.

ART. 141. The navigation of the rivers shall be free to all flags. ART. 142. Neither Honduraneans nor foreigners shall in any case claim against the State any indemnity for damages done to their persons or property by revolutionists. ART. 143. In cases of invasion, internal disturbance of the peace, or any other case in which society may become in grave danger, the state of siege of the entire Republic or a portion thereof may be proclaimed. The state of siege shall last only for the time required by the circumstances which produced it, but it never shall extend beyond sixty days without a further declaration, nor can it affect the guaranties set forth in articles '26, 35, 37, 43, and 44. In case of epidemic diseases it shall be lawful for the Government to issue sanitary regulations restricting or abridging the guaranties contained in articles 41 and 42, or the portion thereof relating to the detention of correspondence, and articles 50, 56, and 63. ART. 144. The present Consti tution may be amended. The necessity for amending it shall be de-clared by Congress, but the amend ment itself shall only be made by a national constitutional con von Lion called for that purpose. A proposition to amend, which is not supported by two-thirds or the members of Congress, shall have no effect. The case forcseen in article 1 shall be an ex ception to this rule. ART. 145. Every employer of functionary of the Republic entering on the discharge of duties shall make the following promise: "I promise to be faith ful to the Republic and to and cause others to comply with the Constitution and the law,

TITLE XIX. TRANSIENT PROVISIONS. ART. 146. For this time and for the first constitutional period the present assembly shall make the election of President of the Republic and of justices of the supreme court, and shall receive from them the promise required by law. FINAL ARTICLE. The present Constitution shall begin to be in force when secondary laws in harmony with its principles shall be enacted; but from the present date the Constitution of October fourteenth, eighteen hundred and ninety-four, is repealed.

