•"7

'.'*':.'.'•• •'•"•'.'•' 'Vi'.V:;?''•.*;.7"^.- ':f' '' : j"''>"'^''"'-^-^Y^' ••:'" . . '.HDKQAJax. . •.'•.• v:':>'.'• ^'1121 .; '"_••

LAW respecting the Re-eaJablfaHmant of the Constitutional ,-• \ Order and the Provisional Exercise of Sovereign Power' . in Hungary:—Budapest, February- 28, 1920. v • (Translation,) : LAW I of 1920. • t ' - S The National Assembly, as the sole legal representative : • i of national sovereignty, establishes that the exeroise of . i Eoyal power ceased on the 13th November, 1918. It further establishes that the joint ownership that existed betweea Hungary and her dependencies and the Kingdoms and lands represented in tho former Austrian Imperial Council. "\ has ceased owing to force of circumstances. The National Assembly shall therefore be competent to decide questions arising from these facts after the conclusion of peace. ' It further establishes that the House of Deputies of the Parliament lawfully convoked for the 21st June, 1910, { dissolved itself on the 16th November, 1918, and' that the House-of Magnates, on the same day, took note of this decision and closed its deliberations, whereby Parliament ceased to function. Thereby the exercise of sovereign power within the ordinary limits.of the constitution became impossible. In accordance with the fundamental principles of our constitution, the provisional Governments formed since the . 7th August, 1919, have appealed to the nation to elect a representative National Assembly, on the basis of universal J suffrage, this suffrage to,be extended to women and to be exercised by means of secret, equal, direct and compulsory ballot. Elections were accordingly held in- all those parts of the country not ocoupied by the enemy, and the elected deputies assembled at Budapest on the 16th February and constituted the National Assembly. The first measure passed by the National Assembly thus constituted was the following law:— . CHAPTER I.—Provisions for the Be'establishment of Constitutional Order. ART. 1. The National Assembly sanctions all those decrees of the Government on the basis of which the National Assembly is constituted. 2. The National Assembly declares itself to be the lawful representative of the sovereignty of the Hungarian State, which in the sense of our constitution is also competent to decide in what manner sovereign power shall in future be exercised. • [oxxi] • 2o

^fiiaa^l^-:••••••.;''•.

•

HTOGABX..

_.

^ ..,

__..

_.

'". - ' " 8/' The" National Assembly secures to its members all • those privileges accruing to members of Parliament by the '.'. rules hithertoin force. . - . ' • . • ' . • -The National Assembly, its committees and members, their activities and the -laws enacted by tram shall enjoy'' the same protection as was seouved by the criminal laws to Parliament, its two houses, its committees and members," their aotivities and their laws. • Unauthorised persons who appear in the rooms reserved for the sittings ol the National Assembly or its committees ' and do not leave forthwith on being invited to do so by the President of the .National Assembly or of the committee commit an offence and Bhall, in so far as thenactions do not incur more severe penalties under the Penal Code, be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year, and loss of their political rights; . Persons who appear without authorisation in the preWses of the National Assembly and who do not leave on the second invitation of the President shall be arrested and handed over to the Publio Prosecutor. Should such action be committed by a deputy excluded from the sittings in accordance with the standing rules, the action is not covered by the provisions concerning privilege; in such cases the Public Prosecutor may drop . the charge only with the consent of the National Assembly. 4. The legislative power shall be exercised by the National Assembly. 6. Until the appointment of a Governor, executive power shall be exercised solely by, the Cabinet responsible to the National Assembly. 6. The Hungarian responsible Cabinet will be supplemented by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Public Welfare and Labour; further, by the Minister of Small Landowners (one of the Ministers without portfolio) who may be appointed in the sense of Law XI of 1917, the Minister of Food and the Minister for National Minorities. Pending a settlement by legislation, the sphere of activities of these Ministers will be defined by the Cabinet. The post of a Minister to the King's person is hereby abolished, 7. Until further provisions on the part of the Legislature, jurisdiction shall be exercised in the" name of the Hungarian State by the courts organised in the sense of the law. 8. For the defence of the country and for co-operation in the maintenance of internal order and security a national army shall be formed which shall take the oath to the Hungarian constitution.

•':' ' ^

'.

HUNOAHY..

' . ' • ' •

1128

- 9. All provisions of the organs • of the so-called People's Bepublic and Bepublio of Soviets, issued in the form of decrees or under other denominations, shall be invalid, as shall also be all provisions and decisions of the so-called National Councils and their organs. The so-called people's decrees and people's laws shall be. cancelled in the Code oi Laws, > The National Assembly, however, empowers the Ministry to keep in force provisionally within .the limits of the. constitution, on their own responsibility, the provisions of, the organs of the so-called People's Bepublic, in. so far as this is necessary in the interest of order and security, or to replace them by new provisions. Until suc*h time as the Ministry shall have regulated this, matter, the provisions of the organs of the so-called People's Bepublio shall be. applied, in so far as they do not conflict_ with the constitution and the existing laws, were issued legally, and have not yet been annulled. The Cabinet is further empowered to make by Cabinet decrees the necessary arran amenta to put an end to the conditions created by the provisions o£ the organs of the so-called Bepublic of Soviets, and to restore order. The Ministry is instructed to submit to the National Assembly as soon as possible appropriate bills dealing with matters whioh require settlement by legislation. 10. The National Assembly accepts the validity of the provisions of the Governments and its members formed since tho 7th August, 1919, for tho purpose of re-establishing constitutional order and security; it empowers the Cabinet, however, to invalidate, to modify or to supplement these provisions according to necessity. The Ministry fs at the same time instructed to submit as soon as possible appropriate bills to the National Assembly, in so far as these provisions refer to matters belonging to the sphere of legislation. 11. Tho relations of Hungary with the Kingdoms and lands represented in the former Austrian Imperial Council having ceased to exist, law XII of 1867 and other legal provisions referring to such relations have become inoperative, and the free self-determination of the Hungarian State, consequent upon its traditional independence, has been completely restored as regards these relations. The National Assam' ly maintains all claims of the Hungarian State to ownership of former institutions and properties held jointly until the cessation of the relations whioh existed with the above-mentioned Kingdoms and lands. [oxxt] 2 o2

•:J.#^^P^^|^"':V^
^^^mmw:^''-^m^>H^ ^u^*^-- ' : • • • • • •
7 ; \ £ i i 2 4 ' < ^ ' :?>?"•;••'.'' ;•;' H p N O A i r e . : / /..' •_•" ••'•.-••.•••.•

y: ^.^':T.\-QBk7TE^ 11.-—Powers'of the- Quoernor. ••:.. :.'. " 12...The National Assembly, unialthe question of,the exercise of supreme power is decided,'and until the head .'. of the State assumes his office on the basis of this decision, - ~ shall elect, by secret ballot from amongst Hungarian ^ nationals a Governor for the temporary exercise of supreme power. (')18. The Governor shall exercise the constitutional rights pertaining to sovereign power within, the limits speoified below. Laws framed by the National Assembly require no sanction; the Governor shall within 60 days at latest sign and promulgate them,- Prior to the promulgation, the Governor may return them once to the National Assembly for reconsideration, stating his reasons for 'such action. If the. National Assembly maintains unchanged a law thus returned, the Governor must promulgate it within 15 days. The Governor may not exercise his right of returning a bill as regard's laws dealing with the form* of the State or the person of the head of the State. The Governor may in any case exercise his right of returning a bill only in such a maimer as to enable, the National Assembly to decide upon the law thus returned before the expiration of the 2 years' term for which it (the National Assembly) was elected. The Governor may not prorogue the National Assembly, and may exercise the right of dissolution pertaining to the sovereign power only if the National Assembly, in spite of the Governor's message, has become incapable of performing its work, and the Speaker is unable to remedy the evil by the powers secured to him by the standing rules. In case of a dissolution, the Governor must, in the decree dissolving the National Assembly, make provision for the convocation of the new National Assembly, in such a manner that the new National Assembly may assemble within 8 months at latest from the day of the dissolution, on the basis of the new franchise law to be framed by the National Assembly; should this, however, not have been framed by that time, on the basiVof the franchise which served as a basis for the election of the present National Assembly. The Governor represents Hungary in international relations. He may delegate and receive diplomatic representatives. He may, in the name of Hungary, through the responsible Cabinet, conclude alliances and other treaties with foreign Powers, but in so far as these refer to legislative matters, only with the consent of the National Assembly.
(>) Modified by law of August 19, 1920; toe page 1126.

27

• Declarations of .war,- .employment .61 tie army outside ••".. the frontiers of the country, and the'.conclusion of peace' '-'"\ shall require the consent of the National Assembly. .-, • • , . • • " . The Governor may exercise " > • executive * power only •• through the Cabinet responsible to.the.National Assembly. AH his orders and dispositions; .including, dispositions relating to the armed forces, shall only be valid if they are countersigned by the responsible Minister concerned. This j does not, however, affect the Governor's constitutional j rights as regards the command and internal organisation j of the national army. He shall not ennoble anyone. \ He shall not exercise the.right of patronage. ] A general amnesty shall only be granted by law.' 14. The person of the Governor is inviolable and enjoys i the same protection as that secured to the King by our laws. ' ; In case of a violation of the constitution'or of the law the Governor may be called to account by the National Assembly. The National Assembly; may decree this calling j to. account only upon a proposal signed by 'at least 100 of its members and upon a vote of two-thirds of the total number of members. The proceeding will he regulated by a special bill. 15. The Governor shall bear the title of " His Serene Highness the Governor." 16. The National Assembly shall fix a grant for the Governor. 17. An office necessary for the carrying out of official work will be created and placed under the orders of the ' Governor by the Ministry within the budgetary limits to i be fixed by the National Assembly. 18. The Governor shall exercise his functions only after having taken the following oath. before the National Assembly: " I, N.N., elected Governor of Hungary, swear to God that I will be faithful to Hungary, will keep her laws and her ancient and traditional customs and will also cause others to keep them_, will defend her independence and her territory, will exercise my powers in the sense of the constitution in agreement with the National Assembly through the responsible Cabinet, and will do everything 1 can for the benefit and glory of the country. So help me God."
CHAPTER in.—Concluding Provisions. 19. This law shall be promulgated in the Code of Laws a3 law I of 1920. 20. This law comes into force on the day of its promulgation. [cxxi] 2o8

m.

,.>.u:,'

•;'''"'. 1126'

• ' ' .''HONOAEY^C ^ ' ' ^ 1 ' ; .

•

.'•'

This law, the will of the nation? must be kept by everyone. ' . . : . . . . • • • ' • <•:-.• • . STEPHEN BAKOVSZKY,' President * of the National .' Assembly.CHAKLES HU8ZAK. Prime Minister. LADISLAS PETHEfc. . Keeper of the Minutes in the National Assembly. Budapest, February 28, 1920. LAW modifying the Law relating to the Re-establishment of Constitutional Order and the Provisional fSxercise of Sovereign Power in Hungary .—Promulgated August 19. 1920. (Translation.) LAW X y n of 1920. ART. 1. The right pertaining to the Eoyal power of adjourning, proroguing and dissolving Parliament may be exercised also in connexion with the National Assembly, within the limits of law IY of 1848.andiaw X of 1867. This right may be exercised by the Governor, but in case of a dissolution the Governor must, in the. decree dissolvingthe National Assembly, make provision for the convocation of the new National Assembly in such a manner that the latter may assemble within 3 months at latest from the day of the dissolution, on. the basis of the new franchise law to be framed; should this, however, not have'been framed by that time, on the basis of the franchise which served as a basis for the election of the present National Assembly. The Governor may adjourn the National Assembly for a period o£ 80 days at the outside. Should the Governor have dissolved the National Assembly during the 60 days' term prescribed for the promulgation of laws framed by the National Assembly inl accordance with paragraph .2 of article 13 of law I of 1920,( ) or should the 2 years' term of the National Assembly have expired during this interval, the Governor may return the law not yet promulgated to the new National Assembly for reconsideration, or, if the latter has been replaced by a Parliament, tothe said Parliament within 15 days from its constitution. The provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of article 13 of law I of 1920, which are at variance with the present article, are? hereby repealed.
(i) Pago 1121.

2$

•'"''•.'•

' "

r;

". ' o H m T O A W ^ ^ ^ ^ : ( > ' : . H ' V - i i 2 7 \

2. Paragraph 5 of article 18 of law-I of 1020. shall be supplemented oy the following: sentence t " In a case of national emergency, wever,;the,Governor may, upon the responsibility of the Cabinet and the subsequent assent of the Na6ional Assembly, which must be solicited without delay, order the rmployment of the army outside the frontiers of the country." 3. The last paragraph of article 13 of law I of 1920 is hereby repealed and is replaced by the following provision : "The Governor may grant a general amnesty, but to those who were arraigned or sentenced for actions or omissions defined in paragraph 82 of law I U of 1846 or article 9 of law XVXII of 1870, an amnesty may only be granted by law." 4. This law comes into force on the day of its promulgation. • LAW abolishing the Sovereign Rights of King Charles IV and the Hereditary Succession of the House of Hapsburg in Hungary.—Budapest, November 6, 1921. {Translation.) ' LAW No. XLVII of 1921. I notify all whom it may concern that the National Assembly of Hungary has passed the following bill: — 1. The sovereign rights of King Charles IV are abolished. 2. The Pragmatic Sanction and all the other legal olauses contained in laws I and I I of 1723, establishing and regulating •the hereditary succession of the house of Austria (Domus Amtriaca,), have lost their legal force and thus the nation has regained the right of choosing a King. 8. The nation maintains unchanged its traditional constitution as a Kingdom, though it puts off filling the Eoyal throne to some later date, and entrusts the Government with •the task of bringing forward proposals for this purpose at a suitable time. 4. This law comes into force on the day of its promulgation. I hereby order this bill to be published, and I shall keep this law as the will of the nation, and make everyone else ieep it. Budapest, November 6, 1921. NICHOLAS HOETHY, Governor of Hungary. COUNT STEPHEN BETHLEN, Royal Hungarian Prime Minister. .'

[exxtj

2oi

