
CONSTITUTION OF HUNGARY
January 31, 1946 We hereby commit to the memory of all those whom it may concern, that the National Assembly of Hungary has framed the following Act: On November 13, 1918, the exercise of royal power had ceased in Hungary. The nation regained her right of self-determination. ' After a struggle, which lasted four hundred years, after the parliament of Onod, the Debrecen deliberations of 1849, the attempt at two revolutions, and the oppression in the wake thereof, the Hungarian people are once more free to decide on their form of government. The National Assembly, elected on the basis of universal, equal, direct, and secret suffrage, will now, in the name of and by virtue of the authority vested in it by the Hungarian people, constitute that form of government which best complies with the will and interests of the nation: the Hungarian Republic. For its citizens, the Republic assures the natural and inalienable rights of man, for the Hungarian people, organized cohabitation and peaceful co-operation with other peoples. The natural and inalienable rights of man are in the first place: the rights of personal freedom; the right of a human life, which is free from oppression, fear, and want; the free expression of opinion; free exercise of religion; right of assembly and association; right to personal security, labor, and dignified human livelihood, to free improvement of the mind; the right to take part in the administration of the life of the State and autonomies. No citizen should be deprived of these rights without a legal procedure, and the Hungarian State assures all its citizens these rights without any discrimination, within the framework of democratic state-order and to an extent both uniform and equal. 

In the first place, the National Assembly of Hungary with a view to translating this end into reality, frames the following law: 

1 The Hungarian people are the exclusive source and holder of state power. The Hungarian people shall exercise the power of legislation by way of the National Assembly, elected on the basis of universal, equal, direct and secret suffrage. 

1. Hungary is a Republic. 2. A president shall act as head of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the National Assembly to hold office for four successive years. 3 Every Hungarian citizen over thirty-five years of age is eligible for the office of the President of the Republic, provided that he has a right to elect representatives of the National Assembly.

162 1950


163

4
1. The election of the President of the Republic shall be preceded by nomination. The validity of nomination requires a recommendation in writing of at least fifty National Assembly members. The nomination shall be submitted to the president of the National Assembly prior to the decreeing of the voting. Each member of the National Assembly may recommend one candidate only. All recommendations shall be considered as null and void, in cases where several candidates are recommended by the same member of the National Assembly. 2. If the necessary recommendation was received by one candidate only, the said candidate may be elected President of the Republic by acclamation in the presence of at least two-thirds of the members of the National Assembly. Election shall take place by secret ballot. Repeated voting is justified as need arises. The President of the Republic, elected on the basis of the first ballot, shall require the vote of at least two-thirds of all National Assembly members. 3. Should, on the occasion of the first voting, none of the candidates obtain this majority, a new voting will take place on the basis of a new recommendation and in conformity with point 1. Nomination on the basis of the second voting will also require the ballot of at least two-thirds of all National Assembly members. 4. Should, on the occasion of the second voting, none of the candidates obtain the majority required, a third voting will be held. On this occasion, ballots may only be cast in favor of those two candidates who on the occasion of the second voting received most of the ballots. The President of the Republic, nominated on the basis of the third voting, shall require -regardless of the number of persons participating in the voting-the majority of ballots. 5. The voting must be concluded within three days. 5 The President of the Republic cannot be re-elected to stay in office for two successive terms.
6

1. The President of the Republic shall take an oath or affirmation in the presence of the National Assembly. 2. The form of oath is as follows: I ........................ hereby solemnly swear to remain loyal to Hungary and her Constitution. I shall observe her laws and practices of legal force, make others observe them too, and shall exercise my office as President of the Republic in agreement with the National Assembly and to the advantage of the Hungarian people. So help me God. 3. The form of affirmation is as follows: I ........................ hereby affirm, upon my honor and conscience, to remain loyal to Hungary and her Constitution. I shall observe her laws and practices of legal force, make others observe them too, and shall exercise my office as President of the Republic in agreement with the National Assembly and to the advantage of the Hungarian people. 7 Of the President's election, his taking of oath or affirmation, minutes shall be kept. The said minutes shall also be signed by the President of

the Republic; his signature shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister. The minutes shall be published in the official gazette.
8

Upon the taking of oath (affirmation) of the President of the Republic, nominated in the first instance, the institution of the national high council shall cease. 9 Laws framed by the National Assembly shall be signed within fifteen days by the President of the Republic, who will provide said laws with a clause decreeing publication within the same space of time. Prior to the decreeing of publication, he may return, on one occasion only, the law to the National Assembly within the aforementioned space of time, with a view to a renewed consideration and with the notification of his observations; it is however his duty to make public within fifteen days laws passed to him for the second time by the National Assembly.
10

1. The President of the Republic may adjourn the National Assembly once-for not more than thirty days-during one session. For the duration of adjournment and upon the proposal, moved in writing by at least one hundred representatives, the president of the National Assembly shall convene the assembly within a period of eight days, following the receipt of the motion. 2. The President of the Republic is entitled to dissolve the National Assembly provided that a motion is carried by the government to this effect, or it is so requested by at least two-fifths of the representatives of the National Assembly.
11

1. The President of the Republic shall represent Hungary in all international relations. He shall delegate and receive envoys, appoint consuls, and grant permission for the functions of foreign consuls. Through the government he may conclude agreements with foreign powers; should, however, the subject of a certain agreement affect the competence of legislation, the agreement cannot be concluded until after having been duly approved by the National Assembly. 2. Only by virtue of a preliminary authority, vested in him by the National Assembly, shall the President of the Republic have the right to declare war, establish a state of war, sign a peace treaty and use the services of the armed forces outside the borders of the country.
12

1. As head of State, a right of pardon shall be accorded to the President of the Republic, as well as the right of exemption from legal impediments, reserved for the head of the State. A general pardon, however, and a pardon to a minister, arraigned or convicted as a result of his ministerial responsibility, or to the president of the supreme public audit office, respectively, may only be granted by the National Assembly. 2. In case of war or mobilization, the President of the Republic shall pass a decision upon the motion carried by the government, with regard to a release from citizenship status.

  164 1950



165

13 1. Executive power shall be exercised by the President of the Republic through the government, which is responsible to the National Assembly. 2. After having given a hearing to the political committee of the National Assembly and paying due regard to the parliament's majority principle, the President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss a prime minister and, on the basis of a motion by the Prime Minister, the ministers. 3. The nominated government shall present itself during the session of the National Assembly within eight days after its nomination. Prior to the taking place of this event, the President of the Republic has no right to dissolve the National Assembly. 4. All orders issued and all measures taken by the President of the Republic shall require the countersignature of the Prime Minister or one of the competent responsible ministers. 14 1. State officials, belonging to the fifth salary class or some higher salary class as well as all judges-regardless of the salary class--shall be nominated by the President of the Republic upon a motion, through the Prime Minister, by the competent responsible minister. Upon a proposal, moved through the Prime Minister by the competent responsible minister, the President of the Republic shall fill other offices the filling of which was assigned by legal provisions to the sphere of authority of the head of the State. 2. It is the right of the President of the Republic to confer such orders and titles of official positions as were founded by the National Assembly. 15 1. The President of the Republic may only resign his office by way of a declaration addressed to the National Assembly and with the consent of the latter. The National Assembly may ask the President of the Republic within fifteen days to reconsider his decision. Should the President of the Republic uphold his decision, the National Assembly cannot refuse to take cognizance of the resignation. 2. Should the President of the Republic die, or the presidential office of the Republic become vacant for other reasons or the President of the Republic be continuously unable to hold office, the president of the National Assembly shall, until the election of the new President of the Republic, exercise the jurisdiction of the President, with the restriction, however, that the aforesaid cannot return laws already constituted by the National Assembly to this assembly for further consideration, cannot dissolve the National Assembly, and may exercise the right of pardon only in favor of finally convicted persons. 3. Should the presidential office of the Republic become vacant, or the President of the Republic be continuously unable to perform his duties of office, it is the duty of the president of the National Assembly to see that the National Assembly is convened within thirty days in order to elect a new president. Should the mandate of the National Assembly cease prior to the arising of such circumstances as require the election of a president of the Republic, or should the President of the Republic have

  165 1950

166

ordered the dissolution of the National Assembly, it is the duty of the president of the National Assembly to see that elections are held within sixty days after the taking place of events which necessitated the nomination of a new president of the Republic. In such a case, the rights of the President of the Republic shall, with restrictions as determined in point 2, be exercised by the president of the dissolved National Assembly or by the president of that National Assembly, respectively, the mandate of which has ceased prior to the office of the President of the Republic becoming vacant. 16 1. The person of the President of the Republic is invulnerable; a special law will assure his legal defense. 2. Should the President of the Republic violate the Constitution or the law, he may be called to account by the National Assembly-on the basis of a motion carried in writing by at least one hundred and fifty members-in the presence of at least two-thirds of all the members and with the ballot of at least two-thirds of those present. The right of jurisdiction rests with a court formed from among members of the National Assembly with the appropriate adoption of Act 111:1848, par. 34. 

17 1. It rests with the National Assembly to establish compensation for the President of the Republic. 2. An office, necessary to the discharge of duties of the President of the Republic, shall be organized by the government. The expenditures of this office shall be provided for from within the framework of state budget. 18 Courts shall exercise the judicial power in the name of the Republic and shall pass final decisions "in the name of the Hungarian Republic." 19 This law shall be immediately effective on the day of its publication in the National Assembly. With the publication thereof, all legal provisions relative to the kingdom, which has ceased to exist, and to the institution of regency are hereby declared null and void. It is the duty of everyone to observe this act as the will of the nation.


