Title: Date Adopted: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

The Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia: 17 August 1945 08/18/1945 Indonesia Oceana Publications, Inc. Proprietary Gisbert H. Flanz

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA Table of Contents Chapter I: Form of Government and Sovereignty of the State Chapter II: The People's Consultative Assembly Chapter III: The Executive Chapter IV: The Supreme Advisory Council [Dewan Pertimbangan Agung] Chapter V: The Ministries Chapter VI: Local Administration Chapter VII: The Council of Representatives Chapter VIII: Finance Chapter IX: The Judiciary Chapter X: Citizenship Chapter XI: Religion Chapter XII: National Defense Chapter XIII: Education Chapter XIV: Social Welfare Chapter XV: Flag and Language Chapter XVI: Amendment of the Constitution Transitional Provisions

Additional Provisions

PREAMBLE Since independence is the right of every nation, any subjugation in this world is contrary to humanity and justice, and must therefore be abolished. Our struggle for an independent Indonesia has come to a successful stage and the Indonesian people are on the very threshold of an Indonesia State — free, united, sovereign, just and prosperous. With the blessing of God Almighty and moved by the high ideal of a free national life, the Indonesian people hereby declare their Independence. The establishment of a national Indonesian Government is for nurturing the Indonesian people and their territories; for promoting public welfare; for uplifting the standard of living, and for participation in the founding of a world order, based on independence, eternal peace and social justice. Therefore, our national Independence is embodied in the Constitution of the Indonesian State, established as a republic with sovereignty vested in the people. We believe in one supreme God; in righteous and moral humanity, in the unity of Indonesia. We believe in democracy, wisely guided and led by close contact with the people through consultation and representation so that democracy shall result [in] social justice for the whole Indonesian people. CHAPTER I FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND SOVEREIGNTY OF THE STATE Article 1. 1. The Indonesian State is a unitary State with a republican form of government. 2. Sovereignty is vested in the people and fully exercised by them through the medium of the People's Consultative Assembly [Madjelis Permusjawaratan Rakjat] . CHAPTER II THE PEOPLE'S CONSULTATIVE ASSEMBLY Article 2. 1. The People's Consultative Assembly consists of members of the Council of Representatives [Dewan Perwakilan Rakjat] , and delegates of regional territories and other groups, in accordance with the provisions provided by law.

2. The People's Consultative Assembly shall hold assembly in the capital at least once every five years. 3. All decisions of the People's Consultative Assembly shall be decided by a majority vote. Article 3. The People's Consultative Assembly shall draw up the Constitution and determine the broad outlines of national policy. CHAPTER III THE EXECUTIVE Article 4. 1. The President is vested with Executive Power, in accordance with the Constitution. 2. In the exercise of his duties, the President is assisted by a Vice President. Article 5. 1. The President, acting in concurrence with the Council of Representatives, is vested with legislative powers. 2. The President shall enact the necessary ordinances [peraturan pemerintah] as required for the proper execution of the laws. Article 6. 1. The President must be a native-born Indonesian citizen. 2. The President and the Vice President shall be elected by the People's Consultative Assembly by a majority vote. Article 7. The President and the Vice President hold office for a term of five years, and are thereafter eligible for re-election. Article 8. In the event of death, removal or inability to exercise the duties of his office, the President is succeeded by the Vice President until the completion of the President's term of office.

Article 9. Before assuming the duties of his office, the President and Vice President shall, by oath or affirmation, solemnly declare before the People's Consultative Assembly or the Council of Representatives: Oath of President (Vice President): "I do solemnly swear before God, that I shall faithfully and conscientiously fulfill the duties of President of the Republic of Indonesia (Vice President of the Republic of Indonesia) to maintain the Constitution and to execute conscientiously all its laws and regulations, and dedicate myself to the service of the State and Nation." Affirmation of the President (Vice President): "I do solemnly affirm that I shall faithfully and conscientiously fulfill the duties of President of the Republic of Indonesia (Vice President of the Republic of Indonesia) to maintain the Constitution and to execute conscientiously all its laws and regulations, and dedicate myself to the service of the State and Nation." Article 10. The President is commander-in-chief of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force. Article 11. The President, with the concurrence with the Council of Representatives, declares war, makes peace, and concludes treaties with other States. Article 12. The President is empowered, in times of emergency, [to] proclaim martial law. Legislation shall be provided to decide what conditions shall make the imposition of martial law imperative, and what action shall be taken after the proclamation of martial law. Article 13. 1. The President accredits ambassadors, diplomatic ministers and consuls. 2. The President receives ambassadors and diplomatic ministers of other countries. Article 14. The President has the authority to grant pardons, amnesties, abolitions and rehabilitation.

Article 15. The President has the authority to grant titles, to award decorations of merit and other insignia of honor. CHAPTER IV THE SUPREME ADVISORY COUNCIL [DEWAN PERTIMBANGAN AGUNG] Article 16. 1. The composition of the Supreme Advisory Council shall be provided by law. 2. The Council shall advise the President on matters submitted to it by the President and has the right to submit proposals to the Government. CHAPTER V THE MINISTRIES Article 17. 1. The President is assisted by Ministers of State. 2. Ministers are appointed and discharged of their duties by the President. 3. The Ministers shall be in charge of their respective Departments of Government. CHAPTER VI LOCAL ADMINISTRATION Article 18. The division of Indonesian territory into administrative units and the form of their administration shall be prescribed by law in accord with the principle of consultation and the traditional rights of particular territories. CHAPTER VII THE COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES Article 19. 1. The organization of the Council of Representatives shall be prescribed by law. 2. The Council of Representatives shall assemble at least once every year. Article 20.

1. Every law requires the concurrence of the Council of Representatives. 2. If any bill is rejected by the Council of Representatives, that bill may not be submitted for a second time during the same session of the Council of Representatives. Article 21. 1. Members of the Council of Representatives have the right to initiate bills. 2. In the event that a bill is approved by the Council of Representatives, but rejected by the President, that bill may not be submitted for a second time during the same session of the Council of Representatives. Article 22. 1. In times of emergency, the President has the authority to enact ordinances taking the place of laws. 2. Ordinances passed by the Government shall be ratified by the Council of Representatives during the next session. 3. If no ratification is obtained, such ordinances are revoked. CHAPTER VIII FINANCE Article 23. 1. The budget of receipts and expenditures shall be determined every year by the Council of Representatives. If the Council of Representatives does not approve of the budget proposed by the Government, then the budget of the previous year shall remain in force. 2. Every form of tax for the purpose of Government shall be prescribed by law. 3. Currency denominations and their value shall be determined by law. 4. Other matters concerning public finance shall be provided by law. 5. There shall be a General Auditing Office [Badan Pemeriksa Keuangan] to examine, audit and settle all accounts pertaining to public finances. The results of such audits shall be presented to the Council of Representatives. CHAPTER IX THE JUDICIARY Article 24.

1. Judicial power is vested in the Supreme Court and such subordinate courts as may be established by law. 2. The organization and competence of these courts shall be provided by law. Article 25. Qualifications for judgeship and the conditions for discharge from this office shall be provided by law. CHAPTER X CITIZENSHIP Article 26. 1. Citizens shall be natural-born Indonesians, and those who are naturalized. 2. Matters affecting citizenship shall be provided by law. Article 27. 1. All citizens have the same status in law and in the Government and shall, without exception, respect the law and the Government. 2. Every citizen has the right to work and to expect a reasonable standard of living. Article 28. The freedom of assembly and the right of association, freedom of speech and of the press and similar freedoms shall be provided by law. CHAPTER XI RELIGION Article 29. 1. The State is based upon belief in the One, Supreme God. 2. The State guarantees the freedom of every inhabitant to profess and to worship according to their religion and beliefs. CHAPTER XII NATIONAL DEFENSE Article 30.

1. All citizens have the right and the duty to participate in the defense of the State. 2. Matters concerning national defense shall be provided by law. CHAPTER XIII EDUCATION Article 31. 1. Every citizen has the right to obtain education. 2. The Government shall create and execute a system of national education provided by law. Article 32. The Government shall promote and develop Indonesian national culture. CHAPTER XIV SOCIAL WELFARE Article 33. 1. The economy shall be organized cooperatively on the principle of family life. 2. The branches of production which are important to the State and which affect the life of most people, shall be controlled by the State. 3. The land, water and natural riches therein shall be controlled by the State and shall be exploited for the greatest welfare of the people. Article 34. The State shall take care of the poor and orphaned children. CHAPTER XV FLAG AND LANGUAGE Article 35. The flag of the Republic of Indonesia shall be the Red and White Flag. Article 36. The official language is Indonesian.

CHAPTER XVI AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION Article 37. 1. Two-thirds of the total of the members of the People's Consultative Assembly must be present during discussions on modifications of the Constitution. 2. Modifications shall be made in concurrence with at least two-thirds of the total members present. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 1. The Preparatory Committee for the Independence of Indonesia shall regulate and prepare for the period of transition to the Indonesian Government. 2. All existing official institutions and laws shall be in accordance with the Constitution. 3. In the first instance the President and Vice President shall be elected by the Preparatory Committee for the Independence of Indonesia. 4. Before the period of election of the People's Consultative Assembly, the Council of Representatives and the Supreme Advisory Council in accordance with the Constitution, their competences shall be exercised by the President assisted by a National Committee. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 1. Within six months after the termination of the World War II, the President of Indonesia shall regulate and prepare everything stipulated by the Constitution. 2. Within six months after the election of the People's Consultative Assembly, the Assembly shall assemble to enact the Constitution.

