THE NEW CONSTITUTIONS OF EUROPE
BY

HOWARD LEE McBAIN
Eaton Professor of Municipal Science and Administration in Columbia University

AND

LINDSAY ROGERS
Associate Professor of Government in Columbia University

GARDEN CITY	

NEW YORK

DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY

1922

COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF TRANSLATION INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES, INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES AT THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y.

First Edition

2. FUNDAMENTAL STATUTE OF MARCH 4, 1848' We, Charles Albert, by the Grace of God, King of Sardinia, Cyprus, and Jerusalem, Duke of Savoy, Genoa, etc., etc., Prince of Piedmont, etc., etc., etc., with the fidelity of a king and the affection of a father, are about to-day to fulfill all that we promised our most beloved subjects in our proclamation of the eighth of last February, whereby we desired to show, in the midst of the extraordinary events then transpiring throughout the country, how much our confidence in our subjects increased with the gravity of the situation, and how, consulting only the impulse of our heart, we had fully determined to make their condition conform to the spirit of the times and to the interests and dignity of the nation. We, believing that the broad and permanent representative institutions established by this Fundamental Statute are the surest means of cementing the bonds of indissoluble affection that bind to our Italian crown a people that has so often given us ample proof of their faithfulness, obedience, and love, have determined to sanction and promulgate this Statute, in the belief that God will bless our good intentions, and that this free, strong, and happy nation will ever show itself more deserving of its ancient fame and thus merit a glorious future. Therefore, we, with our full knowledge and royal authority and with the advice of our Council, have ordained and do hereby ordain and declare in force the fundamental perpetual and irrevocable Statute and law of the monarchy as follows: Article 1. The Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman religion is the only religion of the state.' Other cults now existing are tolerated, in conformity with the law. Art. 2. The state is governed by a representative monarchical government. The throne is hereditary according to the Salic Law.3 Art. 3. The legislative power shall be exercised collectively

by the King and two houses, the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies.' Art. 4. The person of the King is sacred and inviolable. Art. 5. To the King alone belongs the executive power. He is the supreme head of the state; commands all land and naval forces; declares war; makes treaties of peace, alliance, commerce and other treaties, communicating them to the houses as soon as the interest and security of the state permit, accompanying such notice with opportune explanations. Treaties involving financial obligations or alterations of the territory of the state shall not take effect until after they have received the approval of the houses. Art. 6. The King appoints to all of the offices of the state, and makes the necessary decrees and regulations for the execution of the laws, without suspending their execution or granting exemptions. Art. 7. The King alone approves and promulgates the laws. Art. 8. The King may grant pardons and commute sentences? Art. 9. The King convokes the two houses every year. He may prorogue their sessions and dissolve the Chamber of Deputies, but in the latter case he shall convoke another within a period of four months. Art. 10. The initiative in legislation shall belong both to the King and to each of the two houses. All bills, however, levying imposts or contributions or approving the budgets or accounts of the state shall first be presented to the Chamber of Deputies. Art. 11. The King attains his majority upon the completion of his 18th year. Art. 12. During the King's minority, the prince who is his nearest relative in the order of succession to the throne, shall be regent of the Kingdom, provided he be 21 years of age. Art. 13. Should the prince upon whom the regency devolves be still in his minority and this duty pass to a more distant relative, the regent who actually takes office shall continue in the regency until the King becomes of age. Art. 14. In the absence of male relatives the regency shall devolve upon the Queen Mother. Art. 15. In default also of a Queen Mother, the regent shall be elected by the legislative houses, convened within 10 days by the ministers.

Art. 16. The preceding provisions with reference to the regency are applicable in case the King who has attained his majority is physically incapable of reigning. Under such circumstances, if the heir presumptive to the throne be 18 years of age, he shall be regent of full right. Art. 17. The Queen Mother shall be guardian of the King until he has completed his 7th year; from this time his guardianship shall pass into the hands of the regent. Art. 18. All rights pertaining to the civil power in matters of ecclesiastical benefices and in the execution of all regulations whatsoever coming from foreign countries shall be exercised by the King.' Art. 19. The civil list of the crown shall remain, during the present reign, at an amount equal to the average for the past 10 years. The King shall continue to have the use of the royal palaces, villas, and gardens and their appurtenances, and also of all chattels without distinction pertaining to the crown, of which a speedy inventory shall be made by a responsible ministry. In future the above-mentioned civil list shall be fixed for the duration of each reign by the first legislature subsequent to the King's accession to the throne? Art. 20. The property which the King now possesses in his own right, together with that to which he may hereafter acquire title, either for a consideration or gratuitously in the course of his reign, shall form his private patrimony. The King may dispose of his private patrimony either by acts during his life or by will, without being bound by the provisions of the civil law which limit the amount disposable. In all other cases, the King's patrimony shall be subject to the laws that govern other property. Art. 21. The law shall provide an annual civil list for the hereditary prince when he has attained his majority, and even earlier in case of his marriage; for the allowances to the princes of the royal family and of royal blood, under the above-mentioned conditions; for the dowries of the princesses and for the dowries of the queens. Art. 22. Upon ascending the throne, the King, in the presence of the houses, in joint session, shall take the oath to observe faithfully the present Statute. Art. 23. The regent, before entering on the duties of that

office, shall take the oath to be faithful to the King and to observe faithfully this Statute and the laws of the state.
THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS

Art. 24. All inhabitants of the Kingdom,' whatever their rank or title, are equal before the law. All shall equally enjoy civil and political rights and shall be eligible to civil and military office, except as otherwise provided by law. Art. 25. All shall contribute without distinction to the burdens of the state, in proportion to their possessions. Art. 26. Individual liberty is guaranteed. No one shall be arrested or brought to trial except in the cases provided by law and in the forms which it prescribes. Art. 27. The domicile is inviolable. No domiciliary search shall take place except by virtue of law and in the forms which it prescribes. Art. 28. The press shall be free, but the law may suppress abuses of this freedom? Nevertheless, bibles, catechisms, liturgical and prayer books shall not be printed without the previous consent of the bishop .3 Art. 29. All property, without exception, is inviolable. Nevertheless, when the public interest, legally ascertained, requires it, a person may be bound to give it up, in whole or in part, upon payment of a just indemnity in accordance with the law.4 Art. 30. No tax shall be levied or collected without the consent of the houses and the approval of the King. Art. 31. The public debt is guaranteed. All obligations of the state to its creditors are inviolable. Art. 32. The right to assemble peaceably and without arms is recognized, subject, however, to the laws that may regulate its exercise in the interest of the public welfare.5 This provision is not applicable to meetings in public places or places open to the public, which remain entirely subject to police laws.
THE SENATE

Art. 33. The Senate shall be composed of members, appointed for life by the King without limit of numbers, who have at-

tained the age of 40 years and who have been chosen from the following categories of citizens: (1) Archbishops and bishops of the state. (2) The President of the Chamber of Deputies. (3) Deputies after having served in three legislatures, or after six years of service. (4) Ministers of state. (5) Ministers secretaries of state. (6) Ambassadors. (7) Envoys extraordinary, after three years of such service. (8) The first presidents and presidents of the Courts of Cassation and of the Court of Accounts. (9) The first presidents of the courts of appeal. (10) The attorney general of the Courts of Cassation, and the prosecutor general, after five years of service. (11) The presidents of the chambers of the courts of appeal, after three years of service. (12) The councilors of the Courts of Cassation and of the Court of Accounts, after five years of service. (13) The attorneys general and fiscals general of the courts of appeal, after five years of service. (14) General officers of the land and naval forces. Major generals and rear admirals, however, should have five years of active service in that grade. (15) The councilors of state, after five years of service. (16) The members of the councils of division,' after three elections to their presidency. (17) The intendants general,2 after seven years of service. (18) Members of the Royal Academy of Sciences,3 after seven years of membership. (19) Regular members of the Superior Council of Public Instruction, after seven years of service. (20) Those who by their services or eminent merit have done honor to their country. (21) Persons who, for at least three years, have paid direct property or business taxes to the amount of 3,000 lire. Art. 34. The princes of the royal family are, by that very fact, members of the Senate. They shall take rank immediately after the president. They shall enter the Senate at the age of 21 and have a vote at 25.4

Art. 35. The President and Vice-Presidents of the Senate shall be appointed by the King.' The Senate shall choose its own secretaries from among its own members. Art. 36. The Senate may be constituted a High Court of Justice by decree of the King to try crimes of high treason and attempts upon the safety of the state, and to try ministers impeached by the Chamber of Deputies.2 In this case, the Senate is not. a political body. It shall not then occupy itself with any other j udicial matters than those for which it was convened, under penalty of nullity. Art. 37. No Senator shall be arrested except by virtue of an order of the Senate, except in case of flagrante delicto. It alone is competent to judge of the imputed misdemeanors of its members. Art. 38. Legal documents as to births, marriages, and deaths of members of the royal family shall be presented to the Senate and deposited by that body among its archives.
THE CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES

Art. 39. The elective house shall be composed of Deputies chosen by the electoral colleges in conformity with the law .3 Art. 40. No Deputy shall be admitted to the Chamber who is not a subject of the King, 30 years of age, in the enjoyment of civil and political rights, and in the possession of the other qualifications required by law .4 Art. 41. Deputies represent the nation as a whole, and not the several provinces in which they were elected. No binding instructions shall be given to them by the electors. Art. 42. Deputies are elected for five years; their mandate ceases ipso facto at the expiration of this period. Art. 43. The President, Vice-Presidents, and secretaries of the Chamber of Deputies are chosen by the Chamber from among

its own members at the beginning of each session, for the entire session. Art. 44. If a Deputy ceases for any reason to perform his duties, the college which elected him shall be called upon at once to proceed with a new election. Art. 45. During the sessions no Deputy shall be arrested except in case of flagrante delicto, nor be proceeded against in criminal matters without the previous consent of the Chamber. Art. 46. No warrant of arrest for debts' shall be executed against a Deputy during the sessions of the Chamber, nor within a period of three weeks preceding or following the same. Art. 47. The Chamber of Deputies has the right to impeach ministers of the King and to bring them to trial before the High Court of Justice.
PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH HOUSES

Art. 48. The sessions of the Senate and of the Chamber of Deputies begin and end at the same time. Every meeting of one house at a time when the other is not in session is illegal and its acts are entirely void. Art. 49. Senators and Deputies before being admitted to the exercise of their functions take the oath to be faithful to the King, to observe faithfully the Statute and the laws of the State, and to perform their functions with the inseparable welfare of King and country as the sole end in view.2 Art. 50. The office of Senator or Deputy shall not carry with it any compensation or indemnity.' Art. 51. Senators and Deputies shall not be called to account for opinions expressed or votes given in the houses. Art. 52. The sessions of the houses are public. Nevertheless, upon the written request of 10 members secret sessions may be held. Art. 53. Sessions and deliberations of the houses are not legal or valid if an absolute majority of their members is not present. Art. 54. Action on any question shall be taken only by a majority of the votes cast. Art. 55. All bills shall first be submitted for preliminary examination to committees elected by each house. Any proposition discussed and approved by one house shall be trans-

mitted to the other for its consideration and approval; and then it shall be presented to the King for his approval. Bills shall be discussed article by article. Art. 56. Any bill rejected by one of the three legislative powers shall not again be introduced during the same session. Art. 57. Every person who has attained his majority has the right to send petitions to the houses, which shall order them to be examined by a committee and, on report of the committee, shall decide whether such petitions are to be taken into consideration; in case of an affirmative decision they shall be referred to the competent minister or deposited in the offices' for action at the proper time. Art. 58. No petition may be presented in person to either house. Legally organized bodies alone shall have the right to petition under a collective name. Art. 59. The houses shall not receive any deputation, nor give hearing to others than their own members, ministers, and commissioners of the government. Art. 60. Each house shall be the sole judge of the qualifications and elections of its own members. Art. 61. The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall make their own rules and regulations respecting their methods of procedure in the performance of their respective duties.2 Art. 62. The Italian language is the official language of the houses. The use of French shall, however, be permitted to the members coming from districts where French is used, and in replying to them.' Art. 63. Votes shall be taken by rising and sitting, by division, or by secret ballot. The latter method, however, shall always be employed for the final vote on a law and in all cases of a personal character. Art. 64. No one shall at the same time be Senator and Deputy. THE MINISTERS Art. 65. The King appoints and dismisses his ministers .4 Art. 66. The ministers have no vote in either house unless they are members thereof.

They shall have entrance to both houses and shall be heard upon request. Art. 67. The ministers are responsible. Laws and governmental acts shall not take effect until they shall have received the signature of a minister.
THE JUDICIARY

Art. 68. Justice emanates from the King and shall be administered in his name by the judges whom he appoints. Art. 69. Judges appointed by the King, except cantonal judges, shall be irremovable after three years of service.1 Art. 70. Courts, tribunals, and judges shall be retained as at present existing. No modification shall be introduced except by law.2 Art. 71. No one shall be withdrawn from his ordinary legal jurisdiction. It shall, therefore, not be lawful to create extraordinary tribunals or commissions .3 Art. 72. The proceedings of courts in civil cases and the hearings in criminal cases shall be public, as provided by law. Art. 73. The interpretation of the laws, in the form obligatory upon all citizens, belongs exclusively to the legislative power.
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 74. Communal and provincial institutions and the boundaries of the communes and provinces shall be regulated by law.4

Art. 75. Military conscriptions shall be regulated by law.' Art. 76. A communal militia shall be established upon a basis fixed by law? Art. 77. The state retains its flag, and the blue cockade is the only national one.3 Art. 78. The knightly orders now in existence shall be maintained with their endowments, which shall not be used for other purposes than those specified in the acts by which they were established. The King may create other orders and prescribe their constitutions. Art. 79. Titles of nobility shall be borne by those who have a right to them. The King may confer new titles. Art. 80. No one may receive decorations, titles, or pensions from a foreign power without the authorization of the King. Art. 81. All laws contrary to the present Statute are abrogated.
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Art. 82. This Statute shall go into effect on the day of the first meeting of the two houses, which shall take place immediately after the elections. Until that time urgent public service shall be provided for by royal ordinances according to the mode and form now in vogue, excepting, however, the authentications and registrations in the courts which are from now on abolished. Art. 83. In the execution of this Statute the King reserves to himself the right to make the laws for the press, elections, communal militia, and the reorganization of the Council of State. Until the publication of the laws for the press, the regulations now in force on this subject shall remain valid. Art. 84. The ministers are entrusted with and are responsible for the execution and full observance of these transitional provisions.

