PRAEGER SPECIAL STUDIES IN INTERNATIONAL POLITICS AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS

Middle Eastern Constitutions and Electoral Laws
Abid A A Marayati

I RI 1)1 RICK A. PRAEGER, Publishers Now York • Washington • London

The purpose of the Praeger Special Studies is to make specialized research monographs in U.S. and international economics and politics available to the academic, business, and government communities. For further information, write to the Special Projects Division, Frederick A. Praeger, Publishers, I 1 I Fourth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003.

FREDERICK A. PRAEGER, PUBLISHERS
ill Fourth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003, U.S.A. 77-79 Charlotte Street, London W.1, England Published in the United States of America in 1968 by Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., Publishers

All rights reserved
© 1968 by Frederick A. Praeger, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 67-25237 Printed in the United States of America

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN January 8, 195211 We, Talal the First, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, in accordance with Article 25 of the Constitution and in pursuance of the decision of the Senate and House of Representatives, hereby approve this revised Constitution and order its promulgation. Part I The State and its System of Government Article 1: The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is an independent Sovereign State. the Kingdom is indivisible and no part of it may be ceded. The people of Jordan form part of the Arab nation. The form of Government shall be parliamentary and hereditary monarchy. Article 2: Islam shall be the religion of the State and Arabic shall be its official language. Article 3: The City of Amman shall be the capital of the Kingdom. The capital may be transferred to another place by a special law. Article 4: The Jordan flag shall be of the following form and dimensions: Its length shall be double its breadth, and it shall be divided horizontally into three parallel and equal stripes, the uppermost being black, the center white, and the lowest green. It shall have superimposed at the flag-staff end a red triangle, of which the base shall be equal to the breadth of the flag and the height equal to half the length of the flag. In the triangle shall be a white seven-pointed star of such a size that it may be contained within a circle of which the diameter is one-fourteenth the length of the flag and so placed that its center is at the intersection

of the lines bisecting the angles of the triangle, and the axis through one of its points is parallel to the base of the triangle. Part II Rights and Duties of the Jordanian People Article 5: Jordanian nationality shall be defined by law. Article 6: (i) No discrimination of any kind shall be made before the law between Jordanians in regard to their rights and obligations, on the ground of race, religion or language; (ii) The Government shall ensure work and education within the limits of its means and shall also ensure satisfaction and equal opportunities to all Jordanians. Article 7: Personal freedom shall be safeguarded. Article 8: No person shall be detained or imprisoned except in accordance with the provisions of the law. Article 9: (i) No Jordanian may be exiled from the territory of the Kingdom; (ii) No Jordanian shall be banned from residing in any locality or obliged to reside in any particular locality except in the circumstances prescribed by law. Article 10: Dwelling houses shall be inviolable. They may not be entered except in the circumstances and in the manner prescribed by law. Article 11: No property may be expropriated except for purposes of public utility and on payment of fair compensation as prescribed by law. Article 12: No compulsory loan may be imposed

and no property, movable or immovable, may be confiscated except in accordance with the law. Article 13: No compulsory labor shall be exacted from any person, but exaction of work or service from any person may be permitted in circumstances prescribed by law in the case of: (i) an emergency, as in the event of war, the occurrence of public danger, fire, flood, famine, earthquake, violent epidemic, or epizootic diseases, plague of animals or insects or botanical pest or any other like calamity, or in any other circumstances which would endanger the well-being of the whole or part of the population; (ii) as a consequence of a conviction by a court, provided that such work or service shall be carried out under the supervision and control of an official authority, and the person convicted not being hired to, or placed at the disposal of, any private individual, company or association. Article 14: The State shall ensure the free exercise of all form of worship and religious rites in accordance with the customs observed in the Kingdom, unless they offend public order and morality. Article 15: (i) The State shall guarantee freedom of opinion. Every Jordanian shall be free to express his opinion verbally, in writing and pictures and in other forms of expression within the limits of the law. (ii) The press and forms of publication shall be free within the limits of the law. (iii)Publication of newspapers may not be suspended, nor may their licence be withdrawn except in accordance with the provisions of the law. (iv)A limited censorship on newspapers, pamphlets, books and broadcasts, affecting the public safety or national defense may be imposed by legislation in the event of a declaration of a state of martial law or an emergency. (v) The law shall specify the manner of censoring the material for publication in the newspapers.

Article 16: (i) Jordanians shall have the right to hold meetings within the limits of the law. (ii) Jordanians shall have the right to form societies and political parties provided their objects are lawful, their means are peaceful, and their internal regulations do not contravene the provisions of the Constitution. (iii)The law shall regulate the manner of forming societies and political parties and method of supervising their sources of revenue. Article 17: Jordanians are entitled to address the public authorities regarding matters affecting their persons, or concerning public affairs, in such manner and under such conditions as may be prescribed by the law. Article 18: All postal, telegraphic and telephonic communications shall be inviolable, and shall not be subject to censorship or to interruption except in the circumstances prescribed by the law. Article 19: All communities shall have the right to establish and maintain their own schools for the education of their own members provided that they observe the general requirements of the law and submit to Government supervision regarding their curricula and educational policy. Article 20: Elementary education shall be compulsory for Jordanians and shall be free in government schools. Article 21: (i) Political refugees shall not be extradited on account of their political principles or for their defense of liberty. (ii) International agreements and laws shall regulate the procedures for extraditing ordinary criminals. Article 22: (i) Every Jordanian shall be eligible for appointment to a public office in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the pertinent law or regulation.

(ii) Appointments to a governmental office or to any institution attached to the Government, or to a municipal office, whether such appointment be permanent or not, shall be made on the basis of merit and qualification. Article 23: (i) Every citizen has the right to work, and it is the duty of the State to provide opportunities for work for Jordanians by directing the national economy and raising its standard. (ii) The State shall protect labor and legislate for it with the following principles in view: (a) the workman's pay shall be proportionate to the quantity and quality of work produced; (b) limiting the number of hours of work per week and the grant to laborers of weekly and yearly holidays with pay; (c) determining special compensation to workmen supporting families and in case of retrenchment, illness, old age and accidents arising from their work; (d) defining the special conditions for the employment of women and juveniles; (e) making factories and workshops subject to health rules; (f) the free formation of trade unions within the limits of the law. Part III State Authorities--General Provisions Article 24: (i) The people shall be the source all powers. (ii) The people shall exercise those powers in the form prescribed by the Constitution. Article 25: The legislative power is vested in the National Assembly and the King. The National Assembly consists of the Senate and the House of Representatives. Article 26: The executive power is vested in the King who exercises his powers through his Ministers in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

Article 27: The judicial power shall be exercised by the different courts, and all judgments shall be issued in accordance with the law and in the name of the King. Part IV The Executive Chapter I - The King and His Rights Article 28: The Throne of the Hashemite Kingdom devolves by inheritance in the dynasty of King Abdullah Ibn Al Hussein in direct line through his male heirs after him as provided in the following paragraphs: (i) The Royal Power passes from the King to his eldest son, and thereafter to the eldest son of that son and by similar process thereafter. If the eldest son should die prior to the transfer of the Throne to him, this Power devolves upon his eldest son notwithstanding the existence of brothers of the deceased son. (ii) Should the person entitled to the Throne die without heir, this right shall pass to his eldest brother, if he has no elder brothers, then to the elder sons of the other brothers according to their seniority in age. (iii) In the absence of brothers and nephews, the right of the Throne shall pass to the uncles on the male side and their descendants in accordance with the order prescribed in Paragraph (ii) above. (iv) Should the last King die without heir in the manner prescribed above, the Throne devolves upon the person whom the National Assembly chooses from among the descendants of the founder of the Arab Revolt, the late King Hussein Ibn Ali. (v) No person shall ascend the Throne unless he be sane, a Moslem, a son of Moslem parents and born by a lawful wife. (vi) No person shall ascend the Throne who has been excluded by Royal Iradah (Royal Decree) from the succession on the ground of unsuitability. Such exclusion shall not of itself include the descendants of such a person.

Such an Iradah shall be signed by the Prime Minister and by at least four other Ministers including the Ministers of Justice and Interior. (vii)The King attains his majority upon the completion of his eighteenth year, calculated in accordance with the lunar calendar; and if the Throne is inherited by a minor, the powers of the King shall be exercised by a Regent or by a Council of Regency which had been appointed by a Royal Iradah by the reigning King, but if he dies without making such an appointment, the same shall be made by the Council Ministers. (viii)Should the King be unable to exercise his prerogatives because of illness, his powers shall be exercised by a Deputy or by a Council of the Throne. Such Deputy or Council of the Throne shall be appointed by a Royal Iradah, and if he shall be incapable of so appointing, then by the Council of Ministers. (ix) If the King decides to depart from the country, he shall, before his departure, appoint by a Royal Iradah a Deputy or Council of the Throne to exercise his powers during his absence, subject to such conditions as may be therein imposed. If the absence of the King is extended to more than four months and the House of Representatives is not in session, the latter shall be immediately summoned to review the matter. (x) A Regent, or Deputy, or member of the Council of Regency or of the Throne shall not act or enter upon his office until he has taken the oath, set out in Article 29 hereof, before the Council of Ministers. (xi) If a Regent, or Deputy, or member of the Council of Regency or of the Throne, shall die or become incapable of acting, the Council of Ministers shall appoint a suitable person to act in his stead. (xii)A Regent, or a Deputy, or a member of the Council of Regency or of the Throne must not be less than thirty lunar years of age, but a male relative of the King who has completed his eighteenth lunar year, may be appointed. (xiii)In the event of the King being incapacitated by insanity, the Council of Ministers, on confirmation of this, shall immediately invite the

National Assembly to a session. If this illness is definitely confirmed, the National Assembly shall decide on terminating the reign of the King; thereupon the Royal Prerogatives shall be transferred to his heir as prescribed in this Constitution. Should the House of Representatives be dissolved at the time, or its term have ended and no new House have been elected, the former House of Representatives shall be convened for this purpose. Article 29: Upon the accession of the King to the Throne and before the National Assembly which will be convened under the chairmanship of the President of the Senate, the King shall take the oath to respect and observe the provisions of the Constitution and be loyal to the nation. Article 30: The King is the head of the State and shall be immune from all liability or responsibility. Article 31: The King approves laws and promulgates them. He directs the enactment of rules and regulations for the enforcement of these laws, provided that such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of these laws. Article 32: The King is the Supreme Commander of the Navy, Army and Air Force. 12 (i) The King declares war, conArticle 33:	 cludes peace and signs treaties and agreements. (ii) Treaties and agreements incurring financial commitments or affecting the public or private rights of Jordanians shall not be brought into force unless approved by the National Assembly. In no circumstances shall a secret clause in a treaty or agreement be contradictory to its published clauses. Article 34: (i) The King issues orders for holding elections to the House of Representatives in accordance with the provisions of the law. (ii) The King convenes the House of Representatives, opens, adjourns, and prorogues it in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

(iii) The King may dissolve the House 	 sentatives.

Repre-

Article 35: The King appoints the Prime Minister, dismisses him or accepts his resignation. Ministers are appointed, dismissed or their resignations accepted by the King on the recommendation of the Prime Minister. Article 36: The King appoints the President and members of the Senate, and accepts their resignation. Article 37: (i) The King grants and withdraws military and civil ranks. He confers decorations and other honorary distinctions and may delegate this authority by special law. (ii) Money is minted in the name of the King in accordance with the law. Article 38: The King may grant a special pardon or remit a sentence. General pardon shall be granted only by a special law. Article 39: No death sentence shall be carried out except after confirmation by the King. Every such sentence shall be submitted to him by the Council of Ministers with an expression of its opinion. Article 40: The King exercises his jurisdiction by Iradahs. The Tradah shall be signed by the Prime Minister and the Minister or Ministers concerned. The King expresses his concurrence by affixing his signature above other signatures. Chapter 2 Ministers Article 41: There shall be constituted a Council of Ministers consisting of the Prime Minister, as a President, and such number of Ministers as need and public interest may demand. Article 42: No person may assume a position of a Minister unless he is a Jordanian.

Article 43: The Prime Minister and Ministers shall, before assuming their duties, take the following oath before the King: I swear by Almighty God to be loyal to the King, uphold the Constitution, honestly serve the nation and perform the the duties entrusted to me. Article 44: No Minister may purchase or hire any Government property even if the same is offered in a public auction. Likewise he may not, while holding his ministerial post, become a member of the board of directors of any company or participate in any financial or commercial business or receive a salary from any company. 13 Article 45: (i) The Council of Ministers is entrusted with the conduct of all affairs of the State, whether internal or external, other than those which have been or may be entrusted by this Constitution or by any legislation to any other person or body. (ii) The respective duties of the Prime Minister, of the Ministers and of the Council of Ministers shall be prescribed by regulations made by the said Council and approved by the King.
Article 46: A Minister may, in accordance with the decree of his appointment, assume the responsibility of one ministry or more.

Article 47: (i) The Minister shall be responsible for the conduct of all matters pertaining to his Ministry. He shall refer to the Prime Minister any matter not within his powers. (ii) The Prime Minister shall dispose of all matters within his powers and shall refer other matters to the Council of Ministers for the necessary decisions. Article 48: Decisions of the Council of Ministers shall be signed by the Prime Minister and the members of the said Council and shall be submitted

to the King for approval where this Constitution, or any law or regulation enacted thereunder so requires. Such decisions shall be implemented by the Prime Minister and each Minister within the limits of his jurisdiction.
Article 49: Oral or written orders of the King shall mot release the Ministers from responsibility. Article 50: In the event of the resignation or the dismissal of the Prime Minister, all Ministers shall, ipso facto, be considered resigned or dismissed. Article 51: The Prime Minister and the Ministers shall be collectively, responsible before the House of Representatives with regard to the general policy of the State. In addition, each Minister is responsible before the House of Representatives for matters affecting his Ministry. Article 52: The Prime Minister, and every Minister who is a member in the House of Representatives or the Senate shall have the right of voting in his House, and the right of speaking in the House of Representatives and the Senate. As to the Ministers who are not members of either House they may speak in both of them without having the right of voting. The Ministers, or their deputies in their absence, shall have priority over all members in addressing the House of Representatives and the Senate. A Minister who receives ministerial salary shall not be entitled to the-emoluments for membership of either House.

(i) The House of Representatives may cast a vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers or in any one of the Ministers. (ii) Should the House of Representatives withdraw its confidence from the Council of Ministers by an absolute majority of the members, the Council of Ministers shall tender its resignation. (iii) Should the resolution of "no confidence" be taken in reference to one of the Ministers, he shall resign his office.
Article 53:

14

Article 54: (i) A session to consider a vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers or any Minister shall be held either at the request of the Prime Minister or at the signed request of not less than ten members of the House of Representatives. (ii) 15 The vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers or in any Minister may be postponed once for a period not exceeding ten days, either upon the request of the Minister concerned, or of the Council of Ministers. (iii) 16 Every newly formed Council of Ministers shall, within one month of its formation, if the House of Representatives should be in session, present to the House of Representatives its Ministerial program and ask for a vote of confidence on that program. If the House of Representatives is not in session at the time or dissolved, the speech from the Throne shall be considered a Ministerial program for the purpose of this Article. Article 55: Ministers shall be tried by a High Council for offences they are accused of committing in the course of performing their duties. Article 56: The House of Representatives shall have the power to impeach Ministers, but a decision to this effect shall be taken only by a majority of two thirds of the members of the House of Representatives. The House shall appoint, from among its members, those who shall submit the impeachment and substantiate it before the High Council. 17 Article 57: The High Council shall consist of the President of the Senate as President and eight other members: three from among the members of the Senate elected by it, and five judges from the highest civil court selected by order of seniority. In case of necessity, the number shall be completed by taking presidents of lower courts, also by seniority. Article 58: The High Council shall apply the provisions of the penal code in force regarding offences specified therein; a special law shall prescribe the acts which entail the criminal responsibility of the Ministers in cases where such acts are not included in the penal code.

18 Judgments and decisions of the Article 59:	 High Council shall be taken by a majority of six votes. Article 60: The High Council shall lay down its own rules of procedure in trying Ministers until such time as a special law for this purpose is promulgated. Article 61: The Minister accused by the House of Representatives shall be suspended from his office until his case is decided by the High Council. Should he resign, the resignation shall not prevent the instituting of criminal proceedings against him, or the continuation of his trial. Part V
The Legislative Power The National Assembly

Article 62: The National Assembly shall consist of two Houses: a Senate and a House of Representatives. Chapter 1 - The Senate Article 63: The number of Senators, including the President, shall not exceed one half the number of the members of the House of Representatives. Article 64: In addition to the requirements stated in Article 75 of this Constitution, a Senator must have completed his fortieth solar year and must be one of the following: Present and past Prime Ministers and Ministers, persons who held appointments of Ambassador or Minister Plenipotentiary, Presidents of the House of Representatives, President and members of the Court of Cassation, and of the Civil and Sharia Courts of Appeal, retired officers of the rank of General and above, former members of the House of Representatives who have been elected to that House at least twice, and other similar personalities who enjoy the confidence and trust of the people for their services to the nation and country.

Article 6 9 (i) The period of membership in the Senate is four years. A Senator who has served his term of membership may be reappointed. (ii) The term of presidency of the President of
the Senate shall be two years which may be renewed. Article 66: (i) The Senate shall meet concurrently with the House of Representatives. The duration of the sessions shall be the same for both

Houses.
(ii) If the House of Representatives is dissolVed, the sessions of the Senate shall be suspended. Chapter 2 - The House of Representatives

Article 67: The House of Representatives shall consist of members elected by secret ballot, in a general and direct election carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Electoral Law which shall provide for the following principles: (i) The integrity of the elections. (ii) The right of candidates to supervise the process of election. (iii) The punishment of those interfering with the wishes of the
electors. (i) The period of membership in the House of Representatives is four solar years commencing from the date of the announcement of the result of the general elections in the Official Gazette. The King shall have the power, by issuing a Royal Iradah, to prolong the term of the House for a period of not less than one year and not exceeding two years. (ii) A general election shall take place during the four months which precede the end of the term of the House. If for some reason the election did not take place before the end of the term of the House, that House shall remain in office until a new House is elected. Article 68:	 20

Article 69: (i) The Speaker of the House shall be elected at the beginning of each ordinary session by secret ballot for a period of one calendar year, and
may be re-elected. (ii) If the House of Representatives should

hold an extraordinary session and have no Speaker, the House shall elect a Speaker whose term will end at the beginning of the ordinary session. Article 70: In addition to the requirements stated in Article 75 of this Constitution, a member of the House of Representatives must have completed his thirtieth solar year of age.
Article 71: The House of Representatives shall have the right to decide on the validity of the election of its members. Each voter shall have the right to present a petition to the Secretariat of the House within 15 days following the announcement of the results of the elections in his area, setting out the legal reasons for invalidating the election. No election shall be-considered invalid unless it is so decided by a majority of two thirds of the members.

Article 72.; Any member of the House of Representatives may resign by notifying in writing the President of the House of Representatives, who shall submit this resignation to the House to decide on it. Article 73: (i) If the House of Representatives
is dissolved, a general election shall take place,

and the new House shall assemble in extraordinary session not more than four months after the date of dissolution. Such session shall be deemed as an ordinary session for the purpose of Article 78 of this Constitution and shall be subject to any prolongation or postponement provided for therein. (ii) In the event of an election not being concluded after the lapse of four months, the dissolved House shall have its full constitutional powers restored and assemble forthwith as if its dissolution had not taken place and shall continue its work until the election of a new House. (iii) 21 Such an extraordinary session shall not, in any case, be extended beyond the 30th day of September and it shall be adjourned on that day in order to make possible for the House to hold its ordinary meetings on the 1st day of October. Should such an extraordinary session be convened in the months

of October and November, it shall be regarded as the first ordinary session of the said House of Representatives. 22 Article 73:	 If the House of Representatives is dissolved for any reason, the new House shall not be dissolved for the same reason. A Minister who intends to nominate himself for the elections shall resign at least fifteen days before the beginning of the nomination period. Chapter 3 - Provisions Applicable to the Senate and the House of Representatives Article 75: (i) No person shall become a member of the Senate or the House of Representatives: (a) Who is not a Jordanian. (b) Who claims foreign nationality or foreign protection. (c) Who was adjudged bankrupt and has not been legally rehabilitated. (d) Who was interdicted for any reason and the interdiction has not been removed. (e) Who was sentenced for a term of imprisonment exceeding one year for a non-political crime and has not been pardoned. (f) Who has a material interest arising out of any contract, other than a lease of land or property, with a governmental department. This does not apply to a member who is a shareholder in a company of more than ten members. (g) Who is insane or an imbecile. (h) Who is related to the King within such degree of consanguinity as shall be prescribed by special law. (ii) Should any Senator or member of the House of Representatives become disqualified during his term of office because of the occurrence of any of the disqualifying conditions prescribed in the preceding paragraph or should any of such conditions become evident after his election he shall lose his membership and his seat shall become vacant by a decision of two thirds of the members of the House to which he belongs provided that if the decision is taken by the Senate it shall be submitted to the King for approval. Article 76: Subject to the provisions of Article

52 of the Constitution, no member of either the House of Representatives or the Senate may hold a public office at one and the same time. Public office means every office whose holder receives his

salary from public funds including offices of municipalities. Likewise, no one may be a member of both Houses at one and the same time. Article 77: Subject to the pngrotvhiesdluafHeoRprsntaiv Constitution, the National Assembly shall, hold one ordinary session during each year of its term. 23 Article 78: (i) The King shall summon the National Assembly to meet for its ordinary session on the first day of October of each year, or if such day is an official holiday, then on the first day following which is not an official holiday; but the King may, by a Royal Iradah, to be published in the Official Gazette, postpone for a period not exceeding two months, the summoning of the Assembly to a date to be fixed by the Royal Iradah. (ii) If the National Assembly is not summoned in accordance with the preceding paragraph, it shall assemble of its own accord as if it had been summoned. (iii) 24 The ordinary session of the National Assembly shall begin on the date upon which it is summoned to assemble in accordance with the two preceding paragraphs, and shall last for four months unless the House of Representatives be dissolved by the King before the expiration date of that period; the session may be prolonged by the King for a further period not exceeding three months to allow for the dispatch of business. At the expiry of the said four months or any such prolongation thereof, the King shall prorogue the Assembly. Article 79: The King opens the ordinary session of the National Assembly with a Speech from the Throne at a joint meeting by the Senate and the House of Representatives. He may depute the Prime Minis -teronfhMisteropfmhenig ceremony and deliver the Speech from the Throne. The House of Representatives and the Senate shall

each submit a petition, including its reply to this speech. Article 80: Every Senator and member of the House of Representatives shall, before assuming his duties, take the following oath before the House of which he is a member: I swear by Almighty God to be loyal to the King and to the country and uphold the Constitution, serve the nation and perform the duties entrusted to me. Article 81: (i) The King may by a Royal Iradah adjourn the meetings of the National Assembly three times only, or twice if he has postponed the meeting of the National Assembly under Paragraph (i) of Article 78, provided that the period of adjournment, including that of postponement, shall not exceed two months during any ordinary session. In computing the term of the session, the periods of adjournments shall not be taken into account. (ii) Each of the Senate and the House of Representatives may adjourn its session from time to time in conformity with its rules of order. Article 82: (i) Whenever necessary the King may convene the National Assembly to meet in extraordinary session for an indeterminate period in each session for the purpose of deciding specific matters stated in the Royal Iradah summoning the Assembly. Each extraordinary session shall be prorogued by Iradah. (ii)The King shall convene the National Assembly to meet in extraordinary session at the signed petition of an absolute majority of the members of the House of Representatives in which the matters for deliberation are stated. (iii)The National Assembly shall not in any extraordinary session deliberate on any matters but those stated in the Iradah summoning the Assembly. Article 83: Each of the Senate and the House Representatives shall enact its internal rules of

order for the regulation of their own proceedings and submit these to the King for his approval. 25 (i) No meeting of either the SenArticle 84:	 ate or the House of Representatives shall be deemed valid if it is not attended by two thirds of its members; the meeting shall continue to be valid as long as an absolute majority of the members remains in

attendance. Resolutions of each of the Senate and the (ii) House of Representatives shall be taken by the majority of votes of the members present other than the President who shall not vote except in cases where it is otherwise provided in this Constitution. In the case of a tie the President shall exercise a casting vote. If the voting is in respect of (iii) a constitutional matter, or, relative to the question of confidence in the Council of Ministers ,or one of the Ministers, the votes shall be taken by calling the members by their names in a loud voice. Article 85: Meetings of each of the Senate and the House of Representatives shall be public. Meetings in camera may be held at the request of the Government or at the request of five members. Thereupon the House concerned shall decide whether to accept or refuse the request. Article 86: (i) No member of the Senate or the House of Representatives shall-be arrested or tried during a session of the House to which he belongs unless that House by an absolute majority decides that there is siffucient cause for his arrest or trial or unless he .is apprehended flagrante delicto, in which case the House concerned shall be immediately notified. (ii) Should a member be arrested for any reason during a period when the National Assembly is not in session, the Prime Minister shall notify the House to which the member belongs at its next meeting, of the measures taken, accompanied by the necessary explanation. Article 87: Every member of the Senate and the

House of Representatives shall have complete freedom

of speech and expression of opinion within the limits of the rules of the House of which he is a member, and no legal proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of any vote or opinion expressed or speech made by him during the deliberations. Article 88: When a seat becomes vacant in the Senate or in the House of Representatives by death or resignation or other causes, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment in the case of a member of the Senate and through by-election in the case of a member of the House of Representatives within a period of two months following the date on which the House concerned notifies the Government of the vacancy. The membership of the new member shall be for the duration of the remaining term of his predecessor. Article 89: (i) In addition to the cases where the Senate and House of Representatives hold joint meetings as prescribed in Articles 29, 79 and 92 of this Constitution, they shall hold joint meetings at the request of the Prime Minister. (ii) When the two Houses hold joint meetings, the President of the Senate shall preside. (iii) 26 Joint Meetings of the Senate and the House of Representatives shall not be considered valid unless attended by the absolute majority of the members of each of them. Decisions shall be taken by majority votes of the members present excluding the President who in the case of a tie shall exercise a casting vote. Article 90: No member of either the Senate or the House of Representatives shall be disqualified except by a resolution from the House of which he is a member, provided that in cases other than the two cases of loss of qualifications and incompatibility of offices held as laid down in this Constitution and in the Electoral law, the resolution be taken by two-thirds majority of the members. If the resolution concerns a Senator, it shall be submitted to the King for approval. Article 91: The Prime Minister shall submit

every project of law to the House of Representatives

which has the right to accept, amend or reject it; but in all cases, the House shall refer the project to the Senate and it shall not be promulgated as a law unless it is passed by both the Senate and the House of Representatives and approved by the King. Article 92: If either the Senate or the House of Representatives should twice reject a bill which has been accepted with or without amendment by the other House, both Houses shall hold a joint meeting under the presidency of the President of the Senate to discuss the points of disagreement, provided that the bill may not be passed unless accepted by twothirds majority of members present at the joint meeting. If the bill is rejected in the manner described above, it shall not be resubmitted during the same session. Article 93: (i) Every bill passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives shall be submitted to the King for approval. (ii) A law shall come into force upon its decree by the King and after 30 days from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette unless a special provision is made in the law providing for its coming into force at another date. Should the King withhold his approval, he (iii) may, within a period of six months from the date on which the bill is submitted to him, return it with a statement of the reasons for his non-approval. (iv) If a bill, other than (a bill affecting) the Constitution, is returned to the National Assembly27 within the period specified in the preceding paragraph and is voted for again by two thirds of the members of each of the Senate and the House of Representatives it shall then be passed; should it not be returned duly approved within the period prescribed in paragraph (iii) of this article it shall be considered as approved and shall come into force. Should the bill fail to obtain the two-thirds majority it may not be resubmitted during the same session. However, the National Assembly may reconsider the said bill during its next ordinary session.

(i) Whenever the National Assembly is not in session, the Council of Ministers, with the approval of the King, shall have the power to make provisional laws to deal with situations entailing the adoption of necessary measures which cannot be postponed or require urgent expenditure which cannot be delayed. Such provisional laws, which shall not contravene the terms of the Constitution, shall have the force of law provided that they be submitted to the Assembly at the first meeting of its next session. The Assembly may approve or amend such laws. Should the Assembly reject these laws, the Council of Ministers with the consent of the King shall announce their immediate cancellation, and from the date of the said announcement such provisional laws shall cease to be in force, provided that such cancellation shall not prejudice any contract or acquired rights. (ii) A provisional law comes into force the same way an ordinary law does in accordance with Paragraph ii of Article 93 of this Constitution.
Article 94:

28

(i) Ten or more members of the Senate or House of Representatives may propose the enactment of a new law. The proposal shall be referred to the appropriate committee of the Senate or the House, as the case may be, for examination and reporting. If the proposal is accepted by the Senate or the House it shall be referred to the Government to be put in a form of a bill and submitted to the House during the same session or the following. (ii) Any proposal for a new law proposed by members of either the Senate or the House of Representatives in accordance with the preceding paragraph and rejected by either House shall not be presented for the second time during the same session.
Article 95 Article 96: Every member of the Senate or the House of Representatives may direct questions and interpellations to any Minister concerning any public affair in accordance with the Internal Regulations of the House of which he is a member. No interpellation shall be debated before the lapse of eight days

29

from its notification to the Minister except in urgent cases provided that the Minister consents to the curtailment of the said period. Part VI The Judiciary Article 97: Judges are independent, and in the exercise of their judicial function they are subject to no authority but that of the law. Article 98: Judges of the Civil and Sharia Courts shall be appointed or dismissed by a Royal Iradah in accordance with the provisions of the law. Article 99: The courts shall be divided into three categories: (1) Regular Courts; (ii) Religious Courts (iii) Special Courts. Article 100: The establishment of the different courts, their ranks, divisions, jurisdiction and their administration shall be determined by a special law which shall provide also for the constitution of a High Court of Justice. Article 101: (i) The courts shall be open to all and shall be free from interference in their affairs. (ii) Hearings shall be public except where the court decides to hold hearings in camera in the interest of public order or morality. 30 The Regular Courts in the Article 102: Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan shall have jurisdiction over all persons in all civil and criminal cases, including claims by, and against, the Government, except in such matters which by the provisions of this Constitution, or of any law in force, shall be assigned to the Religious Courts or the Special Courts. Article 103: (i) The Regular Courts shall exercise their civil and criminal jurisdiction in accordance with the law in force in the Kingdom provided

that, in matters regarding the personal status of foreigners, or in other civil and commercial matters where it is customary by international usage to apply the law of another country, that law shall be applied in the manner prescribed by law. (ii) Matters of personal status are those prescribed by law and fall accordingly within the exclusive jurisdiction of Sharia Courts where the parties are Moslems. Article 104: The Religious Courts shall be divided into: (i) The Sharia Courts; (ii) The Councils of other Religious Communities. Article 105: The Sharia Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction in the following matters in accordance with their special laws: (i) Matters of personal status of Moslems; (ii) Matters of diyahn where the two parties are Moslems or where one of the parties is a non-Moslem and the two parties accept the jurisdiction of the Sharia Courts; (iii) Matters concerning Moslem Awqaf.32 Article 106: The Sharia Courts shall apply the principles of ash-shar'ash-sharif. Article 107: The organization of the Moslem Awqaf, the administration of its financial affairs and other related matters shall be defined by a special law. Article 108: The Councils of Religious Communities are the Councils of non-Moslem religious communities recognized or which shall hereafter be recognized by the Government as being established in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Article 109: (i) Councils of Religious Communities shall be established in accordance with laws to be enacted for that purpose. Such laws shall define the jurisdiction of the Councils regarding matters of personal status and Awqaf constituted for the benefit of the Community concerned. As to matters of personal status for such a Community they are the

same as those which in the case of Moslems are within the jurisdiction of the Sharia Courts. (ii) Such laws shall determine the procedure to be followed by the Councils of the Religious Communities. Article 110: Special Courts shall exercise jurisdiction in accordance with the terms of the laws pertaining thereto. Part VII Finance Article 111: No tax or duty shall be levied except by law. The various kinds of fees which the Treasury collects either in respect of services rendered to the members of the public by Government Departments, or in return to benefits accruing to them from State Domain shall not be considered as taxes or duties. In imposing taxes, the Government shall be guided by the principle of progressive taxation provided that it ensures equality and social justice. The tax must not overburden the capacity of taxpayers or exceed the State's requirements for funds. Article 112: (i) The project of the General Budget shall be submitted to the National Assembly for debate in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution at least one month prior to the beginning of the financial year. (ii) The budget shall be voted chapter by chapter. (ill) No part of the expenditure of the General Budget shall be transferred from one head to another except by law. (iv) The National Assembly, when debating the project of the General Budget or the provisional laws related to it, may reduce the provisions made under the various heads according to its appreciation of public interest. The National Assembly may not, however, increase such expenditure either by amendment or by making separate proposals; it may, however, after the conclusion of the debate, propose the enactment of laws purporting to incur new expenditure.

(v) No proposal shall be accepted during the debate on the General Budget for the repeal of an existing tax or the creation of a new tax or for increasing or reducing existing taxes which had been fixed by financial laws in force. No proposal shall be allowed for amending revenue or expenditure fixed by contracts. (vi) The estimates of national revenue and expenditure for, the financial year shall be approved by a general budget law. This law may allocate special sums for a period exceeding one year. If no law is passed for the general budget prior to the beginning of the new financial year, expenditure shall continue by monthly credits, calculated on the basis of one twelfth of the budget of the preceding fiscal year.

Article 113:	

34

Article 114: The Council of Ministers, with the approval of the King, may make regulations for the supervision of the appropriations and expenditures for public funds, and for the administration of Government stores. Article 115: All receipts from taxes and other sources of revenue of the State shall be paid into the Treasury and included in the State Budget save where otherwise provided by the law. No part of the funds of the Treasury shall be appropriated or expended for any purpose whatever unless sanctioned by law. Article 116: The Civil List of the King shall be paid from public funds and shall be fixed in the General Budget law. Article 117: Every concession granting a right to the exploitation of mines, minerals or public utilities must be sanctioned by law. Article 118: No person shall be exempted from the payment of taxes and duties in circumstances other than those prescribed by law.

Article 119: There shall be constituted by a law a State Comptroller's Office to audit the State's revenue and expenditure and the methods their disbursement. (i) The State Comptroller's Office shall submit to the House of Representatives at the beginning
of every ordinary session, or whenever the said House requests it to do so, a general report embodying its views and comments, indicating any irregulari-

ties committed and the responsibility arising therefrom. (ii) The law shall provide for the immunity
the State Comptroller. Part VIII General Provisions

Article 120: The Council of Ministers shall, with the approval of the King issue regulations for determining the administrative divisions in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the organization of Government departments, their classification, designation, and administration; the manner of appointing civil servants and their dismissal, the exercise of supervision over them and the limits of their duties
and powers.

Article 121: Municipal affairs and local councils shall be administered by municipal or local
councils in accordance with special laws. Article 122: The High Council provided for in Article 57 shall have the jurisdiction to interpret the provisions of the Constitution, either pursuant to a resolution by the Council of Ministers or by a decision taken by one of the Houses of the National Assembly by an absolute majority. Its interpretation

shall be applicable after its publication in the
Official Gazette.

Article 123: (i) At the request of the Prime Minister the Diwan Khas (Special Council) shall have the jurisdiction to interpret the text of any law which has not been interpreted by the Courts.

(ii) The Diwan Khas shall be constituted of the President of the highest Regular Court as President, two other members from among the judges of that Court and another senior administrative official who shall be appointed by the Council of Ministers and one senior official from the Ministry concerned with the required interpretation, nominated by the Minister of that Ministry. (iii) 35 The Diwan Khas shall take its decisions by majority votes. (iv) The decisions taken by the Diwan Khas and published in the Official Gazette shall have the force of law. (v) All other questions concerning the interpretation of laws shall be decided, as they arise, by the courts of law in the ordinary way.
Article 124: In the event of an emergency necessitating the defense of the realm, a law to be entitled the Defense Law shall be enacted giving power to a person named therein to take the necessary actions and measures including the suspension of the ordinary laws of the State in order to ensure the defense of the realm. The Defense Law shall come into force when proclaimed by a Royal Iradah issued in pursuance of a decision by the Council of Ministers. Article 125: (i) In the event of a serious emergency in respect of which the measures prescribed in the preceding article of this Constitution are considered insufficient for the defense of the Kingdom, the King may, in pursuance to a decision of the Council of Ministers, issue a Royal Iradah declaring martial law in all or any part of the Kingdom. (ii) When martial law is declared, the King may, by a Royal Iradah, issue such instructions as may be necessary for the defense of the Kingdom, notwithstanding the provisions of any law in force. Persons acting under such instructions shall be legally liable for all acts done by them not consistent with the provisions of the law until they have been relieved of that responsibility by a special law enacted for this purpose.

Article 126: (i) The procedures prescribed in this Constitution for the initiation of laws shall apply to any proposal for the amendment of this Constitution, provided that no amendment shall be enacted unless decided on by two-thirds majority of the members of each of the Senate and the House of Representatives. In the case of a joint session of the Senate and the House in accordance with Article 92 of this Constitution, the amendment shall not be enacted unless approved by a two-thirds majority of members of each House, provided that in all cases the amendment shall not come into force unless approved by the King. (ii) No amendment to the Constitution concerning the rights of the King and his heirs shall be passed during a period of regency. Article 127: The duties of the Army shall be restricted to the defense of the realm and its safety. (i) The manner of recruitment, the organization of the Army, the rights and duties of its members shall be defined by law. (ii) The organization of the Police Force and Gendarmery and their duties shall be defined by law. Part IX Enforcement of Laws and Repeals Article 128: All laws, regulations and other legislative enactments in force in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan at the date of the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue in force until such laws or regulations are repealed or amended by legislation enacted in accordance with the Constitution. Article 129: (i) The Jordanian Constitution issued on 7th December, 1946, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. (ii) The Palestine Order in Council of 1922 and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. (iii) The repeals mentioned in the preceding two paragraphs shall not affect the validity of any law or regulation made or anything done thereunder,

prior to the coming into force of this Constitution.

Article 130: This Constitution shall become effective from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette. Article 131: The Council of Ministers shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this Constitution.

