Part I
The Organization of Society 
Article 1. Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic is a socialist state of workers and peasants. 
Article 2. The political foundation of the Latvian SSR  are the Soviets of working people’s deputies, which were firmly established as a result of the overthrow of the governance of capitalists and big landlords and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
Article 3. All power in the Latvian SSR belongs to the working people of cities and country represented by the Soviets of working people's deputies.
Article 4. The economic foundation of the Latvian SSR is the socialist system of economy and the socialist ownership of the means of work and working instruments, which was firmly established in the result of the capitalist economy system liquidation, the abolishment of private ownership of the means of work and working instruments within large industrial sites, and the nationalization of these industrial sites, banks, transportation systems and communication systems with a goal to liquidate permanently a possibility for a man to exploit another man and to establish the socialistic society.
Article 5. The socialist property in the Latvian SSR exists either in the form of state property (the property of all people), or in the form of cooperative property.
Article 6. The land, its natural deposits, waters, forests, large factories and industrial sites, mines, rail transport, water transport and air transport, banks, communication systems, large agricultural enterprises established by state (state farms, machines and tractors stations and the like) as well as communal enterprises and large houses in the cities and within industrial sites, are state property, namely, the property of all people.
Article 7. Enterprises of the society within cooperative organizations together with their livestock inventory or any other inventory, the production of the cooperative organizations, as well as public buildings are the public socialist property of the cooperative organizations. 
Article 8. Simultaneously with the socialist system of economy, the Latvian SSR permits the private economy of peasants, craftsmen and handicraftsmen, small individual enterprises and trade enterprises within the limits set by law.
Article 9. The land used by peasants for work is provided to them for their free use for an unlimited term within the limits set by law.
Article 10. The law protects as citizens’ private property right the right of citizens for their income from work and for their savings, for their dwelling houses and auxiliary household, their working inventory and articles necessary for household, for articles required for their personal use and convenience, as well as the inheritance right of personal property of citizens.
Article 11. The economic life of the Latvian SSR is determined and directed by the state economic plan, the aim of which is to increase the public wealth, to improve steadily the material and cultural level of the working people, to strengthen the independence of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its defensive capacity.
Article 12. In the Latvian SSR work is a duty and a matter of honor of every able-bodied citizen and it is directed by the principle: "One who does not work, neither shall eat."
The principle of the Latvian SSR is the principle of socialism: "From each according to his ability, to each according to his work."
Part II
The Organization of State 
Article 13. In order to realize mutual assistance in the areas of economy, policy and as well as defense, the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic by its own will became a part of the united state – the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics – and united with the following Soviet Socialist Republics that have the similar legal status: the Russian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the Byelorussian SSR, the Azerbaijan SSR,  the Georgian SSR, the Armenian SSR, the Turkmen SSR, the Uzbek SSR, the Tadjik SSR, the Kazakh SSR, the Kirghiz SSR, the Karelo-Finnish SSR, the Moldavian SSR, the Lithuanian SSR, the Estonian SSR. 
On this basis the Latvian SSR as represented by the USSR highest organs and state authority organs ensures to the USSR the rights set forth in the Article 14 of the USSR Constitution. 
Except for the limitations set forth in the Article 14 of the USSR Constitution, the Latvian SSR realizes state power independently by reserving completely all its sovereign rights. 
Article 14. The Latvian SSR consists of the parishes of Riga, Cesis, Valmiera, Valka, Madona, Liepaja, Aizpute, Kuldiga, Tukums, Talsi, Ventspils, Jelgava, Bauska, Jekapblis, Ilukste, Daugavpils, Rezekne, Ludza and Abrene and of the following cities that are not parts of any parish: Riga, Daugavpils, Liepaja, Jelgava, Ventspils. 
Article 15. The Latvian SSR has the right to secede freely from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Article 16. The territory of the Latvian SSR may not be changed without Latvian SSR consent.
Article 17. The laws of the USSR have the force within the territory of the Latvian SSR.
Article 18. Every citizen of the Latvian SSR is a citizen of the USSR. The citizens of all the other united republics enjoy the same rights in the Latvian SSR as the citizens of the Latvian SSR. 
Article 19. The jurisdiction of the Latvian SSR, as represented by its highest organs and the state governing authorities, covers the following matters:
a) The Latvian SSR Constitution formation and control over its enforcement; 
b) The definition of the administrative-territorial division of the Latvian SSR, as well as of the borders of parishes and districts;
c) The legislation of the Latvian SSR;
d) The protection of the state order and citizens’ rights; 
e) The approval of economic plan of the Latvian SSR;
f) The approval of the state budget;
g) The definition of state and municipal taxes, fees and other income in accordance with the laws of the USSR as well as governance over the local budget realization;
h) The administration of insurance and investments cases;
i) The administration of the banks, industrial sites and agricultural and trade enterprises that are in the Latvian SSR jurisdiction;
j) Exercise of control and surveillance over the management and condition of the enterprises that are in the Union jurisdiction;
k) The definition of the order of exploitation of land as well as land resources, forests and waters;
l) The management of apartments’ and communal facilities, apartments buildings’ and cities’ as well as other residential areas’ facilities;
m) Roads construction, the formation of the local transportation and communication systems;
n) Labor legislation;
o) The administration of the health protection;
p) The administration of the social security;
r) The administration of elementary, secondary-level and higher education systems;
s) The administration of cultural, educational and scientific organizations and institutions as well as governance over such cultural, educational and scientific organizations that are considered important within the Republic;
t) The administration and organization of physical education and sport;
u) The organization of the courts of the Latvian SSR;
v) The enduing of the Latvian SSR citizenship;
z) The pardon and amnesty of the citizens convicted by the Latvian SSR courts. 
Part III
State Authority Highest Organs of the Latvian SSR
Article 20. The highest organ of state authority of the Latvian SSR is the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR.
Article 21. The Supreme Soviet is elected for 4 years by the citizens of the Latvian SSR within their electoral districts based on the following standard: 1 deputy for 20.000 residents. 
Article 22.  The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR exercises all rights vested in the Latvian SSR in accordance with the Article 13 and the Article 19 of the Constitution of the Latvian SSR, in so far as they are not in the jurisdiction of the Latvian SSR organs that are accountable to the Latvian SSR Supreme Soviet: the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR, the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR and the People's Commissariats of the Latvian SSR. 
Article 23. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR is the sole legislative authority in the Latvian SSR. 
Article 24. A law is considered adopted if the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR voted for it with a simple majority of votes.
Article 25. The Laws adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR are published in the Russian and the Latvian languages with the signatures of the President and Secretary of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR.
Article 26. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR elects a Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR and two Vice-Chairmen.
Article 27. The Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR presides over its sessions and directs its internal order.
Article 28. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR convenes the sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR two times a year. 
The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR convenes extraordinary sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR at its discretion or on the demand of one third of the Supreme Soviet deputies. 
Article 29. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR elects the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR consisting of a President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR, two Vice-Presidents, a Secretary of the Presidium and 7 members of the Presidium.
Article 30. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR is accountable for all its activity to the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR.
Article 31. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR:
a) Convenes the sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR;
b) Construes the laws of the Latvian SSR, issues decrees;
c) Organizes population surveys (referenda);
d) Annuls rules and orders of the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR and of the Councils of Working People's Deputies in case they do not conform to law;
e) Between the sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR recalls and appoints certain People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR on the proposal of the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR, and informs the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR on it within the next session for obtaining its confirmation;
f) Awards titles of honor of the Latvian SSR;
g) Exercises the right of pardon of the citizens convicted by the Latvian SSR courts.
Article 32. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR elects a mandates commission that examines the mandates of the deputies of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR.
The Supreme Soviet of the SSR decides either to annul the election of certain deputies or to confirm their mandate on the proposal of the mandates commission.
Article 33. When the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR considers it necessary, the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR has the right to appoint investigation and inspection commissions in relation to any case.
All institutions and public officers shall exercise the demands of these commissions and submit to them all the necessary materials and documents.
Article 34. A deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR may not be prosecuted or arrested without the consent of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR. Between the sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR it may not be done without the consent of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR.
Article 35. On the expiration of the term of the mandate of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the LSSR schedules the new elections that shall take place not later than 2 months after the expiration of the mandate of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR.
Article 36.  On the expiration of the term of the mandate of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the LSSR retains its powers until the election of a new Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR by the new Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR. 
Article 37.  The Presidium of the previous Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR convenes the newly-elected Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR not later than one month after the elections.
Article 38. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR forms the Government of the Latvian SSR - the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR.   
Part IV
State Authority Organs of the Latvian SSR
Article 39. The highest enforcement and administrative organ of the Union of the Latvian SSR is the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR.
Article 40. The Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR is accountable and responsible to the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR. Between the sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR it is responsible and accountable to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR.
Article 41. The Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR issues and supervises the execution of rules and orders on the basis of and for the execution of the laws of the USSR and the Latvian SSR and the Councils of People's Commissars of the USSR rules and orders.
Article 42. Rules and orders of the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR are binding within the territory of the Latvian SSR.
Article 43. The Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR:
a) Unites and directs the work of the republican and Union-republican work of the People’s Commissariats of the Latvian SSR and of other economic, administrative and cultural institutions accountable to the Council, as well as unites and examines the work of the All-Union People’s Commissariats’ authorized persons;
b) Drafts the economic plan of the Latvian SSR, submits it to the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR for its confirmation, and puts the plan into effect;
c) Drafts the state budget of the Latvian SSR and the local budgets of the Latvian SSR, submits the state budget of the Latvian SSR to the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR for its confirmation, and puts the state budget and the local budgets into effect;
d) Ensures the public order, the protection of the state interests and of the citizens’ rights;
e) Manages and examines the work of the enforcement committee of the Council of the Working People’s deputies of parishes;
f) In case of necessity establishes special committees and the Central Administrations accountable to the Council of the People’s Commissariats of the Latvian SSR in the cases related to economic and culture development. 
Article 44. The Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR has the right to annul the orders and instructions of the People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR and to annul decisions and orders of the enforcement committees of the Councils of the Working People’s deputies of parishes, as well as to suspend the execution of the decisions and the orders of the Councils of the Working People’s deputies of parishes.
Article 45. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR appoints the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR in the following composition:
The Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR;
The Vice-Chairmen of the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR;
The Chairman of the Commission on the State Plan of the Latvian SSR;
The People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR in the following matters:
	Local industry;
	Food industry;
	Consumer goods industry;
	Forest industry;
	Finance;
	Agriculture;
	Trade;
	Internal Affairs;
	Justice;
	Health protection;
	Education;
	Communal facilities;
	Social security;
	Labour;
	State control;
The All-Union People’s Commissariats’ authorized persons.
Article 46. The People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR direct the branches of state administration that come within the jurisdiction of the Latvian SSR. 
Article 47. The People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR issue, within the limits of the jurisdiction of the respective People's Commissariats, orders and instructions on the basis and in pursuance of the laws of the Latvian SSR, and of rules and orders of the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR and of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR as well as of orders and instructions of Union-Republican People’s Commissariats of the USSR, and supervise their execution.
Article 48. The People's Commissariats of the USSR are either Union-Republican or Republican Commissariats.
The following People's Commissariats of the Latvian SSR related to the following matters are the Union-Republican People's Commissariats of the Latvian SSR:
Food Industry;
Consumer good industry;
Forest industry;
Agriculture;
Finance;
Trade;
Internal affairs;
Justice;
Health protection;
State control.
The following People's Commissariats of the Latvian SSR related to the following matters are the Republican People's Commissariats of the Latvian SSR:
Local industry;
Education;
Labour;
Communal facilities;
Social security.
Article 49. The Union-Republican People's Commissariats of the Latvian SSR direct the branches of state administration entrusted to them (except for the limited amount of institutions the list of which is confirmed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR) and are accountable to the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR and to the corresponding Union-Republican People’s Commissariats of the USSR.  
Article 50.  The Republican People's Commissariats of the Latvian SSR direct the branches of state administration entrusted to them and are accountable directly to the Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR.  
Article 51. The Government of the Latvian SSR or a People's Commissar of the Latvian SSR to whom a deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR addresses a question must give a verbal or written reply in the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR within a period not exceeding three days.  
Part V
The Local Organs of State Authority
Article 52. The organs of state authority in parishes, cities, districts and densely populated areas are the Soviets of Working People's Deputies.
Article 53. The working people of parishes, cities, districts and densely populated areas elects the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of parishes, cities, districts and densely populated areas for the term of two years. 
Article 54. The Soviets of Working People's Deputies (of parishes, cities, districts and densely populated areas) direct culturally political and economic construction on their territory, draw up the local budgets, direct the work of the organs of administration subordinated to them, ensure the public order, strengthen defensive capacity of the state, ensure the observance of laws and the protection of the rights of citizens. 
Article 55. The Soviets of Working People's Deputies adopt decisions and issue orders within the limits of the rights vested in them by the laws of the USSR and of the Latvian SSR.
Article 56. The executive and administrative organs of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of parishes, cities, districts and densely populated areas are the executive committees elected by them, and that consist of a Chairman, Vice-Chairmen, a Secretary and members.
Article 57. The executive and administrative organs of Soviets of Working People's Deputies of small cities, districts and densely populated areas are the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman, and the Secretary elected by them.
Article 58. The executive committees of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies direct culturally political and economic construction on their territory based on the decisions adopted by the corresponding Soviets of Working People’s Deputies and the highest state organs. 
Article 59.  The executive committees of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of parishes convene the sessions of these Soviets not less than 4 times per year. 
Article 60.  The executive organs of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of districts convene the sessions of these Soviets not less than 6 times per year. 
Article 61.  The executive organs of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of cities and of the densely populated areas convene the sessions of these Soviets not less than one time per month. 
Article 62. For each of their session the Soviets of Working People's Deputies elect a Chairman and a Secretary within the corresponding session for the direction of the session.  
Article 63. The executive organs of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies are directly accountable both to the Soviets of Working People's Deputies that elected them and to the executive organ of the superior Soviet of Working People's Deputies.
Article 64. The superior executive committee of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies has the right to annul the decisions and orders of the lower executive committee and to suspend the decisions and orders of the lower Soviets of Working People's Deputies.
Article 65.  The superior Soviets of Working People's Deputies have the right to annul the decisions and orders of the lower Soviets of Working People's Deputies and their executive committees. 
Article 66.  The Soviets of Working People's Deputies of parishes establish the departments of the executive committees in the following matters: 
Land; 
Finance;
Trade;
Health Protection;
Education of the population;
Local industry;
Communal facilities;
Labor;
Roads;
General;
Plan Commission;
Personnel office of the Chairman of the executive committee.
Additionally, in accordance with the particular economic characteristics of each parish the Soviets of Working People's Deputies have the right to establish other departments and offices subject to the confirmation of the corresponding People’s Commissariat. 
Article 67.   Depending on the conditions in the corresponding parish the All-Union People’s Commissariats  and the Internal People’s Commissariat establish their offices as affiliated with the the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of the parish based on the laws of the USSR and the Latvian SSR. 
Article 68. The departments and administrations of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of parishes are accountable both to the Soviet of Working People's Deputies of the parish including its executive committee and to the corresponding People’s Commissariat of the Latvian SSR.
Article 69.  The Soviets of Working People's Deputies of cities establish the departments of the executive committees in the following matters:
Finance;
Communal facilities;
Trade;
Health Protection;
Labor;
Education of the population;
Social Security;
General;
Plan commission;
Personnel office of the Chairman of the executive committee
as well as in accordance with the particular economic characteristics of the city, city’s industry and nearest suburbs, the departments in other matters. 
Article 70.  The departments of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of cities are accountable both to the Soviet of Working People's Deputies of the city including its executive committee and to the corresponding People’s Commissariat of the Latvian SSR.
Article 71. The departments of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of Riga, Liepaja, Daugavpils, Jelgava and Ventspils are accountable both to the Soviet of Working People's Deputies of the corresponding city including its executive committee and directly to the corresponding People’s Commissariat of the Latvian SSR.
Article 72.  After the expiration of the mandate of the Soviets of Working People's Deputies, their executive and administrative organs keep their mandate until the newly-elected Soviet of Working People’s Deputies establishes new executive and administrative organs. 
Part VI
The Budget of Latvian SSR
Article 73. The Council of People's Commissars of the Latvian SSR drafts the state budget of the Latvian SSR and submits it to the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR for its confirmation. 
The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR promulgates the confirmed budget.
Article 74. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR elects the budget commission that provides its opinion to the Supreme Soviet on the state budget. 
Article 75. The Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR examines the overview on the execution of the state budget of the Latvian SSR and promulgates it. 
Article 76.   The budget of the Soviets of parishes, cities and districts consists of the income from the local economy, holdbacks of the state income gained on their territory as well as the amount of the local taxes and fees set forth in the laws of the USSR and the Latvian SSR. 
Part VII
Courts System and Public Prosecution
Article 77. In the Latvian SSR judicial functions are carried out by the Supreme Court of the Latvian SSR, the courts of parishes, the people’s courts as well as the special courts of the USSR established by decision of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR.   
Article 78. In all courts cases are tried with the participation of people's assessors, except in cases specially provided for by law.
Article 79. The Supreme Court of the Latvian SSR is the highest judicial organ in the Latvian SSR. 
The Supreme Court of the Latvian SSR shall supervise the activities of all the judicial organs of the Latvian SSR.
Article 80. The Supreme Court of the Latvian SSR is elected by the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR for a term of five years.
Article 81. The courts of parishes are elected by the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of the parishes for a term of five years.
Article 82. People's courts are elected by the citizens of the district and of the city based on universal, direct and equal suffrage by secret ballot for a term of three years.
Article 83. Proceedings in the Latvian SSR are conducted in the Latvian language. Persons that do not know this language are guaranteed an opportunity to get fully acquainted with the materials of the case with the help of an interpreter as well as the right to use their mother tongue in court.
Article 84. Unless otherwise provided for by law, in all courts of the Latvian SSR cases are heard in public, and the accused is guaranteed the right to be defended by legal defense.
Article 85. Judges are independent and subject only to law.
Article 86. Supreme supervisory power over the strict execution of the laws by all People's Commissariats and institutions subordinated to them, as well as by public officers and citizens on the territory of the Latvian SSR, is vested directly in the Prosecutor of the USSR as well as over the Prosecutor of the Latvian SSR.
Article 87. The Prosecutor of the USSR appoints the Prosecutor of the Latvian SSR. 
Article 88. Subject to the confirmation of the Prosecutor of the USSR the Prosecutor of the Latvian SSR appoints the prosecutors of a parish and a city for a term of five years. 
Article 89. The Public Prosecution organs perform their functions independently of any local organs and are accountable solely to the Prosecutor of the USSR.
Part VIII
Fundamental Rights and Obligation of Citizens
Article 90. Citizens of the Latvian SSR have the right to work, that is, have the right to guaranteed employment and payment for their work in accordance with its quantity and quality.
The right to work is ensured by the socialist organization of the national economy, together with the amplification of steady growth of the productive forces of Soviet society, the elimination of the possibility of economic crises, and of unemployment.
Article 91. Citizens of the Latvian SSR have the right to rest. The right to rest is ensured by the reduction of the working day to 8 hours for the majority of the workers, the introduction of the institution of annual vacations with full usual wage for workers and employees and the provision of a wide network of sanatoria, rest homes and clubs for the working people.
Article 92. Citizens of the Latvian SSR have the right to maintenance in old age and in case of sickness or loss of capacity to work.
This right is ensured by the extensive development of social insurance of workers and employees at state expense, free medical help for the working people and the provision of a wide network of resorts for the use of the working people.
Article 93. Citizens of the Latvian SSR have the right to education. 
This right is ensured by universal, compulsory elementary education, by free education (including higher education), by the system of state scholarships for the majority of students in the universities and colleges, by conducting teaching in schools in the native language, and by the organization of free industrial, technical and agronomic education for the working people in the factories, state farms, machine and tractor stations.
Article 94. Women in the Latvian SSR have equal rights with men in all economic, state, cultural, social and political spheres. 
The possibility to exercise these rights is ensured to women by granting them an equal right with men to work, payment for work, rest, social security and education, and by providing women with protection of the interests of mother and child, maternity leave with full usual wage, and the provision of a wide network of maternity hospitals, orphanages and kindergartens.
Article 95. Equality of rights of citizens of the Latvian SSR, irrespective of their nationality or race, in all economic, state, cultural, social and political spheres is an irrevocable law. 
Any direct or indirect restriction of the rights of, or, conversely, any establishment of direct or indirect privileges for citizens depending on their race or nationality, as well as any declaration of racial or national origins or hatred and contempt, is punishable by law.
Article 96. In order to ensure to citizens freedom of conscience, the church in the Latvian SSR is separated from the state, and the school from the church. Freedom of religious worship and freedom of anti-religious propaganda is guaranteed to all citizens.
Article 97. In conformity with the interests of the working people, and in order to strengthen the socialist system, law guarantees to the citizens of the Latvian SSR:
a. freedom of speech;
b. freedom of the press;
c. freedom of assembly and conducting meetings;
d. freedom of street processions and demonstrations.
These civil rights are ensured by providing the working people and their organizations with the right to use printing houses, paper, public buildings, the streets, communications facilities and other material means for the exercise of these rights.
Article 98. In conformity with the interests of the working people, and in order to develop the organizational initiative and political activity of the masses of the people, citizens of the Latvian SSR are ensured the right to unite in public organizations: trade unions, cooperative associations, youth organizations, sport and defense organizations, cultural, technical and scientific societies, however, the most active and most conscious of the citizens of the working class and of other working people unite in the All-Union Communist (Bolsheviks’) Party, which is the vanguard of the working people in their struggle to strengthen and develop the socialist system and is the leading core of all organizations of the working people, both public and state.
Article 99. Citizens of the Latvian SSR are guaranteed inviolability of the person. No one can be placed under arrest except by decision of a court or with the consent of a public prosecutor.
Article 100. The inviolability of the apartments of citizens and privacy of correspondence are protected by law.
Article 101. The Latvian SSR grants the right of asylum to foreign citizens prosecuted for defending the interests of the working people, or for their scientific activities, or for their struggle for national liberation.
Article 102. Every citizen of the Latvian SSR shall observe the Constitution of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic, the laws, labor discipline, shall maintain honest attitude to public duties, and to respect the rules of socialist common life.
Article 103. Every citizen of the Latvian SSR shall safeguard and strengthen public socialist property as the sacred and inviolable foundation of the Soviet system, as the source of the wealth and might of the Fatherland, as the source of the prosperity and cultural life of all the working people.
Persons posing a threat to public, socialist property are enemies of the people.
Article 104. Universal military service is law. Military service in the Red Army is an honorable duty of the citizens of the Latvian SSR.
Article 105. The defense of the Fatherland is the sacred duty of every citizen of the Latvian SSR. Treason of the Fatherland, including the violation of the oath of allegiance, desertion to the enemy, impairing the military power of the state, espionage is punishable with all the severity of the law as the gravest of crimes.
Part IX
The Electoral System
Article 106. Deputies of all Soviets of Working People's Deputies: of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR, the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of the parishes, cities, districts and densely populated areas are elected based on universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot.
Article 107. Elections of deputies are universal: all citizens of the Latvian SSR who have reached the age of 18, irrespective of race or nationality, religion, educational, permanent residence, social origin, property status or past activities, have the right to participate in the election of deputies and to be elected, with the exception of insane persons and persons who have been convicted by a court with the deprivation of electoral rights.
Article 108. Elections of deputies are equal: each citizen has one vote; all citizens participate in elections on an equal basis.
Article 109. Women have the right to elect and be elected on equal terms with men.
Article 110. Citizens who serve in the Red Army have the right to elect and be elected on equal terms with all other citizens.
Article 111. Elections of deputies are direct: all Soviets of Working People's Deputies, from the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of the parishes, cities, districts and the densely populated areas to the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR, are elected by the citizens by direct vote.
Article 112. Voting at elections of deputies is secret.
Article 113. Candidates for election are nominated according to electoral districts. 
The right to nominate candidates is granted to public organizations and societies of the working people: Communist Party organizations, trade unions, cooperatives, youth organizations and cultural societies.
Article 114. Every deputy shall report to his electors on his work and on the work of the Soviet of Working People's Deputies. A deputy may be recalled at any time as established by law upon a special decision of a majority of the electors.
Article 115. The elections to the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of the Latvian SSR are organized by electoral districts based on the norms set forth in the “Regulations on the elections to the Soviets of Working People's Deputies of the Latvian SSR”.
Part X
Coat of Arms, Flag, Capital
Article 116. The coat of arms of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic consists of a golden sickle and hammer surrounded by ears of grain in the rays of the sun shining from sea; at the top of the coat of arms is a five-pointed gold star; at the bottom on the ribbon, which wraps around the ears of grain, is the inscription in Latvian “Latvian SSR” in the centre and "Workers of All Countries, Unite!" as well as in Russian "Workers of All Countries, Unite!" on the edges. 
Article 117.  The flag of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic is made of a red cloth with the sickle and hammer depicted in gold in the upper left corner near the staff and above them is the inscription made in gold “LSSR”. The ratio of the width to the length is 1: 2. 
Article 118. The capital of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic is the City of Riga.
Part XI
Constitution Amending Procedure 
Article 119. The Constitution of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic may be amended only by decision of the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR adopted by a majority of not less than two thirds of the votes of the members of the Supreme Soviet.




