CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

LESOTHO
by JAMES E. BEARDSLEY (to 1970) PETER GELDENHUYS (1970-76) ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN and STEVEN A. HOLT (1976-83)

Issued January 1984

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

© Copyright 1984 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

MEMORANDUM

PARLIAMENT BILL 1983 MEMORANDUM BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE PRIME MINISTER

1.

This Bill which when it becomes law, is intended to replace Lesotho Order 1973, is headed the Parliament Bill 1983. It is intended to operate as the Constitution henceforth.

2.

The bill makes provision for elections into the General Assembly which is one house whilst providing for Senate the other house to be Constituted of the twenty-two Principal and Ward Chiefs. The other major part of the Bill is devoted to making provisions for the executive arm of Cabinet starting with the appointment of the Prime Minister downwards. Except for minor changes here and there the Bill reproduces in large measure the provisions of the 1966 Constitution which dealt with the Legislature and the Executive. Certain parts of what we have come to regard as integral parts of typical formal Constitutions have been purposely left cut. These are the Civil Rights, the Judiciary and the Civil Service and others. We have already made provision in our laws to cater for some of these matters whilst a Bill of Rights (Civil Rights) Bill will be presented to parliament in this session. Accordingly almost all the facets of a formal written constitution will be or have been taken care of through our laws passed in Parliament.

3.

4.

5.

An attempt has been made to have this Bill as reasonably brief but comprehensive as possible to be able to be understood by government and the nation as a whole.

1

PARLIAMENT ENACTMENT - 1983

To establish a Parliament, to provide for its Constitution and to provide for incidental matters. ENACTED BY THE ASSEMBLY PART I COMPOSITION OF PARLIAMENT 1.(1) This Act may be cited as the Parliament Act 1983 and shall come into operation on a date to be appointed by the Minister by notice in the Gazette. (2) The Minister may appoint different dates for the coming into operation of different sections of this Act. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "Assembly" means the National Assembly constituted under section 5; "Commission" means the Constituency Delimination Commission appointed under section 16; "Parliament" means the Parliament of Lesotho established under section 3; "Senate" means the Senate constituted under section 4; "Session" means the period beginning when the two Houses of Parliament first meet after the coming into operation of this Act or after Parliament has at anytime been prorogued or when Parliament is dissolved without having been prorogued; "Sitting" means in relation to a House of Parliament the period during which that House is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in Committee; "Speaker" means the Speaker of the National Assembly elected under section 13; "Tribunal" means the tribunal appointed under section 16(6) 3. There shall be a Parliament which shall consist of the King, a Senate and a National Assembly. 4. (1) The Senate shall consist of the twenty-two Principal and Ward Chiefs and eight other Senators appointed by the King pursuant to subsection (2).

(2) The King may, on the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint as nominated Senators, eight persons whom He considers desirable in the public interest in order to enhance the representative character of the Senate or to obtain the service as a member of any person who, by reason of his special qualification, would be of special value as such Senator. (3) A Principal or Ward Chief may, by notice in writing to the President of Senate designate any other person to be a Senator in his place either generally or for any sitting or sittings of the Senate specified in the notice and may in like manner, vary or revoke any such designation. 5. (1) The National Assembly shall consist of — (a) 60 members elected in accordance with the Electoral Act 1968; and (b) such nominated members as may be appointed under section 7. 6. (1) Lesotho is divided into constituencies and each constituency shall elect one member to the National Assembly in such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law. (2) Subject to subsection (3) and (4), every person who, at the date of his application to be registered under a law in that behalf — (a) is a citizen of Lesotho; (b) has attained the age of twenty-one years; and (c) possesses such qualifications as to residence as may be prescribed by Parliament, shall be qualified to be registered as an elector in elections to the National Assembly and no other person may be so registered. (3) No person shall be qualifed to be registered as an elector in elections to the National Assembly who, at the date of his application to be registered (a) is, by virtue of his own act, under any acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience or adherence to any foreign power or state; (b) is under sentence of death imposed on him by any court in Lesotho; or (c) is, under any law in force in Lesotho adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind.

3

(4) Parliament may provide that a person who is convicted by any court of any offence that is prescribed by Parliament and that is connected with the election of members of the National Assembly or who is reported guilty of such an offence by the court trying an election petition shall not be qualified to be registered as an elector in elections to the National Assembly for such period, not exceeding five years, following his conviction or, as the case may be, following the report of the court as may be prescribed. (5) Subject to subsections (4) and (5) a person who is registered in any constituency as an elector in elections to the National Assembly shall be qualified to vote in such elections in that constituency in accordance with any law in that behalf and no other person may so vote. (6) Parliament may provide that a person who holds or is acting in any office that is specified by Parliament and the junctions of which involve responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of an election in any constituency shall not be qualified to vote in that election in that constituency. 7. The King may, on the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint as nominated members of the National Assembly such persons, not exceeding 20 in number, as he considers desirable in the public interest in order to enhance the representative character of the Assembly or to obtain the service as a member of the Assembly, of any person who by reason of his special qualifications, would be of special value as such member. 8. Subject to section 9. (a) a person shall be qualified to be nominated as a Senator by the King or designated by a Principal Chief or a Ward Chief as a Senator in his place if, and shall not be so qualified unless, at the date of his nomination or designation, as the case may be, he is a citizen of Lesotho; and (b) a person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be so qualified unless at the date of his nomination for election, he (i) is a citizen of Lesotho; (ii) is registered in some constituencey as an elector in elections to the National Assembly and is not disqualified from voting in such elections; and

(iii) is able to speak and, unless incapacitated by blindness or other physical cause, to read and write the Lesotho language well enough to take an active part in the proceedings of the National Assembly. 9.(1) No person shall be qualified to be nominated by the Kin g as Senator or a Princi p al Chief or a Ward Chief as a Senator in his place and no person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly if, at the date of his nomination or designation or, as the case may be, at the date of his nomination for election, he — (a) is, by virtue of his own act, under any acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience or adherence to any foreign power or state; (b) is under sentence of death imposed on him by any court in Lesotho; (c) is, under any law in force in Lesotho adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind; (d) is an unrehabilitated insolvent having been adjudged or otherwise declared insolvent under any law in force in Lesotho; or (e) subject to such exceptions and limitations as may be prescribed by Parliament, has any interest in any government contract as may be so prescribed. (2) Parliament may provide that a person who, at the date of his nomination for election, holds or is acting in any office that is specified by Parliament and the functions of which involve responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of any election to the National Assembly or the compilation of any register of electors for the purpose of such an election shall not be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly. (3) Parliament may provide that a person who is convicted by any court of any offence that is prescribed by Parliament and that is connnected with the election of members of the National Assembly or who is reported guilty of such an offence by the court trying an election petition shall not be qualified to be nominated for election as a member of the National Assembly for such period not exceeding five years following his conviction, or as the case may be, following the report of the court as may be so prescribed.

(4) Parliament may provide that, subject to such exceptions and limitations as may be prescribed by Parliament, a person shall not be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly, if — (a) he holds or acts in any office or appointment: that is so prescribed; (b) he is a member of any naval, military or air force that is so prescribed; or (c) he is a member of a police force. (5) No person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly who, at the date of his nomination for election as such a member, is a Principal Chief or a Ward Chief or is otherwise a Senator. (6) In subsection (1)(e) "Government Contract" means any contract made with the Government of Lesotho or with a department of that Government or with an officer of that Government contractingas such. 10.(1) A Senator or a member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat if — (a) he ceases to be a citizen of Lesotho; (b) any circumstances arise that, if he were not a Senator or member of the National Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified under section 9(1) to be nominated or designated as such or, as the case may be, to be elected as such; (c) in the case of a member of the National Assembly, if he ceases to be registered in some constituency as an elector in elections to the National Assembly or if he ceases to be qualified to vote in some constituency in such elections; (d) in the case of such Senator, if he ceases to be a principal or ward chief or at the next dissolution of Parliament after his nomination; or — (e) in the case of a member of the National Assembly, if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the National Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified to be elected as such under section 9(2), (3), or (4). (2) Parliament may, in order to permit any member of the House of Parliament who has been sentenced to death, adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind, adjudged

or declared insolvent or convicted or reported guilty of any offence prescribed under section 6(4), or section 9(3) to appeal against the decision in accordance with any law, that subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by Parliament, the decision shall not have effect for the purposes of this section until such time as may be so prescribed. 11.(1) There shall be a President of the Senate who shall be elected by the Senate either from among the persons who are Senators or from among other persons. (2) A Minister shall not be qualified to be elected as President. (3) The President shall vacate his office (a) if, having been elected from among the Senators, he ceases to be a Senator otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; or (b) in the case of a President who was elected from among persons who were not Senators, if any circumstances arise that would cause him to be disqualified to be nominated or designated as a Senator under section 9(1) (b), or (d).; (c) if he becomes a Minister; (d) when the Senate first meets after a dissolution of Parliament; or (e) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the Senate supported by the votes of twothirds of all the Senators. (4) No business shall be transacted in the Senate, other than the election of President, at any time when the office of President is vacant. 12. (1) There shall be a Vice-President of the Senate who shall be elected by the Senate either from among the persons who are Senators or from among other persons. (2) A Minister shall not be qualified to be elected as Vice-President. (3) The Senate shall elect a Vice-President (a) subject to section 11(4) when it first meets after a dissolution of Parliament; and (b) when it first meets after the office of VicePresident has otherwise become vacant;

or as soon thereafter as may be convenient. (4) The. Vice-President shall vacate his office (a) if, having been elected from among the Senators, he ceases to be a Senator otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; or in the case of a Vice-President who was elected from among persons who were not Senators, if any circumstances arise that would cause him to be disqualified to be nominated or designated as a Senator under section 9(1)(b), (c) or (d); if he becomes a Minister;

(b)

(c)

(d) when the Senate first meets after a dissolution of Parliament; or (e) if he is removed from office by resolution of the Senate.

13.(1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be elected by the Assembly, either from among the persons who are members thereof or from other persons. (2) A Minister shall not be qualified to be elected as Speaker. (3) The Speaker shall vacate his office (a) if having been elected from among the members of the National Assembly, he ceases to be a member of the Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; or (b) in the case of a Speaker who was elected from among persons who were not members of the National Assembly, if any circumstances arise that would cause him to be disqualified to be elected as such a member under section 9(1) (b), (c), (d) or (3); (c) if he becomes a Minister; (d) when the National Assembly first meets after a dissolution of Parliament; or (e) if he is removed from office by resolution of the National Assembly supported by the votes of two-thirds of all the members thereof..

(4) No business shall be transacted in the National Assembly other than the election of a Speaker at any

time when the office of Speaker is vacant. 14.(1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be elected by the Assembly either from among the persons who are members thereof or from other persons. (2) A Minister shall not be qualified to be elected as Deputy Speaker. (3) The National Assembly shall elect a Deputy Speaker, (a) subject to section 13(4), when it first meets after a dissolution of Parliament; and (b) when it first meets after the office of Deputy Speaker has otherwise become vacant; or as soon thereafter as may be convenient. (4) The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office (a) if, having been elected from among the members of the National Assembly, he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly otherwise than by reason of dissolution of Parliament; or (b) in the case of a Deputy Speaker who was elected from among persons who were not members of the National Assembly, if any circumstances arise that would cause him to be disqualified to be elected as such a member under section 9(1)(b), (c) or (3); (c) if he becomes a Minister; (d) when the National Assembly first meets after a dissolution of Parliament; or (e) if he is removed from office by resolution of the National Assembly. 15.(1) There shall be a Clerk to the Senate and a Clerk to the National Assembly. (2) The office of the Clerk to the Senate and to the National Assembly and of the members of the staff of the two Houses shall be offices in the Public Service. (3) this section shall be construed as Nothing in preventing the appointment of one person, (a) to the office of clerk to the Senate or to any office of the staff of the clerk to the Senate; or

(b) to the office of clerk to the National Assembly or to any office of the staff of the clerk to the National Assembly. 16.(1) There shall be a Constituency Delimination Commission which shall consist of — (a) a Chairman, who shall be a person appointed by the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister from among the judges of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal; and (b) two other members, each of whom shall be appointed by the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister from among persons who hold or have held high judicial office. (2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a member of the Commission if — (a) he is , or has at any time been, a member of either House of Parliament or a member of either House of the Parliament Constituted under the Basutoland Order 1965 or a member, other than an official or a nominated member, of the Basutoland National Council constituted under the Basutoland (Constitution) Order in Council 1959; (b) he is, or has at any time been, nominated as a candidate for election as a member of the National Assembly constituted under this Act or the Basutoland Order 1965 or of the Basutoland National Council; (c) he is, or has at any time been, the holder of an office in any political organization that sponsors or otherwise supports, or has at any time sponsored or otherwise supported a candidate for election as a member of the National Assembly constituted under this Act or the Basutoland Order 1965, or of the Basutoland National Council or any local Government authority; (d) he is, or has at any time been a member of the Interim National Assembly constituted under section 4 of the Lesotho Order, 1973; or (e) he is a public officer, other than a judge of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal. (3) Subject to this section, the office of a member of the Commission shall become vacant — (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment; or

10

(b) if any circumstances arise that if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified to be appointed as such under subsection (2). (4) A member of the Commission may be removed from office only for inability to exercise the functions of his office whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause or for misbehaviour and shall not be so removed except in accordance with this section. (5) A member of the Commission shall be removed from office by the King if the question of his removal from office has been referred to a tribunal appointed under subsection (6) and the tribunal has recommended to the King that he ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehavious. (6) If the chairman of the Commission represents to the King that the question of removing a member of the Commission under this section ought to be investigated, then — (a) the King shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a chairman and not less than two other members, selected by the Chief Justice from among persons who hold or who have held high judicial office, and (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the King and recommend to him whether the member ought to be removed under this section.

(7) If, the question of removing a member of the Commission has been referred to a tribunal under this section, the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the chairman of the Commision may suspend that member from the exercise of the function of his office and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the King, acting in accordance with such advice as aforesaid, and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the King that that member should not be removed. (8) The chairman of the Commission and any other member of the Commission who is a judge of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal shall be removed by the King from his office as a member of the Commission if, and shall not be so removed unless, he is removed under section 4 of the High Court Act, 1978, or as the case may be, section 5 of the Court of Appeal Act 1978, from his office as a judge, and, accordingly, subsections (5) and (6) shall not apply in relation to the Chairman or such member.

11

(9) The Commission may, by regulation or otherwise regulate its own procedure and, with the consent of the Prime Minister, may confer powers or impose duties on any public officer or on any authority of the Government of Lesotho for the purposes of the discharge of its functions. (10) In the exercise of its functions under this Act the Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority. (11) The Commission may, subject to its rules of procedure, act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership or the absence of any member and its proceedings shall not be invalidated by the presence or participation of any person entitled to be present at or to participate in those proceedings: Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all members thereof. 17. (1) For the purposes of elections to the National Assembly Lesotho shall, in accordance with this section, be divided into 60 constituencies having such boundaries as may be prescribed by order made by the Constituency Delimination Commission. (2) All constituencies shall contain as nearly equal numbers of inhabitants of or above the age of 21 years as appears to the Commission to be reasonably practicable, but the Commission may depart from this principle to such extent as it considers expedient in order to take account of (a) the density of population, and in particular the need to ensure adequate representation of sparsely populated rural areas; (b) geographical features; (c) community of interest; and (d) the boundaries of existing administrative areas; Provided that the number of inhabitants of any constituency of or above the age of 21 years shall not exceed or fall short of the population quota by more than 10 per cent. (3) The Commission shall review the boundaries of the constituencies into which Lesotho is divided -

12

(a) in the case of its first review after the day on which the Act comes into operation, not less than four and not more than six years from that day; and (b) in the case of any subsequent review, not less than eight and not more than ten years from the date of completing its last review, and may, by order, alter the boundaries in accordance with this section to such extent as it considers desirable in the light of the review; Provided that whenever a census of the population has been held in pursuance of any law, the Commission may carry out such a review and make such an alteration to such extent as it may consider desirable in consequence of that census. (4) Every order made section shall be come into effect Parliament after by the Commission under this published in the Gazette and shall upon the next dissolution of it is made.

(5) For the purposes of this section, the number of inhabitants of any part of Lesotho of or above the age of 21 years shall be ascertained by reference to the latest census of the population held in pursuance of any law; Provided that if the Commissioner considers, by reason of the passage of time since the holding of the latest census or otherwise, that it is desirable so to do, it may instead or in addition have regard to any other available information which, in the opinion of the Commission, best indicates the number of those inhabitants. (6) In this section "the population quota" means the number obtained by dividing by 60 the number of the inhabitants of Lesotho of or above the age of 21 years. 18. (1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether (a) any person is validly nominated or designated as a Senator; (b) any person has been validly elected as a member of the National Assembly; (c) the seat in the National Assembly of any member thereof has become vacant; or (d) any person has been validly nominated to the National Assembly.

13

(2) An application to the High Court for the determination of any question under subsection (1)(a) may be by any Senator or by any person who is registered as an elector in elections to the National Assembly or by the Solicitor-General to the Government of Lesotho and, if it is made by a person other than the Solicitor-General, the Solicitor-General may intervene in the proceedings. (3) An application to the High Court for the determination of any question under subsection (1)(b) may be made by any person qualified to vote in the election to which the application relates or by the Solicitor-General to the Government of Lesotho and, if it is made by a person other than the Solicitor-General, the Solicitor-General may intervene and may then appear or be represented in the proceedings. (4) An application to the High Court for the determination of any question under subsection (1)(c) or (d) may be made by any member of the National Assembly or by any person registered as an elector in elections to the National Assembly or by the Solicitor-General to the Government of Lesotho, and if it is made by a person other than the SolicitorGeneral, the Solicitor-General may intervene and may then appear or be represented in the proceedings. (5) Parliament may make provision with respect to (a) the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon which any application may be made to the High Court for the determination of any question under this section; and (b) the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to any such application, but subject to any provision in that behalf made by Parliament under this subsection, the practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to any such application shall be regulated by rules made by the Chief Justice. (6) An appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeal with the leave of that court on any question under this section. (7) In the exercise of his functions under this section, the Solicitor-General to the Government of Lesotho shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.

14

PART 2 LEGISLATION AND PROCEDURE IN PARLIAMENT 19. Subject to this Act, Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good Government of Lesotho. 20. (1) A member of the House of Parliament shall, before taking his seat in that House, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance before the House, but a member may before taking and subscribing that oath take part in the election of the President or Speaker of the House. (2) A person elected as President or Vice-President or Speaker or Deputy Speaker of either House of Parliament shall, if he has not already taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance under subsection (1), take and subscribe that oath before entering upon the duties of his office. 21. There shall preside at any sitting of the Senate (a) the President of the Senate; or (b) in the absence of the President, the VicePresident; or (c) in the absence of the President and the VicePresident, such Senator as the Senate may elect for that purpose. 22. There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly (a) the Speaker; (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or (c) in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker such member of the Assembly as the Assembly may elect for that purpose. 23. (1) If objection is taken by any Senator who is present that there are present in the Senate besides the person presiding fewer than eight Senators and after such interval as may be prescribed in the order of procedure of the Senate, the person presiding ascertains that there are still fewer than eight Senators present, he shall adjourn the Senate. (2) If objection is taken by any member of the Assembly who is present that there are present in the Assembly besides the person presiding fewer than fifteen members of the Assembly and, after such

15

interval as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly, the person presiding ascertains that there are still fewer than fifteen members of the Assembly present, he shall thereupon adjourn the Assembly. 24. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any question proposed for decisions in either House of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting. (2) The person presiding in either House of Parliament shall, if he is a member thereof, have an original vote but he shall have no casting vote, and whenever there is an equ-ality of votes on any question, the motion before the House shall be deemed to have been negatived. (3) The rules of procedure of the House of Parliament may make provision under which a member who votes upon a question in which he has a direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted. 25. A Minister who is a member of the Assembly shall be entitled to attend all meetings of the Senate and to take part in all proceedings thereof but he shall not be regarded as a member of, or be entitled to vote on any question before the Senate, and a Minister shall be entitled to attend all meetings of the Assembly and to take part in all proceedings thereof and he shall be regarded as a member of, and be entitled to vote on any question before the Assembly. 26. (1) Any person who sits or votes in either House of Parliament knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is not entitled to do so is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 100 Maloti, or such other sum as may be prescribed by Parliament, for each day on which he so sits and votes in that House. (2) Any prosecution for an offence under this section shall be instituted in the High Court and shall not be so instituted except by the Director of Public Prosecutions. 27. (1) The power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised by bills passed by both Houses of Parliament or, in the cases mentioned in section 29 by the Assembly and assented to by the King. (2) A bill may originate only in the Assembly. (3) When a bill has been passed by the Assembly it shall be sent to the Senate who shall scrutinize and pass it to the King for Royal assent.

16

(4) The Senate may recommend amendment to a bill but such amendment shall not be binding on the Assembly who may order that the bill be passed for assent without the amendment. (5) Subject to subsection (6), when a bill has been presented to the King for assent in pursuance of subsection (3) he shall assent to it. (6) Where the King is required to assent to a bill and he withholds or otherwise fails to assent to it, the Prime Minister may assent to that bill and his act of assent shall be as valid as if it had been done by the King. (7) When a bill that has been duly passed is assented to in accordance with this Act it shall become law and the King shall thereupon cause it to be pubin the Gazette as a law. lished (8) No law made by Parliament shall come into operation until it has been published in the Gazette but Parliament may postpone the coming into operation of any such law and may make laws with retrospective effect. (9) All laws made by Parliament shall be styled "Acts of Parliament" and the words of enactment shall be "Enacted by the Parliament of Lesotho". 28. Except with the consent of the Cabinet signified by a Minister, Parliament shall not (a) proceed upon any bill including any amendment to a bill that, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of the following purposes (i) for the imposition of taxation otherwise than by reduction; (ii) for the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund of Lesotho or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction; for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund of Lesotho of any moneys not charged thereon or any increase in the amount of such payment, issue or withdrawal; or for the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Lesotho; or

(iii)

(iv)

(b) proceed upon any motion including any amendment to a motion the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to make provision for any of these purposes.

17

29. (1) When a bill that is passed by the Assembly and that is certified by the Speaker of the Assembly under subsection (2) as an Appropriation bill is sent to the Senate it shall forthwith be introduced in the Senate and shall be passed by the Senate without delay, and if it is not passed by the end of the day after the day on which it was sent to the Senate or if it is passed by the Senate with amendments to which the Assembly does not agree, the bill, with such amendment, if any, as may have been agreed to by both Houses, shall, unless the Assembly otherwise resolves, be presented to the King for assent. (2) When a bill that in the opinion of the Speaker of the Assembly is an Appropriation bill is sent to the Senate from the Assembly it shall bear a certificate of the Speaker of the Assembly that it is an Appropriation bill. (3) When a bill that is passed by the Assembly is certified by the Speaker of the Assembly under subsection (4) as a money bill other than an Appropriation Bill and, having been sent to the Senate at least thirty days before the end of the session, is not passed by the Senate with amendments to which the Assembly does not agree within thirty days after the bill was sent to the Senate, the bill, with such amendments, if any, as may have been agreed to by both Houses, shall, unless the Assembly otherwise resolves, be presented to the King for assent. (4) When a bill that in the opinion of the Speaker of the Assembly is a money bill other than an Appropriation bill is sent to the Senate from the Assembly it shall bear a certificate of the Speaker of the Assembly that it is a money bill other than an Appropriation bill. (5) When a bill that has been passed by the Assembly is not certified by the Speaker of the Assembly either under subsection (2) as an Appropriation bill or under subsection (4) as a money bill other than an Appropriation bill and, having been sent to the Senate at least ninety days before the end of the session, is not passed by the Senate within ninety days after it has been so sent or is passed by the Senate with amendments to which the Assembly does not agree within the said ninety days, the bill, with such amendments, if any, as may have been agreed to by both Houses, shall unless the Assembly otherwise resolves, be presented to the King for assent. (6) When a bill is presented to the King pursuant to this section for assent it shall bear a certificate by the Speaker of the Assembly that this section has been complied with.

18

(7) A certificate given by the Speaker of the Assembly under this section shall be conclusive for all purposes and shall not be questioned in any court. (8) Any function that, under this section is required to be exercised by the Speaker of the Assembly may, if he is absent or is for any other reason unable to exercise the functions of his office be exercised by the Deputy Speaker. (9) In this section "money bill" means a bill that contains only provisions dealing with (a) the imposition, repeal, remission, alteration or regulation of taxation; (b) the imposition of charges on the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund of Lesotho or the variation or repeal of any such charges; (c) the grant of money to the King or to any other person or authority or the variation or revocation of any such grant; (d) the appropriation, receipt, custody, investment, issue or audit of accounts of public money; (e) the raising or guarantee of any loan or the repayment thereof; or (f) subordinate matters incidental to any of those matters: Provided that the expressions "taxation", "public money" and "loan" do not include any taxation money or loan raised by local government authorities or other local bodies. 30. (1) Subject to this Act, a House of Parliament may regulate its own procedure and may in particular make rules for the orderly conduct of its own proceedings. (2) Each House of Parliament may act notwithstanding any vacancy not filled when the House first meets after any general election and the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present at or to participate in the proceedings of the House shall not invalidate those proceedings. (3) Parliament may, for the purpose of the orderly and effective discharge of the business of the two Houses, make provision for the powers, privileges and immunities of those Houses and the committee and the members thereof, including any person who is President or Vice-President or Speaker or Deputy Speaker of either House having been elected from among person who were not members thereof.

19

PART 3 SUMMONING, PROROGATION AND DISSOLUTION 31. (1) Each session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Lesotho and shall begin at such time, not being later than twelve months from the end of the preceeding session if Parliament has been prorogued or fourteen days from the holding of a general election of members of the National Assembly if Parliament has been dissolved as the King shall appoint. (2) Subject to subsection (1), the sittings of each House of Parliament shall be held at such time and place as that House, may, by its rules of procedure or otherwise, determine: Provided that the first sitting of each House of Parliament after Parliament has at any time been prorogued or dissolved shall begin at the same time as the first sitting of the other House. 32. (1) The King may at any time prorogue or dissolve Parliament. (2) Subject to subsection (3), Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date when two Houses of Parliament first meet after any dissolution and shall then stand dissolved. (3) At any time when Lesotho is at war Parliament may from time to time extend the period of five years specified in subsection (2) for not more than twelve months at a time: Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years. (4) In the exercise of his power to dissolve Parliament, the King shall act in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. Provided that (a) if the Prime Minister recommends a dissolution and the King considers that the government of Lesotho can be carried on without a dissolution and that a dissolution would not be in the interests of Lesotho, he may refuse to dissolve Parliament;

20

(b) if the Assembly passes a resolution of no confidence in the Government of Lesotho and the Prime Minister does not within three days thereafter either resign or advise a dissolution, the King may dissolve Parliament; and (c) if the office of Prime Minister is vacant and the King considers that there is no prospect of his being able within a reasonable time to find a person who is the leader of a political party that will command the support of a majority of the members of the Assembly, he may dissolve Parliament. (5) A resolution of no confidence in the Government of Lesotho shall not be effective for the purposes of subsection (4)(b) unless it proposes the name of a member of the Assembly for the King to appoint in the place of the Prime Minister. 33. (1) Subject to subsection (2) and (3) a general election of members of the Assembly shall be held at such time within three months after any dissolution of Parliament as the King may appoint. (2) If, when Parliament has been dissolved and before the holding of the general election of members of the Assembly the Prime Minister declares a public emergency pursuant to section 3 of the Emergency Powers Act, 1982, the Prime Minister shall advise the King that, owing to the existence of a public emergency in Lesotho or any part thereof, it would not be practicable to hold a general election within three months after dissolution. (3) Where, pursuant to the declaration of a public emergency a general election is not held as aforesaid, the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister may, by Proclamation, recall the Parliament that has been dissolved and the following provisions shall then have effect, that is to say, (a) Both Houses of Parliament may meet at such date, not later than 14 days after the date of the Proclamation, as may be specified therein;

(b) the Prime Minister shall, subject to sections 11(4) and 13(4), introduce or cause to be introduced in each House as soon as it meets a resolution declaring that a public emergency exists and, subject as aforesaid, no other business shall be transacted in either House until that resolution has been passed by both Houses: (c) if the resolution is passed by each House within five days after it has been introduced in that

21

House, a general election shall be held at such time within twelve months after the original dissolution of the Parliamentthat has been recalled as the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may appoint; and the Parliament that has been recalled shall be deemed to be Parliament for the time being and may meet and be kept in session accordingly until the date for the nomination of candidates in that general election, and unless previously dissolved, shall then stand dissolved; and (d) if the resolution is not passed by each House within five days after it has been introduced in that House, the Parliament that has been recalled shall then be again dissolved and a general election shall be held at such date of the Proclamation by which Parliament was so recalled as the King may appoint.
PART 4

THE EXECUTIVE 34. (1) The executive authority of Lesotho is vested in the King and, subject to this Act, may be exercised by him either directly or through officers or authorities of the Government of Lesotho. (2) Where the King is required by this Act or any other law to do any act in accordance with the advice of any person or authority and the Prime Minister is satisfied that the King has neglected or declined to do so, the Prime Minister may inform the King that it is the intention of the Prime Minister to do that act himself after the expiration of a period to be specified by the Prime Minister, and if at the expiration of that period the King has not done that act the Prime Minister may do the act himself and shall, at the earliest opportunity thereafter, report the matter to the Assembly; and any act so done by the Prime Minister shall be deemed to have been done by the King and to be his act. (3) Nothing in this section shall prevent Parliament from conferring functions on persons or authorities other than the King. 35. (1) There shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the King. (2) There shall be, in addition to the office of Prime Minister, such other offices of Ministers of the Government of Lesotho, not being less than seven in number as may be established by the Prime Minister

22

or, subject to any provision made by Parliament, the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (3) The King shall, (a) appoint as Prime Minister the person who, being the leader of the political party which commands the majority of the members of the Assembly, is nominated by such party for appointment to that office; and (b) acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint the other Ministers from among the Senators or from persons other than members of either House of Parliament: Provided that if occasion arises for making an appointment to the office of Prime Minister or other Minister while Parliament stands dissolved a person who is the leader of the political party which commands the majority of the members of the Assembly may be appointed to the office of Prime Minister and the King may, acting on the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint such person as he thinks fit to the office of Minister (4) The King may remove the Prime Minister from office (a) if a resolution of no confidence in the Government of Lesotho is passed by the Assembly and the Prime Minister does not within three days thereafter either resign form his office or advise a dissolution of Parliament; or (b) if at any time between the holding of a general election to the Assembly and the date on which the Assembly first meets thereafter, the King considers that in consequence of changes in the membership of the Assembly resulting from that election, the Prime Minister will no longer be the leader of the political party or coalition of political parties that will command the support of a majority of the members of the Assembly. (5) The office of the Prime Minister shall become vacant if (a) he dies; (b) he resigns; (c) he ceases to be the leader of the political party that nominated him for appointment as Prime Minister;

by

23

(d) he ceases to be a member of the Assembly otherwise than by reason of dissolution of Parliament; (e) when the Assembly first meets after a dissolution of Parliament, he is not then a member thereof; or (f) he is otherwise unable to discharge the functions of his office. (6) Where the office of the Prime Minister falls vacant in any of the circumstances specified in subsection (5), the King shall appoint a Prime Minister in accordance with subsection (3). (7) The office of a Minister other than the Prime Minister shall become vacant (a) if he ceases to be a member of either House of Parliament otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; (b) if the two Houses of Parliament first meet after a dissolution and he is not then either a member of the Assembly or such a Senator as is referred to in subsection (3); (c) if the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, so directs; (d) if the Prime Minister resigns from office within three days after the passage by the Assembly of a resolution of no confidence in the Government of Lesotho or is removed from office under subsection (4); or (e) on the appointment of any person to the office of the Prime Minister. (8) A resolution of no confidence in the Government of Lesotho shall not be effective for the purposes of subsections (4)(a) and (7)(d) unless it proposes the name of a member of the Assembly for the King to appoint in the place of the Prime Minister. 36. (1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers consisting of the Prime Minister and the other Ministers. (2) The function of the Cabinet shall be to advise the King in the government of Lesotho, and the Cabinet shall be collectively responsible to the two Houses of Parliament for any advice given to the King by or under the general authority of the Cabinet and for all things done by or under the authority of any Minister in the execution of his office.

24

(3) Subsection (2) shall not apply in relation to (a) the appointment and removal from office of a Minister or Minister of State, the assignment of responsibility to any Minister under section 37 or the authorisation of another Minister under section 38 to exercise the functions of the Prime Minister during the latter's absence or illness; or (b) the dissolution of Parliament. 37. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister may, by directions in writing, assign to the Prime Minister or any other Minister or Minister of State responsibility for any business of the Government of Lesotho, including the administration of any department of Government. (2) The authority to exercise any power or discharge any duty that is conferred or imposed by this Act or any other law on the King or on any other person or authority, not being the Minister concerned, shall not be conferred or imposed upon any Minister under this section. 38. (1) Whenever the Prime Minister is absent from Lesotho or is by reason of illness unable to exercise the functions conferred on him by this Act, those functions, other than the functions conferred by this Section, shall be exercised by such other Minister as the King may authorise in that behalf. (2) A Minister who is authorised by the King pursuant to subsection (1) to exercise the functions conferred on the Prime Minister by this Act may exercise those functions until his authority is revoked by the King. (3) The powers of the King under this Act shall be exercised by him in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. 39. A Minister shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed. 40. Subject to this Act and notwithstanding any other law, the King may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, constitute offices for Lesotho, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment.

25

41. (1) The King may (a) grant to any person convicted of any offence under the law of Lesotho a pardon either free or subject to lawful conditions; (b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, or the execution of any punishment imposed on any person for such an offence; (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment imposed on any person for such an offence; and (d) remit the whole or part of any punishment imposed on any person for such an offence or any penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to the King on account of such an offence. (2) The powers of the King under subsection (1) shall be exercised by him acting in accordance with the advice of the Pardons Committee. (3) The powers conferred upon the King by subsection (1) shall not extend to any trial before or any conviction in, or any sentence, penalty or forfeiture imposed by, any court-martial, constituted by or under any law that was enacted by any legislature in Lesotho and that is applicable only to naval, military or air forces raised under any such law. 42. (1) There shall be a Pardons Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy which shall consist of a chairman and two other members appointed by the King acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission from among persons who are not public officers or members of either House of Parliament. (2) The office of chairman or of any other member of the Committee appointed under subsection (1) shall become vacant, (a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his appointment; (b) if the King, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, so directs; or (c) if any circumstances arise that if he were not a member of the Committee, would cause him to be disqualified to be appointed as such, under subsection (1).

26

(3) The Committee may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership and its proceedings shall not be invalidated by the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate in those proceedings. (4) Subject to this section the Committee may regulate its own procedure. 43. (1) The Lesotho Order, 1973, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal effected by subsection (1), (a) any statutory instrument made under the Order repealed by this Act and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue in force and be deemed to have been made under this Act until it is revoked; and (b) any orders, directions, appointments and other acts lawfully made under the Order repealed by this Act in force immediately before the coming into force of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue to have effect until revoked.

27

