CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

LITHUANIA
by GISBERT H. FLANZ

RELEASE 92-1 Issued January 1992

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

This work contains British Crown Copyright Material which is reproduced by permission of the Controller of Her Britannic Majesty's Stationery Office. This work contains material © Copyright by the Government Printer, Australian Government Publishing Service, and is reproduced with permission.

Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4 © Copyright 1992 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

12. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE LITHUANIAN REPUBLIC, AUGUST 6, 1922
(Official text reprinted in Current History, Vol. XVII, pp. 480-485, December, 1922)
PREAMBLE

In the name of Almighty God, the Lithuanian Nation, gratefully mindful of the glorious deeds of her sons and their noble sacrifices made to free their fatherland, having reconstituted her independent State, and desiring to establish for her independent life a firm democratic base, to create conditions for the establishment of right and justice, and to assure to all her citizens equality, freedom and welfare, and proper State protection for the work and morals of her people, through her duly authorized representatives formally convened as the Constituent Assembly, on the first day of August, 1922, adopted this the Constitution of the State of Lithuania.

I. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
Section 1. The State of Lithuania is an independent democratic Republic. The sovereign Government , of the State shall be vested in the people. Section 2. The governmental functions of the State shall be performed by the Legislative, the Executive and the Judicial Departments. Section 3. In the State of Lithuania no law which is contrary to the Constitution shall have force. Section 4. The boundaries of the territory of Lithuania can be changed only in the manner prescribed by law. Section 5. The law shall determine the administrative divisions of the territory of Lithuania. For the purpose of special local needs of inhabitants, autonomous units, whose boundaries and rights shall be fixed by law, may be formed from separate districts of Lithuania. Section 6. The Lithuanian language shall be the language of the State. The use of local languages shall be determined by law. Section 7. The State colors shall be yellow, green and red. The State coat-of-arms shall be a white knight on a red background.

II. LITHUANIAN CITIZENS AND THEIR RIGHTS

Section 8. Citizenship may be acquired and revoked in accordance with the citizenship laws. Citizens of foreign States may become citizens of Lithuania provided they shall have resided in Lithuania not less than ten years. Section 9. No person can be at the same time a citizen of Lithuania and a citizen of any other State. Section 10. All citizens of Lithuania, men and women, are equal before the law. No special privileges can be given to, nor shall the rights of citizens be restricted because of, race, creed, or nationality. Section 11. The person of a citizen shall be inviolable. A citizen may be brought before justice only in such cases and in the manner prescribed by law. A citizen may be arrested or his liberty restricted only in case he shall be found committing an offense, or by the decision of a judicial organ of the Government. The cause of arrest must be made known to such citizen and a copy of the indictment given him within forty-eight hours. No such indictment having been given, the person so placed under arrest shall be given his freedom. Section 12. The home of a citizen shall be inviolable. Entry into a home and the making of a search therein shall be permitted only in such cases and in the manner prescribed by law. Section 13. Citizens shall have the right of freedom of religious belief and conscience. The belonging to any religion or the profession of one's convictions shall not form the basis for justification of an offense or for refusing to perform public duties. Section 14. Secrecy of correspondence and communication by post, telephone and telegraph shall be guaranteed to citizens. Exception can be made only in cases provided by law. Section 15. Freedom of speech and of the press shall be guaranteed to the citizens. This freedom can be restricted only in such cases as is provided by law whenever it shall be necessary to protect the morals and the order of the State. Section 16. The right of citizens to freedom of assembly without arms and without disturbance of the public peace, in the manner prescribed by law, shall be recognized. Section 17. Freedom to form societies and associations shall be guaranteed to the citizens provided the purpose thereof and the methods of putting them into effect shall not be contrary to the penal laws. Section 18. Any citizen who shall have been aggrieved by an official in the performance of his duties shall have the right, in the manner prescribed by law, to have such official brought

before a court of justice without first obtaining the permission or consent of his superiors, and to seek damage. Section 19. Each citizen shall have the right of petition to the Seimas. Section 20. Citizens shall have the right of initiative in the making of laws. Twenty-five thousand citizens, possessing the right to elect representatives to the Seimas, may submit their proposals to the Seimas in the manner prescribed by law, and the Seimas shall be obliged to consider these proposals. Section 21. The right of property shall be protected. The property of citizens may be condemned, in the manner prescribed by law, only in the event of the public need.
III. THE SEIMAS

Section 22. The Seimas shall be composed of the representatives of the people. Section 23. Representatives shall be elected by a general, equal, direct and secret ballot based upon a proportional election system. The laws shall determine the number of representatives and the manner of conducting elections. Section 24. All qualified Lithuanian citizens, men and women, not less than 21 years of age, shall have the right to elect representatives to the Seimas, and those not less than 24 years of age to be elected. Section 25. The Seimas shall be elected for three years. Should the State be at war, or should there be martial law in more than half of its territory, the President of the Republic may, by a special act, extend the term of the Seimas beyond the term for which it shall have been elected. Such act of the President of the Republic must be confirmed by the Seimas. Section 26. The election of a new Seimas must take place before the expiration of the term of the old Seimas. The President of the Republic shall fix the date for the election of the new Seimas. The term of the new Seimas shall commence upon the expiration of the term of the. old Seimas. The Seimas shall convene not later than thirty days after its election. The President of the Republic shall designate the day for the convening of the Seimas. Section 27. The Seimas shall make the laws. The manner of publication of the laws, and the time when they shall become effective, shall be determined by a separate law. Section 28. The Seimas shall supervise the work of the Executive Government, propounding questions and, interpellations, and conducting investigations.

Section 29. The State budget and its administration shall be confirmed by the Seimas. Section 30. The following State agreements and treaties entered into by the Government shall be confirmed by the Seimas : Peace treaties, agreements for the acquisition, abandonment or conveyance of territory by the State, commercial treaties with other States, foreign loans, agreements which wholly or partially abolish or amend existing laws, agreements which impose duties on Lithuanian citizens, agreements which fix direct or indirect monopoly or condemnation, rights. Section 31. The Seimas shall have the power to declare and end war. Acts of war may be commenced without the Seimas in case an enemy country shall have declared war against Lithuania, or in case the enemy, without declaration of war, shall have invaded the borders of Lithuania. Section 32. In case of war, armed uprising and other disturbances dangerous to the peace of the State, the President of the Republic, having first made a proposal to the Cabinet of Ministers, may declare the existence of a state of war or other unusual state of affairs in the entire State or in certain parts thereof, temporarily place in abeyance the constitutional rights of citizens (Sections 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17), and use means to prevent or remove such danger, even using armed force, and at the same time he shall bring all of these matters to the attention of the Seimas, which shall either confirm or reject such act of the Executive. Section 33. The Schuss shall elect its President and other members of the presidium. The Seimas shall adopt its own rules which shall have the force of law. Section 34. The sessions of the Seimas shall be called in the manner determined by the Seimas. If the President of the Republic or one-fourth of the number of its representatives shall so request, the President of the Seimas shall call the Seimas into session. Section 35. Each representative, upon assuming office, shall make oath or solemnly affirm that he will be loyal to the Republic of Lithuania, protect its laws and conscientiously carry out his powers and fulfill his duties as representative of the people. Any representative who shall decline to make oath or make affirmation, or who shall make oath or affirm conditionally, shall lose his powers as a representative. Section 36. Representatives shall be guided only by their own conscience, and they shall not be restricted by any mandates whatsoever. Section 37. Representatives shall not be punished by courts

of justice for speeches made in the course of their duties, nevertheless they may be made to answer in the ordinary manner for injury to the reputation of another. Section 38. The person of a representative shall be inviolable. A representative can be arrested only with the consent of the Seimas, except in cases where the representative is found in the place where the offense is being committed. Notice of the arrest of a representative and the cause for such arrest in such case shall be given not later than forty-eight hours to the President of the Seimas, who shall announce the same to the Seimas at its next session. The liberty of such representative may be restored by the Seimas. Section 39. Representatives shall have the right of free transportation on all the railroads of Lithuania. The compensation which representatives shall receive for the performance of their duties shall be determined by law.
IV. EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY

Section 40. The executive authority shall be vested in the President of the Republic and the Cabinet of Ministers. Section 41. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the Seimas. The President of the Republic shall be elected by secret ballot of the absolute majority of the representatives. If, after taking two ballots, none of the candidates shall have received the absolute majority of the votes of the representatives, the President of the Republic shall then be elected from the two candidates who shall have received the most votes, and he shall be deemed elected President who shall have obtained the more votes. In case both candidates shall have obtained an equal number of votes, the senior in years shall be deemed elected. Section 42. The President of the Republic, upon assuming office, shall make oath or solemnly affirm, with all his power, to look after the welfare of the Republic and the people, protect the Constitution and laws, and conscientiously fulfill his duty and be just equally to all. Section 43. Any Lithuanian citizen who shall be eligible for election as a representative to the Seimas, and who shall not be under 35 years of age, may be elected as President of the Republic. Section 44. The President of the Republic shall be elected for three years. The President of the Republic shall remain in office until the election of his successor. The President of the Republic may be dismissed from office by a two-thirds vote of all the representatives of the Seimas.

The same person shall not be elected President of the Republic for more than two three-year terms in succession. Section 45. In case the President of the Republic shall leave the country, or in case of sickness or temporary disability, his duties shall devolve upon the President of the Seimas. In case the President of the Republic shall resign from office, die or become too ill to perform the duties of his office, another President shall be elected to complete the unexpired term. Section 46. The President of the Republic shall represent the Republic, accredit emissaries and accept the envoys of foreign countries. Section 47. The President of the Republic shall appoint the Prime Minister, authorize him to form the Cabinet of Ministers, confirm the same, and accept the resignation of the Cabinet of • Ministers. Section 48. The President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss the State Controller. The State Controller shall be responsible to the Seimas, and shall resign upon the vote of want of confidence by the Seimas. Section 49. The President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss officials of the republic whose appointment and dismissal shall be vested in him by law. Section 50. The President of the Republic shall publish the laws. The laws adopted by the Seimas shall be published by the President of the Republic within thirty-one days, to be calculated from the day on which the law was submitted to him. The President of the Republic shall have the right, within twenty-one days to be calculated from the day on which the laws shall have been submitted, to return to the Seimas, with his remarks, the law adopted by the Seimas, for second consideration. If the Seimas shall then pass the same law by an absolute majority of the votes of all of the representatives, the President of the Republic must publish it. If the Seimas by a two-thirds vote of all of the representatives shall recognize the publication of a law as urgent, the President of the Republic shall not have the right to return it to the Seimas for second consideration.. Section 51. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon. The President of the Republic may pardon only with the consent of the Seimas the offenses of Ministers who shall have been sentenced for abuse of office. Section 52. The President of the Republic shall have the right to dissolve the Seimas. Upon the meeting of a new Seimas, the President of the Republic shall be re-elected.

The election of a new Seimas must take place not later than sixty days after the dissolution of the Seimas. The term of the new Seimas shall commence from the day of election. Section 53. The President of the Republic is the Commanderin-Chief of all armed forces of the Republic. The Cabinet of Ministers and the proper Ministers shall be responsible to the Seimas for the control and administration of the armed forces of the Republic. In time of war, upon 'the proposal of the Cabinet of Ministers, the President of the Republic shall appoint the chief military commander. Section 54. The President of the Republic shall have the right to participate in the sessions of the Cabinet of Ministers, and preside over them, and to require from the Cabinet of Ministers or individual Ministers information in writing relating to their office. Section 55. All the acts of the President of the Republic, in order to have force, must have the signature of the Prime Minister or the proper Minister. Responsibility for the act shall rest upon the Minister who shall have signed it. Section 56. The Cabinet of Ministers shall consist of the Prime Minister and other Ministers. The number of Ministers and their duties shall be determined by law. Section 57. The Prime Minister shall submit the names of the Ministers selected by him to the President of the Republic for approval. The President of the Republic shall have the power to dismiss the Ministers. Section 58. Upon assuming office, the Ministers shall make oath or solemnly affirm that they will impartially and conscientiously perform the duties of their office and uphold the Constitution and laws. Section 59. The Cabinet of Ministers shall be responsible as a whole to the Seimas for the common policies of the Government, and each individual Minister shall be separately responsible for the work assigned to him in the administration of his special department. The Ministers must have the confidence of the Seimas. If the Seimas shall directly declare want of confidence in them, the Cabinet of Ministers and each Minister must resign. Section 60. The Cabinet of Ministers shall formulate and submit to the Seimas proposed laws. Ministers who shall remain in the minority in passing upon a proposed law by the Cabinet of Ministers shall have the right to present, in writing, to the Seimas their minority view in respect thereto, together with the proposal submitted by the Cabinet of Ministers.

Section 61. The Cabinet of Ministers shall uphold the Constitution and administer the laws, conduct the internal and foreign policies and protect the inviolability of the territory and the internal order of the Republic. Section 62. The State Controller shall have the right to participate in an advisory capacity in the sessions of the Cabinet of Ministers. Section 63. The Seimas alone, by the absolute majority of votes of all the representatives, shall have the right to commence criminal action against the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister or any Minister for abuse of office or treason. Such instituted action shall be passed upon by the Supreme Court of Lithuania.
V. THE JUDICIARY

Section 64. The Judicial Department shall render decisions in the name of the Republic in accordance with the laws. Section 65. No decision of a court shall be modified or reversed, except by judicial authority in the manner prescribed by law. Amnesty may be granted in the manner provided by law. Section 66. The organization, competence and jurisdiction of the court shall be fixed by law. Section 67. There shall be one Supreme Court for the entire territory of the Republic. Section 68. The courts shall pass upon the legality of acts proceeding from the administration. Section 69. All citizens are equal before the courts. Special courts shall pass judgement upon soldiers for offenses committed while in the service. Special courts may be established only in time of war or while a state of war shall exist.
VI. LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT

Section 70. The right of self-government shall be guaranteed to communities and cities within the limits of law. General, equal, direct and secret ballot shall be made the basis for the election of local self-government bodies. Section 71. The organs of self-government shall look after the needs of the local government of the State in the manner prescribed by law. They shall have the right to impose taxes for the needs of local self-government, in accordance with special tax laws provided for that purpose.

Section 72. The administration shall be charged with seeing that the organs of self-government shall execute their duties, and that their work shall not be contrary to the laws of the State.. The courts shall finally pass upon any disputes arising between local self-governments and the administration.

VII. RIGHTS OF NATIONAL MINORITIES Section 73. National , minorities of citizens, which shall form an appreciable part of the citizenry, shall have the right, within the limits of the law, to administer autonomously the affairs of their national culture—public education, charity, mutual aid— and to elect necessary bodies to conduct these affairs in the manner prescribed by law. Section 74. The national minorities set forth in Section 73 shall have the right, in accordance with special laws for that purpose, to impose upon their members dues for needs of national culture, and they shall have the benefit of the proper portion of the sums set aside by the State and the local selfgovernment for matters of education and charity, provided the sums allowed by the common State and self-government institutions shall not suffice for these needs.. VIII. DEFENSE OF THE REPUBLIC Section 75. All the citizens of the Republic shall participate in the defense of the territory in the manner prescribed by law. Section 76. For the defense of the Republic, armed forces shall be, organized. The organization of armed forces, the means of mobilization, the nature and term of service, shall be fixed by law. Section 77. The care and protection of the State shall be guaranteed to the families of soldiers and to the soldiers themselves who shall lose their health or life in line of duty.

IX.

EDUCATION

Section 78. The education of their children shall constitute the supreme right and natural duty of the parents. Section 79. Schools may be established by the State, local self-governments, public organizations and individuals. All schools shall be under State supervision in the manner prescribed by law.

Section 80. Religious education in schools shall be compulsory, with the exception of schools established for children whose parents do not belong to any religious organization. Religion shall be taught in accordance with the requirements of those religious organizations to which the students belong. Section 81. Primary education shall be compulsory. The manner and time of establishment of compulsory primary education shall be fixed by law. Primary education in schools maintained by the State and local self-governments shall be free. Section 82. Private religious schools, provided they comply with the minimum of the program fixed by law, shall receive from the State Treasury for the purposes of education that part of the budget appropriation which shall correspond to the number of Lithuanian citizens and students belonging to such religion which shall conduct such schools and education.
X. MATTERS OF RELIGION AND CULT

Section 83. The State recognizes the equal right of all religious organizations existing in Lithuania to administer their affairs in accordance with the requirements of their canons or statutes, to freely publish their religious doctrines and to practice their cult ceremonies, to establish and manage their cult buildings, schools, educational and charitable institutions, to establish convents, religious congregations and fraternities, to impose upon their members dues for the needs of the religious organizations, and to acquire and manage personal and real property. Religious organizations shall possess the rights of legal entities in the State. Spiritual advisers are relieved from military obligations. Section 84. The State shall recognize newly formed religious organizations, provided their beliefs and moral teachings and statutes shall not be contrary to the public good and morals. The formation of such organizations and their existence shall be determined by law. Section 85. Birth, marriage or death certificates, made by the faithful before their spiritual advisers, if they comply with the form determined by law, shall have legal force in Lithuania, and citizens shall not be compelled to repeat such acts in another institution. Section 86. The laws shall protect Sundays and other holidays recognized by the State as days of rest and spiritual need. Section 87. Soldiers shall be granted leave to attend to their religious duties. Persons in hospitals, jails and other public institutions shall be given the opportunity to attend to their religious duties.

XI. THE BASIS OF THE ECONOMIC POLICY OF THE STATE

Section 88. The freedom of husbandry and initiative in all the departments of economy shall be guaranteed to each citizen. This freedom can be restricted only by law in cases of public necessity. The economic life shall be so regulated that each citizen shall have work. Section 89. The laws shall guarantee special self-government to the separate departments of economy. There shall be established by law bureaus of agriculture, commerce and industry, labor and other bureaus, whose cooperation with the State Government for the standardization of the economic life shall be prescribed by law. Section 90. The principle of private ownership shall be made the basis for the management of land. To the State shall be reserved the right to regulate the management of land in such a manner that there shall be established suitable conditions for the proper cultivation of agricultural lands, and especially for the development of the smaller and average farms. Estates shall be parceled in the manner prescribed by law.

XII.

STATE FINANCES

Section 91. The imposition of taxes on the inhabitants, appropriation of money from the State Treasury, the making of internal loans or the issuance of paper money, can be done only in the manner provided by law. Section 92. The State Controller shall supervise the accountability and responsibility of revenues, expenditures and debts of the Government. Section 93. The State Controller shall prepare each year a report on the functioning of the State budget for the past year and submit the same to the Seimas not later than the fifteenth day of October. Section 94. The Cabinet of Ministers shall prepare an estimate of all the receipts and expenditures of the State for the ensuing year and submit the same to the Seimas for confirmation not later than the fifteenth day of October. Section 95. The estimate of State revenues and expenditures shall be fixed by law for each year separately before the beginning of the budget year. Section 96. The budget year shall commence on the first day of January and shall end on the last day of December.

XIII.

SOCIAL PROTECTION

Section 97. The working power of the people shall be guarded and protected by special laws. The State shall protect by separate laws a workman while ill, during old age, in cases of misfortune and when unemployed. Section 98. The basis of the family life shall be motherhood. Equality of right for both sexes shall be a fundamental principle of the home. The social welfare and family health shall be protected and maintained by special laws. Maternity shall be under the special protection of the State. Section 99. Public morals and health shall be protected by special laws. Section 100. All classes of schools shall be equally accessible to all. Section 101. For the purpose of maintaining temperance, all the citizens of the community shall have the right to decide whether establishments for the sale of intoxicating liquors shall be maintained within their residential district.
XIV. AMENDMENT OR SUPPLEMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION

Section 102. The Seimas, the Executive Department, or 50,000 citizens having the right to elect to the Seimas, shall have the right to propose an amendment or supplement to the Constitution. Section 103. A proposed amendment or supplement to the Constitution shall be adopted by a vote of three-fifths of all the representatives of the Seimas. An amendment or supplement to the Constitution, adopted by the Seimas, shall be submitted for decision to the people by a general vote, provided that within three months from the date of its publication the President of the Republic, or one-fourth of the number of representatives, or 50,000 citizens having the right to elect to the Seimas, shall require the same. A constitutional amendment or supplement adopted by the Seimas, if it shall not be submitted in accordance with such requirements, shall become effective after three months from the date of publication. A constitutional amendment or supplement, adopted by the Seimas, shall be regarded as rejected by the people if not less than half of all the citizens having the right to vote shall have participated in the voting, and not less than half of the citizens having participated in the voting shall have voted against such amendment or supplement. A constitutional amendment or supplement which shall be adopted by the Seimas by a vote of four-fifths of all the representatives shall acquire force from the date of publication.

XV. INTRODUCTORY REGULATIONS Section 104. Upon the publication of this Constitution, the Constituent Assembly shall remain in place of the Seimas until the election of the Seimas. The first term of the Seimas shall commence from the date of its election. The date of election of the first Seimas shall be fixed by the President of the Republic, having in view that it shall not be later than three months from the date of publication of the Constitution. Section 105. The President of the Constituent Assembly shall act as President of the republic until the President of the republic shall be elected. From the date upon which the Constitution takes effect he shall have all the rights given in the Constitution to the President of the Republic. Section 106. All the laws in force in Lithuania up to the date of publication of this Constitution, which are not contrary to the Constitution, and which shall not be abolished or amended by this Constitution in the manner provided, shall remain in force. Section 107. The Provisional Constitution of the Lithuanian State ceases to be in force. Section 108. This Constitution of the Lithuanian State becomes of full force and effect from the date of its publication. Signed: A. STULGINSKIS, Acting President of the Republic, President of the Constituent Assembly. GALVANAUSKAS, Prime Minister. J. KAROBLIS, Minister of Justice. P. JUODAKIS, Minister of Education. J. OLEKA, Minister of the Interior. TOMASEVICIUS, Acting Minister of Communications. B. SISMAKA, Acting Minister of White Russian D. Affairs. V. JURGUTIS, Minister of Foreign Affairs. J. Dousivieus, Minister of Finance, Commerce and Industry. J. ALEKEA, Minister of Agriculture and State Property. SLIZYS, Minister of Defense. M. SOLOVEICIKAS, Minister of Jewish Affairs. Kaunas, August 6, 1922.

