BRITISH AND FOREIGN

STATE PAPERS
WITH WHICH IS INCORPORATED HERTSLET'S COMMERCIAL TREATIES

19 28 Part I
VOL. CXXVIII

Compiled and Edited in the Librarian's Department of the Foreign Office Crown Copyright Reserved

•=
LONDON PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE To be purchased directly from 11.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses Adastral House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2; 120, George Street, Edinburgh 2 York Street, Manchester ; x, St. Audrew's Crescent, Cardiff 15, Donegan Square West, Belfast or through any Bookseller 1932

CONSTITUTION

of the Republic of Lithuania.— May 15, 1928.

(Translation.)(1) THE President of the Republic, in agreement with the entire Cabinet [Here follow the names.] Assembled in solemn session on the 15th May, 1928, the military holiday, for the purpose of gratefully commemorating the achievements of the Lithuanian nation during the past decade, especially the deeds of her best sons, who defended with arms the independence of Lithuania and who are still mounting guard, resolved to promulgate the following constitution of the State of Lithuania :— I.—General Provisions. 1. The Lithuanian State is an independent democratic Republic. The sovereign power of the Republic belongs to the nation. 2. The powers of the State are exercised by the Seimas, the Government and the law courts. 3. No law contrary to the constitution has any validity in the State of Lithuania. (1)
Prepared by the Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

LITHUANIA.	

853

4. The area of Lithuania is composed of territories the boundaries of which are fixed in international treaties already concluded. The territory may be extended by legislation; it can be diminished only by a referendum. 5. The capital of Lithuania is Vilna. The capital, seat of Government, may be temporarily transferred elsewhere by a special law. 6. The right of autonomous administration may be granted to separate districts of Lithuania by a special law. The autonomous rights of each such district must be determined in the statute accorded to it by a special law. The Diet of an autonomous district may not promulgate laws which affect the affairs of other districts or of the whole of the Lithuanian State, or are contrary to its laws. 7. The Lithuanian language is the State language. The law regulates the use of local languages. 8. The State colours are yellow, green and red. The State arms consist of a white knight on a red background. II.—Lithuanian Citizens and their Rights. 9. The acquisition and the deprivation of the right of citizenship are based upon a corresponding law of citizenship. The citizen of an alien State may be admitted to Lithuanian citizenship if he has resided in Lithuania no less than 10 years. Full political rights are granted to children of naturalised citizens who are born Lithuanian citizens. Naturalised citizens themselves enjoy only active political rights. 10. Nobody can be simultaneously a citizen of Lithuania and of any other State. A citizen of Lithuania who has acquired the citizenship of an American State does not, however, lose Lithuanian citizenship provided he complies with certain legally prescribed duties. 11. All Lithuanian citizens, men and women, are equal before the law. Special privileges may not be accorded a citizen nor may his rights be reduced on account of his origin, religion or nationality. 12. The person of the citizen is inviolable. A citizen can be arraigned only in cases and according to the procedure provided by law. The citizen may be arrested or his freedom restricted only if discovered in flagrante delicto or by the warrant of an organ of a Government court. The warrant for his arrest must be delivered to the arrested citizen not later than within 48 hours, and the grounds for the arrest indicated. An arrested person not having received this warrant is immediately released.

854 .	 13.

LITHUANIA

A citizen's house is inviolable. Entry into a house and the carrying out of a domiciliary search therein are possible only in cases and according to the procedure' provided by law. 14. The citizen enjoys freedom of conscience and religion.	 	 Adherence to any faith or confession of belief cannot be the ground for justifying crime or abstaining from' public obligations. 15. The secrecy' of correspondence and communication by post,' telephone and telegraph is guaranteed' to citizens. It can be withdrawn in cases provided by law. 16. Freedom of speech and the' press is guaranteed' to citizens. This freedom can be restricted only in cases provided by law, when it is essential to protect morality or State order. 17. The liberty of citizens - to hold meetings without arms and without disturbance of public tranquillity;' accordance with procedure provided by law, is recognised. 18. The ,freedom of association and union is guaranteed to citizens, if their aims and proceedings are not contrary. to the penal laws: ' ' 19. Juridical persons may be instituted for confessional and cultural purposes in the legally prescribed form in accordance with public law. 20. A citizen injured by an official who is full-filling his duties has the right, in accordance with the procedure provided by law, to -summon him in court, without the permission or consent of his superiors, and seek compensation for damages; 21, Every' citizen has the right of petition to the Seimas. 22. Citizens have the right to initiate laws. 25,000 citizens possessing' the franchise for the Seimas may, in accordance with the procedure provided by law, submit a bill to the Seimas, which the Seimas must consider. 23. The right of property is safeguarded. The property of citizens may be expropriated by process of law only on the ground of public necessity III.—The Seimas. '24. The Seimas is composed of representatives of the people. The' number of deputies is fixed by law. 25. Deputies are elected , by universal, equal, direct and secret ballot, according to the system of proportional repre-. sentation. The electoral procedure is determined by law. 26. All fully qualified Lithuanian citizens, men and

LITHUANIA.	

855

women, not less than 24 years of age, have the right to vote in elections for the Seimas, and those not less than 30 years of age are eligible for election. 27. The Seimas is elected for a term of 5 years. - 28. On the expiration of the term of the Seimas or on its dissolution, elections for the new Seimas must take place not later than within 6 months. The President of the Republic announces the day of the elections for the new Seimas.	 This period of 6 months is not applicable to the elections to the first Seimas. The Seimas assembles annually for two ordinary sessions: on the 1st Tuesday of February and the 1st Tuesday of September. The President of- the Republic, or the Prime Minister on his behalf, opens the first meeting of each ordinary session. An ordinary session does not last	 longer than 3 months. 29. The Seimas votes the laws. A special law determines the procedure for the promulgation of laws and the time of their coming into force. 30. The Seimas supervises the labours of the Government, putting questions and interpellations to it. 31. The State budget and its fulfilment require the ratification of the Seimas. 32. If international treaties concluded by Lithuania affect matters which are regulated by legislation, the consent of the Seimas is required for their ratification. 33. The consent of the Seimas is necessary to begin or terminate wars. Hostilities can be started without the intervention of the Seimas if the enemy country has declared war or without a declaration of war has crossed the Lithuanian frontier. 34. In case of war, armed rising or other dangerous disturbance in the State, the President of the Republic, on the proposal of the Cabinet of Ministers, may introduce throughout the State or in certain parts thereof a state of siege or other extraordinary position, temporarily restrict the constitutional guarantees of citizens' rights (articles 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18) and take steps to stay or avert the danger, employing even armed force. 35. The Seimas elects its chairman and other members of the presidium. The Seimas adopts its standing orders, which have the force of law. 36. An extraordinary session of the Seimas may be convoked by the President, either at his own discretion or upon a written request of three-fifths of the members of the Seimas, stating the reasons for the convocation. 37. Every deputy, on entering upon his duties, swears

856	

LITHUANIA.

or solemnly undertakes to be faithful to the Lithuanian' Republic, to defend its laws and conscientiously to exercise the powers of a deputy of the people. A deputy who refuses to swear or undertake, or who swears or undertakes conditionally, forfeits the authority of a deputy. 38. Deputies are guided only by their •conscience and cannot be constrained by any mandates. 39. A deputy cannot be .punished by the courts on account of his speeches delivered in the discharge of his duties; nevertheless, for an insult to honour, he may be called to account through ordinary process of law. 40. A deputy's' person inviolable. A: deputy can be arrested only with the permission of the Seimas, with the exception of •those cases when the deputy' is discovered in fiagrante delicto. The arrest and cause of arrest of a deputy in such cases. must be reported to the chairman of the Seimas not later than- within 48 hours, and the chairman of the Seimas reports thereon to the Seimas at its next sitting. 41. A deputy, may not engage in any business which is not compatible with his direct duties. A special law will define what business is compatible and incompatible with the duties of a deputy. Deputies, for their work in the Seimas, receive a remuneration, which is fixed by law..

42. The President of the Republic and the Cabinet constitute the Government. 43. The President of the Republic is elected by special representatives of the nation for a term of 7 years. The method and procedure of election are determined by law. 44. The President of the Republic, on entering upon his duties, swears that he will devote all his efforts to the welfare of the. Republic and the nation, defend the laws, conscientiously discharge his duties, and be equally just to all. 45. Any Lithuanian citizen who is eligible for election as a deputy to the Seimas, and is not less than 40 years old, may be elected President of the Republic. 46. The President of the Republic remains in office until a new President is elected. The same person may be re-elected President. 47. In case of absence beyond the borders of the State, illness, retirement or death of the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister acts in his place. When the

LITHUANIA.	

857

President of the Republic retires or dies, a new President is elected. 48. The President of the Republic represents the Republic, accredits Lithuanian envoys, receives the envoys of foreign States, and ratifies treaties concluded with other countries. 49. The President of the Republic appoints the Prime Minister and the other Ministers and the State Comptroller, who are presented by the Prime Minister, and dismisses the entire Cabinet as well as individual Ministers and the State Comptroller. 50 The President of the Republic appoints and dismisses army officers of all ranks and those officials of the Republic whose appointment and dismissal are vested in him by law. 51. The President of the Republic proclaims laws. Laws passed by the Seimas are proclaimed by the President of the Republic within 1 month counting from the day of his receipt of the law. The President of the Republic has the right, within 1 month, reckoning from the day of receipt of the law, to return to the Seimas the law adopted by the latter, with his observations, for reconsideration. If, thereafter, on reconsideration, the Seimas adopts the same law by a twothirds majority of votes of all the deputies, the President of the Republic is bound to promulgate the law. 52. The President of the Republic has the right of pardon, and, in cases determined by law, of restoring rights entirely or partially forfeited by sentence of a court of law. 53. The President of the Republic has the right to dissolve the Seimas. During the time when there is no Seimas, or during recesses, the President of the Republic may promulgate laws which have legal validity until the Seimas changes them. In cases when there is no Seimas, or when an extraordinary session of the Seimas cannot be convoked, the President of the Republic exercises the rights of the Seimas as defined in articles 31, 32 and 64. 54. A State Council shall be established for the codification of existing laws, and for the drafting and examination of new laws. Its composition, rights and duties are determined by a special law. 55. The President of the Republic is the supreme head of all armed forces of the Republic. 56. The President of the Republic has the right to participate in the sittings of the Cabinet and to preside at same, and to demand from the Cabinet or from individual Ministers reports on their work. 57. All acts of the President, except the dismissal of

Cabinet of Ministers, must bear the' signature of the Prime Minister or appropriate Minister. Responsibility for an act pertains to the Minister signing it. 58. The Cabinet consists of the .Prime Minister and other. Ministers. The number of Ministers and the allotment of their duties are determined by law. 59. On entering upon the discharge of their duties, the Ministers and the State Comptroller swear or 'solemnly undertake impartially and conscientiously to fulfil their duties and 'to maintain the' laws. 60. The Cabinet of Ministers as .a whole is responsible to the Seimas for the general policy of the Government, and each Minister is individually responsible to the Seimas for his work in the sphere assigned to him. The Cabinet of Ministers or each individual Minister must resign if. the Seimas expresses lack of confidence in them by a majority of not less than three-fifths of all the representatives of the Seimas. 61. The Cabinet drafts bills and presents them to the Seimas. 62. The Cabinet carries out the laws of the Republic, conducts the domestic and foreign policy of the Republic, defends the inviolability of the territory of the Republic and maintains internal order. 63. The State Comptroller has the right to take part in the Cabinet meetings in a consultative capacity. 64. The Seimas, by a three-fifths majority of all deputies' votes, has the right to institute criminal proceedings against the Prime Minister, or any other Minister or the State Comptroller, for official offences or high treason. The Supreme Court of Lithuania decides the case so raised. 65. The Seimas may institute proceedings against the President of the •Republic for offences specified in article 61 if a resolution to that effect is passed by a three-fourths majority of the whole Seimas.
the

V.—The Courts.

66. The courts administer justice in the name of the Republic in conformity with the laws. 67. A decision of the courts cannot be changed or rescinded otherwise than by another legal decision, in conformity with the procedure provided by law. Amnesty is' granted through the law. 68. The law determines the organisation, competence and jurisdiction of the courts.

LITHUANIA.	

859

69. There is only one supreme court for the entire territory of the Republic. 70. The courts are equal to all citizens. Special courts try the military for official offences. Special courts can be constituted only in times of war or in the event of the proclamation of a state of war. VI.—Local Autonomy. 71. The right of local autonomy is guaranteed to towns and rural communes within the limits of the law. The method and procedure of the elections to organs of local autonomy are fixed by law. 72. The organs of local autonomy regulate economic and cultural affairs in conformity with the provisions of the law and execute the administrative duties vested in them by the law. 73. The Government sees that organs of local autonomy. fulfil their duties, and that their activities are not contrary to the laws of the State. VII.—The Right
of

National Minorities.

74. National minorities of citizens forming a considerable part of the body of citizens have the right, within the limits of the laws, autonomously to administer their own national cultural affairs—popular education, charity, mutual aid—and to elect representative organs in accordance with procedure provided by the law, to administer those affairs. 75. The national minorities mentioned in article 73 have the right, by virtue of special laws, to levy taxes upon their members for cultural needs and avail themselves of an appropriate portion of the amounts which are assigned by the State and autonomous administrations for the needs of education and charity, if those needs are not satisfied by the general establishments maintained by the State and autonomous administrations.

VIII.—National Defence.
76. All citizens of the Republic participate in the defence of its territory in conformity with procedure provided by law. 77. Armed forces are organised to defend the Republic. The law indicates the organisation of the armed forces, method of formation, class and time of service. 78. State protection and provision are guaranteed to the families of those soldiers and to the soldiers themselves who, while discharging military service, lose their health

or life.

LITHUANIA

79.

IX .—P public .Education. The education of children is the highest duty of

parents.
80. The State, autonomous administrations, public organisations and private individuals establish schools. All schools are under the supervision of the State within the specified limits of the law. 81. Religious teaching in schools is compulsory, with the exception of schools established for children whose parents belong to ,no religious organisation. Religion must be taught in accordance with the demands of the religious organisation to which the pupil belongs. 82. Primary education is compulsory. The law indicates the time and procedure for the introduction of compulsory primary education. Primary education in schools maintained by the State or by autonomous administrations is free. 83. Private religious schools, if they carry out the minimum programme laid down by the laws, receive from the State Treasury the portion of the budget appropriated for the needs of education, which corresponds to the number of Lithuanian citizens and pupils officially belonging to that religious organisation, whose schools are conducted according to the teachings of that organisation. X.—Religion and Cults. 84. The State equally recognises the right of all religious organisations existing in Lithuania to administer themselves as their canons or statutes demand, freely to proclaim the teaching of their faith and to perform the ceremonies of their belief, to establish and administer the houses and schools of their belief and institutions of education and charity, to found monasteries, religious congregations and brotherhoods, to levy taxation upon their members for requirements of religious organisations, to acquire movable and immovable property, and to administer it. Religious organisations possess the rights of juridical persons in the State. The clergy are immune from compulsory military service. 85. The State recognises newly-founded religious organisations, if their faith and moral teachings and statutes are not at variance with public order and morality. The law indicates the conditions for the founding and existence of such organisations. 86. Acts of birth, marriage and death which believers have performed by the clergy of their faith, if they correspond

LITHUANIA.

	

861

to the form laid down in the law, have juridical validity in Lithuania, and citizens are not obliged to repeat those acts in another institution. 87. The laws observe Sunday and other holidays recognised by the State.. 88. Soldiers must be granted leisure to perform their religious duties. Persons kept in hospitals, prisons and other public :'.institutions, must be given the opportunity to perform their religious duties. XI.—Bases of the State's Economic Policy. 89. In all spheres of economy every citizen is guaranteed freedom of labour and initiative. Economic life is regulated so that every citizen should have work. 90. The laws guarantee to individual spheres of economy special administrative autonomy. Chambers of agriculture, commerce, industry, labour, &c., are established by legislation, their co-operation with the State authorities in regulating economic life being determined by the law. 91. The principle of private ownership lies at the basis of land administration. To the State pertains the right to regulate land administration so that suitable conditions should be created for proper agricultural production, especially to develop small and medium-scale farming. XII.—State Finances. 92. To impose taxation upon the inhabitants, to allot outlays of the State Treasury, to contract internal loans or issue paper money is possible only by means of legislation. 93. The State Comptroller supervises State revenue and expenditure, property, debts and public accounts. 94. The State Comptroller annually prepares an account of the realisation of the State budget for the past year, and submits it to the Seimas not later than the 15th October. 95. The Cabinet annually prepares an estimate of all State revenue and expenditure for the new year and submits the same to the Seimas for ratification not later than the 15th October. 96. Estimates of revenue and expenditure are fixed by law annually, for each year separately, before the beginning of the financial year. 97. The financial year begins the 1st January and ends the 31st December.

862	

LITHUANIA.

XIII.--Social Security. 98. The power of human labour is protected and,safe guarded by special laws. The State, by separate laws, protects the workman in cases of sickness, old age, accident, and when there is insufficient work. 99. The foundation of family life is marriage. Equality of rights of both sexes lies at its base. Family health and *social welfare are protected and maintained by special laws. Maternity is under the special protection of the State. 100. Public morality and health are safeguarded by special laws. 101. Schools of all grades are equally accessible to all. 102. To promote temperance, the entirety of the citizens of a commune has the right to decide with regard to the maintenance of establishments for the sale of intoxicants in its residential region. XIV.—Amendments and Additions to Constitution. 103. The Seimas, the Government or 50,000 citizens possessing the franchise for the Seimas, have the right to bring forward a project of amendment or addition to: the constitution. 104. The Seimas adopts a project of amendment or addition to the constitution by a not less than three-fifths majority ,of all deputies' votes. An amendment or addition to the constitution adopted or rejected by the Seimas is submitted to the people for referendum, if within 3 months from the proclamation of its adoption or rejection this should be demanded by the President of the Republic or 50,000 citizens possessing the franchise for the Seimas. An amendment or addition to the constitution adopted by the Seimas, regarding which no such demand shall be submitted, acquires validity after 3 months from the day of its proclamation. XV.—Introductory Provisions. 105. On the initiative of the Government or of 50,000 citizens possessing the franchise for the Seimas, a law adopted or rejected by the Seimas may be submitted to the nation for decision by a referendum. The methods and procedure of the referendum described in article 104 is decided by law. 106. This constitution comes into force from the day of its proclamation, but must be approved or disapproved by a referendum within 10 years.

NETHERLANDS AND UNITED STATES. 	

863

107. The laws operating in Lithuania till the day of the proclamation of this constitution, which are not at variance with this constitution and are not annulled or amended by means of legislation established by this constitution, remain in force. A. SMETONA,

President of the Republic.
PROFESSOR A. VOLDEMARAS,

Prime Minister.

ARBITRAL AWARD rendered by the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague relating to Differences between the Netherlands and the United States of America respecting Sovereignty over the Island of Palmas (or Miangas).—The Hague, April 4, 1928.
AN agreement relating to the arbitration of differences respecting sovereignty over the island of Palmas (or Miangas) was signed by the United States of America and the Netherlands on the 23rd January, 1925. The text of the agreement runs as follows :[The text is in Vol. CXXII, page 979.]

I.
The ratifications of the above agreement (hereafter called the " special agreement ") were exchanged at Washington on the 1st April, 1925. By letters dated the 29th September, 1925, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands and the Minister of the United States of America at The Hague asked the undersigned, Max Huber, of Zurich (Switzerland), member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, whether he would be disposed to accept the mandate to act as sole arbitrator under the special agreement of the 23rd January, 1925. The undersigned informed the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and the Minister of the United States of America at The Hague that he was willing to accept the task. On the 16th and 23rd October, 1925, the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration transmitted to the arbitrator the memoranda of the United States of America and the Netherlands with the documents in support thereof. On the 23rd and 24th April, 1926, the countermemoranda of the Netherlands and the United States of America, with documents in support thereof, were transmitted to the arbitrator through the International Bureau.

