CONSTITUTION OF 17 OCTOBER 1868
CHAPTER I.-THE TERRITORY AND THE GRAND DUKE

ARTICLE 1. The Grand Duchy of Luxemburg forms an independent, indivisible and inalienable and perpetually neutral State." ART. 2. The limits and chief-towns of the judicial or administrative arrondissements, of the cantons and of the communes may be changed only by virtue of a law. ART. 3. The crown of the Grand Duchy is hereditary in the family of Nassau, conformably to the Pact of 30 June 1783, to Article 71 of the Treaty of Vienna of 9 June 18151 and to Article 1 of the Treaty of London of 11 May 1867.5 ART. 4. The person of the Grand Duke is sacred and inviolable. ART. 5. The Grand Duke of Luxemburg reaches his majority at the age of 18 years. When he assumes the reins of government, he takes, as soon as possible, in the presence of the Chamber of Deputies or of a deputation appointed by it, the following oath: I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, to maintain the national independence and the integrity of the territory, as well a, public and individual liberty, as also the rights of all and of each of my subjects, and to employ for the preservation and the increase of the general and individual prosperity, as a good sovereign ought, all the means which the laws place at my disposal. So help me God!

ART. 6. If, at the death of the Grand-Duke, his successor is a minor, the regency is exercised conformably to the Family Pact. ART. 7. If the Grand Duke finds it impossible to reign, he is provided with a regency as in the case of minority. In case of vacancy of the throne, the Chamber provides provisionally for the regency. A new Chamber, convoked in double number within the period of 30 days, provides definitively for the vacancy.

ART.8. At his entrance upon his functions, the Regent takes the following oath:
I swear fidelity to the Grand Duke; I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the country. So help me God!

CHAPTER II.-THE LUXEMBURGERS

AND

THEIR RIGHTS.

ART. 9. The quality of Luxemburger is acquired, preserved and

lost according to the rules determined by the civil law. The present Constitution and the other laws relative to political rights determine what are, beyond this quality, the conditions necessary for the exercise of these rights. ART, 10. Naturalization is granted by the legislative power. Naturalization assimilates the foreigner to the Luxemburger, for the exercise of political rights. Naturalization granted to the father is available to his minor child, if the latter declares, within two years of his majority, intention to claim this privilege.' ART. 11. There is in the State no distinction of orders. The Luxemburgers are equal before the law; they alone are admissible to civil and military employments, save exceptions which may be established by a law for particular cases. ART. 12. Individual liberty is guaranteed.
No one shall he prosecuted except in the cases provided by the law and in the form which it prescribes. Outside of the case of flagrante delicto, no one shall be arrested except by virtue of a judge's warrant with the reason, stated therein, which must be served at the moment of the arrest or, at the latest, within 24 hours. ART. 13. No one shall be deprived, against his will, of the judge whom the law assigns to him. ART. 14. No penalty shall he established or applied except by virtue of the law. 

ART, 15. The domicile is inviolable. No domiciliary visit shall take place except in the cases provided for by the law and in the form which it prescribes. ART. 16. No one shall be deprived of his property, except by reason of public utility, in the cases and in the manner established by the law and in consideration of a just and prior indemnity. 

ART. 17. The penalty of confiscation of property shall not be established. ART. 18. The penalty of death in political matters, civil death and branding are abolished.ART. 19. Liberty of religion, that of its public exercise, as well as the liberty to express one's religious opinions, are guaranteed, except for the repression of offenses committed on the occasion of the Use of these liberties. ART. 20. No one shall be compelled to concur, in any manner whatever, in acts and ceremonies of a religion nor observe the rest days thereof. ART. 21. Civil marriage must always precede the nuptial benediction. ART. 22. The intervention of the State in the nomination and installation of the heads of religions, the mode of nomination and of revocation of the other ministers of religions, the faculty for both to correspond with their superiors and to publish their acts, as well as the relations of the Church with the State, constitute the object of conventions to be submitted to the Chamber of Deputies for the provisions which necessitate its intervention. ART. 23. The State takes care that every Luxemburger receives primary instruction. It creates establishments of intermediate instruction and the necessary courses of higher education. The law determines the means of providing for public instruction, as well as the conditions of supervision by the government and the communes; it regulates, besides, everything relating to education. Every Luxemburger is free to make his studies in the Grand Duchy or abroad and to attend the universities of his choice, under the provisions of the law on the conditions of admission to the employments or the exercise of certain professions. ART. 24. Liberty to manifest one's opinions by word in all matters and the liberty of the press are guaranteed, except for the repression of offenses committed on the occasion of the exercise of these liberties.2 Censorship shall never be established. No caution-money shall be exacted from writers, publishers or printers. Stamp-duties on native newspapers and periodical writings are abolished. The publisher, printer or distributor shall not be sued, if the author is known, if he is a Luxemburger and domiciled in the Grand Duchy. ART. 25. Luxemburgers have the right to assemble peaceably and without arms, if they conform to the laws which regulate the exercise of this right, without the power to submit it to a prior authorization.

 
395

This provision does not apply to assemblies in the open air, political, religious or otherwise; these assemblies remain entirely subject to the laws and police regulations. ART. 26. Luxemburgers have the right to form associations. This right shall not be subjected to any prior authorization. The establishment of every religious corporation must be authorized by a law. ART. 27. Every one has the right to address, to the public authorities, petitions signed by one or several persons. The constituted authorities alone have the right to address petitions in the collective name. ART. 28. The secrecy of letters is inviolable. The law determines who are the agents responsible for the violation of the secrecy of letters confided to the post. The law shall regulate the guarantee to be given for the secrecy of telegrams. ART. 29. The use of the German and French languages is optional. Their use shall not be limited. ART. 30. No prior authorization is required to enter suits against public functionaries for acts of their administration, except what is decreed with regard to members of the government. ART. 31. Public functionaries, to whatever order they belong, the members of the government excepted, shall not be deprived of their functions, honors and pensions, except in the manner determined by the law. CHAPTER III.-THE SOVEREIGN POWER.
ART. 32. The Grand Duke exercises the sovereign power conformably to the present Constitution and to the laws of the country.
SECTION 1.-THE PREROGATIVE OF THE GRAND DUKE.

ART. 33. The Grand Duke exercises alone the executive power.
ART. 34. The Grand Duke sanctions and promulgates the laws. He makes known his decision within 6 months from the vote of the Chamber. ART. 35. The Grand Duke appoints to the civil and military offices, conformably to the law, and saving exceptions established by it. No function salaried by the State shall be created except by virtue of a legislative provision. ART. 36. The Grand Duke makes the regulations and decrees necessary for the execution of the laws. without the power ever to suspend the laws themselves or to dispense with their execution.

ART. 37. The Grand Duke commands the armed force, declares war and makes treaties. He informs the Chamber thereof, as soon as the interest and safety of the State permit it, adding suitable communications. Treaties of commerce and those which can burden the State or bind the Luxemburgers individually, and, in general, all those bearing on a matter which can only be regulated by a law, have effect only after having received the assent of the Chamber. No cession, no exchange, no addition of territory shall take place except by virtue of a law. In no case shall the secret articles of a treaty be destructive of the patent articles. ART. 38. The Grand Duke has the right to remit or to reduce the penalties pronounced by the judges, except what is decreed relative to the members of the government. ART. 39. The Grand Duke has the right to coin money, in execution of the law. ART. 40. The Grand Duke has the right to confer titles of nobility, without the power ever to attach thereto any privilege. ART. 41. The Grand Duke confers military and civil orders, observing in this respect what the law prescribes. ART. 42. The Grand Duke may cause himself to be represented by a prince of the blood, who shall have the title of lieutenant of the Grand Duke and shall reside in the Grand Duchy. This representative shall take oath to observe the Constitution before exercising his powers. ART. 43. The civil list is fixed at 200,000 francs per annum. It may be changed by law at the commencement of each reign.' ART. 44. The Government house in Luxemburg and the Chateau of Walferdange are set aside for the residence of the Grand Duke during his stay within the country. ART. 45. The dispositions of the Grand Duke must be countersigned by a responsible councillor of the crown, with the exception of those which have for their object the bestowal on foreigners of decorations not destined to recompense services rendered to the Grand Duchy.
SECTION 2.-LEGISLATION.

ART. 46. The assent of the Chamber of Deputies is required for every law. ART. 47. The Grand Duke addresses to the Chamber proposals or bills which he wishes to submit for its adoption.


The Chamber has the right to propose bills to the Grand Duke. ART. 48. The interpretation of laws by way of authority shall take place only by the law. 

SECTION 3.--JUSTICE.

49. Justice is rendered in the name of the Grand Duke by the courts and tribunals. Decrees and judgments are executed in the name of the Grand Duke. CHAPTER IV.-THE CHAMBER OF DEPUTIEs.
ART.

50. The Chamber of Deputies represents the country. The deputies vote without consulting with their constituents and shall have in view only the general interests of the Grand Duchy. ART. 51. The organization and the mode of election of the Chamber are regulated by the law. The electoral law fixes the number of deputies according to the population. This number shall not exceed 1 deputy for 4,000 in2 habitants, nor be less than 1 deputy for 5,500 inhabitants. The election is direct. 

ART. 52. To be elector or eligible, it is necessary: 1. To be a Luxemburger by birth or to be naturalized. 2. To enjoy civil and political rights. 3. To be 25 years of age. 4. To be domiciled within the Grand Duchy. No other condition of eligibility shall be required. To be elector, there must be joined to these four conditions those determined by the law and there must be paid, besides, the qualification tax, to be fixed, which shall not exceed 30 francs nor be less than 10 francs.
ART. 53. The following shall not be electors nor eligibles: 1. Those condemned to corporal or infamous punishment. 2. Those who have been condemned for theft, swindling or breach of trust. 3. Those who obtain aid from a public charitable institution. 4. Those who are in a state of declared bankruptcy, bankrupts and interdicts, and those for whom judicial counsel has been named.



ART. 54. The mandate of deputy is incompatible: 1. With the functions of member of the government. 2. With those of prosecuting magistrates. 3. With those of member of the Chamber of Accounts. 4. With those of district commissioner. 5. With those of receiver or accountable agent of the State. 6. With military functions above the grade of captain. The functionaries finding themselves in a case of incompatibility have the right to choose between the mandate confided to them and their functions. ART. 55. The incompatibilities provided by the preceding article do not constitute an obstacle to the establishment of others by the law
in the future. ART. 56. Deputies are elected for 6 years.

They are renewed by halves every 3 years, according to the order of the series determined by the electoral law. In case of dissolution, the Chamber of Deputies is renewed integrally. ART. 57. The Chamber verifies the powers of its members and decides the contests which arise on this subject. On their entrance into office, they take the oath which follows:
I swear fidelity to the Grand Duke, obedience to the Constitution and to the laws of the State. So help me God!

This oath is taken in public session, under the direction of the president of the Chamber. ART. 58. The deputy, appointed by the government to a salaried
position which he accepts, ceases immediately to sit, and resumes his

functions only by virtue of a new election. ART. 59. All laws are submitted to a second vote, unless the Chamber, in accord with the Council of State, sitting in public session, decides otherwise. There shall be an interval of at least three months between the two votes. 2 ART. 60. At each session the Chamber names its president and its vice-president, and organizes its bureau. ART. 61. The meetings of the Chamber are public, with the exceptions to be determined by regulations.

 ART.62. Every resolution is carried by an absolute majority of the votes. In case of a tie vote, the proposition under consideration is rejected. The Chamber may pass a resolution only so long as a majority of its members are present. ART. 63. The votes are cast aloud or by sitting and rising. On the laws as wholes the vote is always taken by roll-call and aloud. ART. 64. The Chamber has the right of inquiry. The law regulates the exercise of this right. ART. 65. A bill can be adopted by the Chamber only after having been voted article by article. ART. 66. The Chamber has the right to amend or to divide the articles and the amendments proposed. ART. 67. It is forbidden to present petitions to the Chamber in person. The Chamber has the right to return to the members of the government the petitions which are addressed to it. The members of the government shall give explanations on their contents whenever the Chamber shall request it. The Chamber does not occupy itself with any petition having individual interests for its object, unless it tend to the redressing of grievances resulting from illegal acts admitted by the government or the authorities, or the decision to intervene be within the competence of the Chamber. ART. 68. No deputy can be prosecuted or investigated because of opinions and votes put forth by him in the exercise of his functions. ART. 69. No deputy can, during the continuance of the session, be prosecuted or arrested by way of repression, except with the authorization of the Chamber, save in case of flagrante delicto. No bodily constraint can be exercised against one of its members during the session, except with the same authorization. The detention or the prosecution of a deputy is suspended during the session and for all its length, if the Chamber requires it. ART. 70. The Chamber determines by its own regulations the mode according to which it exercises its attributions. ART. 71. The meetings of the Chamber are held in the place of residence of the administration of the Grand Duchy. ART. 72. The Chamber meets each year in ordinary session at the time fixed by the regulations.2 The Grand Duke can convoke the Chamber in extraordinary session.



Every session is opened and closed by the Grand Duke in person, or else in his name by a legal representative appointed for this purpose. ART. 73. The Grand Duke can adjourn the Chamber. However, the adjournment can not exceed the term of a month, nor be renewed in the same session, without the assent of the Chamber. ART. 74. The Grand Duke can dissolve the Chamber. New elections are proceeded with within three months of the dissolution at the latest. ART. 75. There is granted to each deputy out of the treasury of the State, by way of indemnification, a sum of five francs per day of attendance or for traveling expenses. Those who live in the city where the session is held do not enjoy any indemnification.
CHAPTER

V.-THE

GOYERN3I-ENT OF THE GRIAND

Duchy.

ART. 76. The Grand Duke regulates the organization of his government, which is composed of at least 3 members." There shall be, besides the government, a Council called to deliberate on the bills and the amendments which might be proposed thereto to regulate questions of administrative litigation, and to give its advice on all other questions which shall be referred to it by the Grand Duke or by the laws. The organization of this Council and the manner of exercising its attributions are regulated by the law. 2 ART. 77. The Grand Duke appoints and recalls the members of the government. ART. 78. The members of the government are responsible. ART. 79. There is between the members of the government and the Grand Duke no intermediary authority8 ART. 80. The members of the government or the commissioners which replace them have admittance to the Chambers, and must be heard when they request it. The Chamber can request their presence. ART. 81. In no case can the oral or written order of the Grand Duke release a member of the government from responsibility. ART. 82. The Chamber has the right to accuse the members of the government. 


A law shall determine the cases of responsibility, the penalties to be inflicted and the mode of procedure, either on the accusation admitted by the Chamber or on the prosecution by the injured parties." ART. 83. The Grand Duke can pardon a convicted member of the government only on the request of the Chamber.
CHAPTER V.JTUSTICE.-

ART. 84. Disputes which have civil rights for their object are

exclusively within the jurisdiction of the tribunals. ART. 85. Disputes which have political rights for their object are within the jurisdiction of the tribunals, save for exceptions established by the law. ART. 86. No tribunal or contentious jurisdiction can be established except by virtue of a law. No commissions or extraordinary tribunals under any denomination whatsoever can be created. ART. 87. The organization of a Superior Court of Justice is provided for by a law. ART. 88. The hearings of the tribunals are public, unless this publicity be dangerous for order or morals, and, in this case, the tribunal declares it by a judgment. ART. 89. Every judgment states the grounds therefor. It is .pronounced in public audience. ART 90. Justices of the peace and judges of the tribunals are appointed directly by the Grand Duke. The counsellors of the court and the presidents and vice-presidents of the tribunals of arrondissement are appointed by the Grand Duke on the advice of the Superior Court of Justice. ART. 91. The judges of the tribunals of arrondissement and the counsellors are appointed for life. No one of them can be deprived of his position or suspended except by a judgment. The removal of one of these judges can take place only by a new nomination and with his consent. However, in case of infirmity or of misconduct, he can be suspended, recalled or removed, following the conditions determined by the law.
ART. 92. The salaries of members of the judicial order are fixed

by law.
ART.

93. Except in case provided by the law, no judge can accept

salaried functions from the government, unless he exercises them gratuitously, without prejudice however to the cases of incompatibility determined by the law.
ART. 94. Particular laws regulate the organization of military tribunals, their attributions, the rights and obligations of the members of these tribunals and the duration of their functions. There may be tribunals of commerce in places determined by the law. It regulates their organization, their attributions, the mode of nomination of their members and the duration of the functions of these last. ART. 95. The courts and tribunals apply general and local decrees and regulations only so far as they are in conformity with the laws. The Superior Court of Justice shall regulate conflicts of attributions according to the manner determined by the law.
CHAPTER

VII.-THE PUBLIC FORCE.

ART. 96. Everything concerning the armed force is regulated by the law.

ART. 97. The organization and the attributions of the gendarmery constitute the object of a law. ART. 98. A civic guard can be formed whose organization is regulated by the law.

CHAPTER VIII.-FINANCES.

ART. 99. No impost to the profit of the State can be established except by law. No loan to the profit of the State can be contracted without the assent of the Chamber. No real estate of the State can be alienated, if the alienation is not authorized by the law. No creation to the profit of the State, of a road, canal, railroad, great bridge or considerable vessel can be decreed except by virtue of a special law. No charge burdening the budget of the State for more than one fiscal period can be established except by a special law. No communal charge or imposition can be established except with the consent of the communal council. The law determines the exceptions, which experience shall demonstrate necessary with regard to communal imposition. ART. 100. Imposts to the profit of the State are voted annually. The laws which establish them have force only for one year, if they are not renewed. ART. 101. No privilege can be established in the matter of imposts. No exemption or moderation can be established except by a law. ART. 102. Outside of the cases formally excepted by the law, no payment can be exacted from citizens or public establishments except by right of impost to the profit of the State or of the commune.



403

ART. 103. No pension, retainer or gratuity at the expense of the

treasury can be accorded except by virtue of the law. ART. 104. Each year the Chamber decrees the law of accounts and votes the budget. All the receipts and expenditures of the State must be carried in the budget and in the accounts. ART. 105. A Chamber of Accounts is charged with the examination and the liquidation of the accounts of the general administration and of all those accountable to the public treasury. The law regulates its organization, the exercise of its attributions and the mode of nomination of its members. The Chamber of Accounts sees to it that no article of expenditure of the budget is exceeded. No transfer from one section of the budget to another can be made except by virtue of a law. However, members of the government can effect, in their offices. Transfers of surpluses from one article to another in the same section, on condition that they justify them before the Chamber of Deputies. The Chamber of Accounts agrees on the accounts of the different administrations of the State and is charged with collecting for this purpose all necessary information and vouchers. The general account of the State is submitted to the Chamber of Deputies with the observations of the Chamber of Accounts. 2 ART. 106. The salaries and pensions of ministers of religions are at the expense of the State and regulated by the law.
CHAPTER

IX.-THE COMMUNES

ART. 107. There shall be in each commune a communal council elected directly by the inhabitants having the qualifications required to be electors; the composition, organization and attributions of this council are regulated by the law. The burgomaster is appointed and recalled by the Grand Duke, who can choose him outside of the council. The communal council decides on all that is of purely communal interest, excepting the approval of its acts in the cases and in the manner which the law determines. The communal agents or employees, those of the municipal, forestry and rural police are appointed and recalled in the manner determined by the law.

404

authorization of the Grand Duke. The accounts and budgets are made public. The Grand Duke can suspend or annul the acts of the communal authorities which exceed their attributions or which are contrary to the law or general interest. The law regulates the consequences of this suspension or annulling. The Grand Duke has the right to dissolve the council. ART. 108. The editing of the acts of the civil State and the keeping of the registers are exclusively among the attributions of the communal authorities.
CHAPER X.-GENRAL PROVISIONS.
ART. 109. The city of Luxemburg is the capital of the Grand Duchy and the seat of government. The seat of government cannot be removed except temporarily, for grave reasons. ART. 110. No oath can be imposed except by virtue of the law; it determines the formula thereof. All civil public functionaries, before entering upon office, take the following oath:

No communal tax can be established or .suppressed without the

I swear fidelity to the Grand Duke, obedience to the Constitution and to
the laws of the State. So help me God!

ART. 111. Every foreigner within the territory of the Grand Duchy enjoys the protection accorded to persons and to property, save exceptions established by the law. ART. 112. No law, or decree or regulation of general or communal administration, is obligatory except after having been published in the form determined by the law. ART. 113. No provision of the Constitution can be suspended. ART. 114. The legislative power has the right to declare that there is occasion to proceed to the revision of such constitutional provision as it designates. After this declaration, the Chamber is dissolved ipso facto. A new one shall be convoked, conformably to Article 74 of the present Constitution. This Chamber determines in common accord with the Grand Duke on the points submitted for revision. In this case the Chamber shall not have power to deliberate, if at least three fourths of the members who compose it are not present, and no change shall be adopted, if it does not receive at least two thirds of the votes. ART. 115. No change in the Constitution can be made during a regency.
CHAPTER XI.-TRANSITORY
AND SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS

ART. 116. Until provision is made by a law, the Chamber of Deputies shall have the discretionary power to accuse a member of the government, and the Superior Court, in general assembly, shall try him, characterizing the offense and determining the penalty. Nevertheless, the penalty must not exceed that of imprisonment, without prejudice to the cases expressly provided for by the penal laws. The councillors of the court forming part of the Chamber shall abstain from all participation in the procedure and the judgment. ART. 117. From the day when the Constitution shall be executory, all laws, decrees, orders, regulations and other acts which are contrary to it are abrogated. ART, 118. The death penalty, abolished in political matters, is replaced by the penalty immediately inferior, until it is determined upon by the new law. ART. 119. While awaiting the conclusion of the conventions provided by Article 22, the present provisions relative to religious worship remain in force. ART. 120. Until the promulgation of the laws and regulations provided by the Constitution, the laws and regulations in force continue to be applied. ART. 121. The Constitution of the Estates of 12 October 1841 is abolished. All the authorities preserve and exercise their attributions, until it shall have been otherwise provided conformably to the Constitution.
