CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR
by HERMAN M. LIEBOWITZ, MATTHEW F. JODZIEWICZ

& ROBERT P. PAYNE, Jr.

Issued April 1988

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

Editor's Note
The Constitution of Madagascar can be classified as an "incomplete constitution" for many of its provisions and much of its understanding depend upon the provisions of the CHARTER of the MALAGASY SOCIALIST REVOLUTION ALLDIRECTIONAL. This explains and amplifies the "choice of socialism on June 16, 1975."

Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN: 0-379-00467-4 © Copyright 1988 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

DEMOCRATIC OF

REPUBLIC

MADAGASCAR CONSTITUTION

The Malagasy People, Faithful to the traditions of struggle maintained throughout their history by the best of their sons who have sacrificed themselves so that man's exploitation of man, as well as all forms of domination, oppression and alienation which follow, may be forever abolished; Convinced of the great dignity of the human being and resolved to strive with all men who love justice and progress toward the liberation of each man and all mankind; Convinced that peace and friendship between people can only be established by respect for individual self-determination, the independence of States and the democratic organization of economic relations between Nations; Resolved to build a new type of State expressing the interests of the laboring masses and to construct a society conforming to the socialist principles put forth in the "Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution; Declares: TITLE I GENERAL PRINCIPLES Article 1. The Malagasy people shall constitute a Nation organized as a State founded on the socialist and democratic community known as the Fokonolona.

9

This State shall be a sovereign and indivisible Republic relying primarily on its own strenth and shall be named the "Democratic Republic of Madagascar." Its territory shall be inalienable. Article 2. The Democratic Republic of Madagascar, unitary and decentralized, shall guarantee and encourage territorial collectives in the exercise of activities and responsibilities contributing to the development of the Nation. Article 3. The sovereign working people shall retain full power within the Democratic Republic of Madagascar. The sovereign people, making known their will by universal suffrage: -- shall democratically elect and recall their representatives, -- shall nominate and designate those citizens worthy of election. Article 4. The people shall exercise their power either directly through the Fokonolona or by means of a referendum, or indirectly by delegating this power to the President of the Republic or the Popular National Assembly. Article 5. Election by universal suffrage and appointment by the President of the Republic shall be the only sources of socialist legitimacy and republican legality. Article 6. The law shall be the expression of the popular will. The law shall be the same for all in protection, in obligation or in punishment. Article 7. Public ownership of the principle means of production, natural resources, industries and activities fundamental for the life and progress of the nation; management of production by the producers democratically organized according to the spirit of the socialist revolution; the

1

0

independent, balanced and harmonious development of an economy led by the people; government by the working classes; all of the foregoing shall form the basis of the social and political foundation of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar. Article 8. Those citizens who are the most inspired by ideals of socialism and patriotism and who are now active in progressive organizations shall freely unite in the National Front for the Defense of the Revolution. Article 9. The Front shall motivate and guide the spirit of the Revolution toward the establishment of Socialism and shall inspire the activity of the State. The powers, organization and prerogatives of the Front shall be determined by law. Article 10. The Democratic Republic of Madagascar shall have for its motto: Tanindrazana, Tolom-Piavotana, Fahafahana (Homeland, Revolution, Liberty). Its emblem shall be a tricolored flag of white, red and green. It shall be composed of three rectangular bands of equal dimensions. Starting from the edge closest to the flagpole, the first band shall be vertical and white. The other two shall be horizontal, the upper one red and the lower, green. The capital shall be Antananarivo. The national humn shall be "Ry Tanindrazanay malala o" ("Oh, Dear Homeland"). The State seals and armorial bearings shall be defined by law. TITLE II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES Article 11. The State shall protect and consolidate the independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Nation.

11

It shall not resort to war for the purpose of attacking the legitimate sovereignty or liberty of other peoples. It shall strive to settle international disputes by peaceful means. Article 12. The State shall insure the equality of all its citizens by: -- guaranteeing the unity of the social order and the socialist legal system, as well as the unity of the economic system in matters of legislation and regulation; -- committing itself to removing those obstacles of an economic and social order which limit equality among citizens, which hinder the development of the individual and which prevent effective participation of all workers in political, economic and social organization; -- prohibiting all discrimination based on race, place of origin, religious belief, education, wealth or sex. Article 13. Fundamental liberties and individual rights shall be guaranteed within the framework of the Charter of the Socialist Revolution. Article 14. Fundamental rights and liberties shall express the socialist and democratic ties by which citizens shall rid themselves of all exploitation and arbitrary control and shall create by individual and collaborative work the conditions necessary for the development of man in liberty and dignity. No right or liberty may be invoked by a citizen who has not fulfilled his duty to the community. No right may be invoked to hinder the State in its work of establishing the socialist order. Article 15. The exercise of all rights and liberties recognized by the Constitution and the

12

law shall be guaranteed to all citizens who work within the guidelines of the Charter and who fight for the triumph of a socialist society. Article 16. Anyone who abuses constitutional or legal liberties to fight against the Revolution, to impede the coming of the Socialist State, to violate the Constitution, to harm the interests of the community, or to endanger the unity of the Nation, shall forfeit his rights and liberties. The rights and liberties of the citizen shall also be limited according to the law and according to urgent national necessity. Article 17. Every citizen has a duty of loyalty to the Nation and the Country, as well as a duty to respect the Charter of the Socialist Revolution, the Constitution, and the laws and regulations of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar. He must loyally fulfill his obligations to the community and observe the rules of socialist conduct. Article 18. The defense of the Country, the safeguarding of socialist accomplishments and socialist property, as well as the protection of the institutions with which the people have been democratically endowed, shall be a sacred honor for every citizen. Article 19. Compulsory national service is a duty of honor. Performance of military duty shall not jeopardize the employment of a citizen nor the exercise of his political rights. Article 20. In addition to the needs of national defense, national service shall be organized to assure social and cultural benefit for the greatest number and to contribute to the development of an economic system founded on: the spirit of community and mutuality; the eradication of man's exploitation of man; the just distribution of national revenue; and equal access to physical well-being.

13

Article 21. Work is an honor and a firm duty for every citizen; he must voluntarily accept its discipline. Work shall be required of everyone according to his ability. Everyone shall be remunerated according to the quality and quantity of his work. Article sured by the ation of the the means of professional 22. The right to work shall be astransformation and socialist organiznational economy, the liberation of production, and the development of education.

Article 23. Workers shall have the right to participate in the management of enterprises under conditions established by law. Article 24. The State shall encourage each citizen's activity, according to his qualifications, in economic, administrative, cultural or social areas. Article 25. The State shall recognize that individual workers have the right, within the limits authorized by law, and without exploiting others, to exercise private activities provided they are not contrary to the spirit or objectives of the Charter. Article 26. Access to public office, professions, positions, and employment shall be open to all citizens without any conditions other than ability and aptitude. Article 27. Working conditions and hours must not jeopardize the health or the dignity of the worker. Article 28. Freedom of speech, of the press and of assembly shall be guaranteed to all citizens if exercised in conformity with the objectives of the Revolution, the interests of the workers and of the community, and with the purpose of strengthening the new democracy for the coming of a socialist State.

14

Article 29. Workers and citizens, motivated by revolutionary and patriotic ideals, forming the avant-garde of the movement to build socialism, shall be encouraged to join together democratically to motivate, lead and manage organizations in defense of the Revolution. Article 30. The law shall guarantee the right to personal property, especially the family residence, customary property, and items that contribute to comfort and material well-being; also commercial and family enterprises and workshops, except for limits imposed by community property or the necessities of nationalization and expropriation for public use. Article 31. The right to personal property may not be exercised in a manner contrary to community benefit, but must contribute to the common good. Article 32. In order to achieve rational land-use, to increase national production, and to establish equitable social and economic relations between members of the community, the law may impose obligations or restrictions on the private ownership of land. Article 33. Each citizen's share in public expenditures must be progressive and calculated on his ability to pay. Article 34. Each citizen shall fight against social parasitism, which the law forbids, as well as anti-revolutionary acts. Article 35. The property of the State and of the socialist collectives must not be put in jeopardy. Waste or misappropriation of State or collective property or money shall constitute, as the case may be, a misdemeanor or a crime which shall be punished with the greatest severity by the law, entailing, perhaps, the loss of civil and political rights as well as confiscation of the offender's property.

15

Article 36. The State shall punish with the greatest severity anyone who harms, by act or omission, the establishment of a socialist economy or the public interest. Article 37. The State shall protect the family, women and children, and recognizes that all citizens have the right to a family and the right to dispose of personal property by inheritance. Article 38. All citizens with full civil and political rights may, under conditions established by law, settle and move freely in any part of the national territory. Article 39. Freedom of conscience and religion shall be guaranteed through the neutrality of the State toward all religions. Religious groups may organize and freely practice in conformity with the law. Article 40. All citizens who fulfill the legal requirements shall have the right to vote and to be elected. Article 41. All citizens have a right to education. The State shall assure this right by the organization of basic education. The State shall organize and supervise instruction. It shall assure the equal access of everyone to education, to professional training, and to culture, with no restriction other than the individual's aptitude. The State and the communities shall cooperate in the training and education of children. Article 42. All citizens shall enjoy the same social dignity. All citizens shall be assured of the inviolability of their person and of their residence, and the privacy of correspondence. No search shall be permitted except according to the law and on written order of the competent

16

judicial authority. No one shall be prosecuted, arrested or detained except in cases determined by law and according to procedures prescribed by law. No one shall be punished except by a law promulgated and published prior to the commission of the punishable act. act. No one shall be punished twice for the same

The law shall assure to all men the right to justice, and lack of means may not be an obstacle. The State shall guarantee full and inviolable rights of defense in all jurisdictions and at all stages of the proceedings. TITLE III THE STRUCTURE OF THE STATE Article 43. The institutions of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar shall be: -- the President of the Republic, -- the Supreme Council of the Revolution, -- the Popular National Assembly, -- the Government, -- the Military Committee for Development, -- the Constitutional High Court. Article 44. General organizational principles for each institution and the execution of its budget shall be determined by law. Article 45. The law shall determine the amount, the conditions and the method of payment of the salaries allocated to the individuals elected to fulfill the duties or carry out the functions provided for by this Constitution.

17

TITLE IV THE EXECUTIVE Article 46. The Executive branch shall be composed of the President of the Republic, the Supreme Council of the Revolution, and the Government. Subtitle 1 The President of the Republic Article 47. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State. This office shall be the supreme office of State power. He shall be assisted by the Supreme Council of the Revolution and the Government. The President of the Republic shall be elected by universal direct suffrage for a seven-year term. He may be re-elected. Article 48. All candidates for the office of President of the Republic must possess all civil and political rights and must be at least thirty-five years old at the time of the election. Other conditions and terms for declaring candidacies shall be established by law. Article 49. The election for President of the Republic shall take place upon convocation by the Supreme Council of the Revolution not less than thirty days nor more than sixty days before the expiration of the term of the President of the Republic then in office. The election shall be by absolute majority of the voters on the first ballot. If that is not obtained, the President of the Republic shall be elected on the second ballot by plurality of one of the two candidates having received the greatest number of votes on the first ballot. Before assuming office, the President of the Republic shall swear before the Nation and in the presence of the Constitutional High Court the following oath:

18

"No an' ny Firenena sy ny Vahoaka dia mianiana aho fa hampiasa mandrakariva ny fahefana natolotra ahy hitondrana ny Tany sy ny Fanjakana, hampitoviana zo sy sata ary fari-piainana ny Malagasy rehetra, ary hampandrosoana lalandava ireo mpiray Tanindrazana amiko, ao anatin' ny firaisankina sy ny firahalahiana tsy mist' avakavaka. Mianiana koa fa hanaja hatrany ny tombon-tsoam-pirenena ny zon' olombelona ary ny lalam-panjakana. "Tsy hikatsaka afa-tsy ny soa ho an' ny besinimaro aho, ary hanokana ny heriko rehetra ho an' ny fanamafisana orina sy fiarovana ny tolom-piavotana sy ny fahaleovantena ary ny fiandrianam-pirenena." Article 50. In case of vacancy or permanent disability declared by the Constitutional High Court, the duties of the President of the Republic shall be exercised temporarily and collectively by the Supreme Council of the Revolution, presided over by its senior member. The Government shall assure the dispatch of current business. The election of the new President of the Republic shall take place within the period provided for in Article 49. Article 51. In cases of temporary disability of the President of the Republic, his duties shall be continued collectively by the Supreme Council of the Revolution presided over by its senior member. Article 52. The office of the President of the Republic shall be incompatible with any other elective public office and any other professional activity. Article 53. The President of the Republic shall guide State policy as defined by the Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution He shall ensure the execution of judicial decisions. He shall, together with members of the Popular National Assembly, have the power to propose

19

laws. He shall be head of the administration. He shall be the commander-in-chief of all armies and internal police forces and shall be responsible for national defense. He shall ensure national independence and territorial integrity. He shall ensure the maintenance of order and public security. He shall accredit and recall ambassadors and envoys extraordinary of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar to foreign States and international organizations. He shall receive the credentials and requests for recall of representatives of foreign States and international organizations recognized by the Democratic Republic of Madagascar. He shall negotiate and ratify treaties. He shall appoint citizens to high offices of the State. He may delegate this power to the Prime Minister with the option to subdelegate it. He shall have the right of pardon. He shall confer the decorations of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar. Article 54. The President of the Republic shall promulgate laws within fifteen days following transmission to him by the Popular National Assembly of adopted laws. He may, before the expiration of this period, ask the Assembly to reconsider the law or certain articles of the law. Subtitle II Supreme Council of the Revolution Article 55. The Supreme Council of the Revolution shall be the guardian of the Malagasy

20

Socialist Revolution. Article 56.. In the Supreme Council of the Revolution, the President of the Republic shall: -- draw up the program implementing the Charter and establish general directives for the Government, -- elaborate the organizational principles of national defense with the participation of the Military Committee for Development, -- convene sessions of the Popular National Assembly, -- dissolve the Popular National Assembly in accordance with Article 78 below and establish the date for new elections, -- promulgate financial ordinances if the budget has not been voted by the Popular National Assembly within the legal time-limits, -- legislate by ordinance, counter-signed by the members of the Supreme Council of the Revolution, if a state of emergency has been proclaimed by the Council of Ministers after consultation with the Constitutional High Court, -- legislate by ordinance, counter-signed by the members of the Supreme Council of the Revolution, between sessions of the Popular National Assembly according to the terms provided for in Title V. These ordinances, immediately applicable, shall, however, be submitted to the Popular National Assembly at its next session for ratification, -- have the power to call for a referendum on all bills dealing with the general organization of the State or fundamental options. Article 57. The Supreme Council of the Revolution shall assist the President of the Republic in the conception, orientation and supervision of the general policy of the State.

21

It shall ensure respect for national sovereignty internally as well as abroad. Article 58. The President of the Republic shall be, by law, the President of the Supreme Council of the Revolution. He shall appoint twothirds of its members. The final third shall be chosen by the President of the Republic from a list presented by the Popular National Assembly. The number of members of the Supreme Council of the Revolution and the conditions for appointment shall be determined by law. The President of the Republic may dismiss these members from office. Article 59. The duties of a member of the Supreme Council of the Revolution shall be incompatible with any other elective public office and any other professional activity. The duties of a member of the Supreme Council of the Revolution shall normally end with the term of office of the President of the Republic. The members are eligible for re-appointment. In case of vacancy or permanent disability of a member of the Supreme Council of the Revolution, he shall be replaced in conformity with the law. Subtitle III The Government Article 60. The Government, the highest organ of State administration, shall execute State policy in conformity with the general directives issued by the President of the Republic in the Supreme Council of the Revolution. The Government shall be responsible to the President of the Republic and shall report its activities to him. Article 61. The President of the Republic shall, after consultation with the Supreme Council

22

of the Revolution, appoint the Prime Minister. On the nomination of the Prime Minister, he shall appoint the other members of the Government. The President of the Republic may dismiss members of the Government. The Prime Minister, Head of the Government, shall be a member, by law, of the Supreme Council of the Revolution. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers. Article 62. In the Council of Ministers, the President of the Republic shall do the following, assisted by the Prime Minister, to whom he may delegate certain of his powers: -- exercise regulatory power and ensure the execution of the laws; -- motivate and coordinate the execution of general State policy declared in the Supreme Council of the Revolution; -- issue bills for submission to the Popular National Assembly after consultation with the Supreme Council of the Revolution; -- decree administrative provisions for the application of directives from the Supreme Council of the Revolution and for the execution of laws; -- draw up the general plan for economic and social development; -- exercise other duties for which consultation with the Council of Ministers is compulsory by virtue of this Constitution and individual laws; -- declare emergencies or martial law, whenever circumstances require it or for the defense of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar, or for public order and State security. Article 63. The Prime Minister shall direct the action of the Government and shall coordinate the activities of the ministerial departments.

23

He shall assure the execution of laws and regulations and shall make use of the administration for this purpose. He shall assure public safety and maintain order. He shall exercise regulatory power except in areas reserved for decree and especially excepting the provisions of Articles 56 and 57 above. He may delegate certain of his powers to a Minister with an option of subdelegation. He shall preside over the Council of the Cabinet at which the Ministers shall be present. Article 64. Decrees made by the President of the Republic shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister and the Ministers responsible for their execution. TITLE V THE POPULAR NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 65. The Popular National Assembly shall be the organ of State, the highest delegation of popular legislative power. The members of the Popular National Assembly shall have the title of deputies of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar. They shall be elected by direct universal suffrage for five-year terms. The law shall establish the number of members of the Popular National Assembly, the conditions of eligibility, the regulations on ineligibility and dismissal, as well as the conditions for the election of persons replacing deputies, in case of vacancy, until the next Assembly election. The law shall also establish the conditions for investigation and recall of a deputy by his electors. Article 66. No deputy shall be prosecuted, investigated, arrested, detained or judged because

24

of the opinions or vote given by him in the exercise of his duties. Article 67. The mandate of the deputies shall be nation-wide. The right to vote shall be individual. However, a delegation of this right shall be permitted under the conditions and terms established by law. No deputy may receive more than one delegation of a voting right. Article 68. The President of the Popular National Assembly and the bureau members shall be elected each year at the start of the first session. They may be re-elected. Article 69. The Popular National Assembly shall meet in two regular sessions each year. Convocation dates shall be set by the President of the Republic with the Supreme Council of the Revolution. The duration of each session may not be less than thirty days nor more than sixty days. The first session shall end before July 10 and the second session, devoted mainly to the adoption of the budget, shall end before December 10. The Popular National Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session with an established agenda, upon the initiative of the President of the Republic issued in the Supreme Council of the Revolution, or upon the request of two-thirds of the Assembly's members. If the extraordinary session takes place upon the request of the deputies, the closure decree shall be issued as soon as the Popular National Assembly has exhausted the agenda for which it was convened, but not later than twelve days after its first meeting. The Popular National Assembly may not be convened in extraordinary session upon request of its members during the month following the close of a session.

25

Article 70. Meetings of the Popular National Assembly shall be open to the public. Minutes shall be kept and shall be available to the public under conditions provided for by law. The Popular National Assembly shall hold closed-door sessions at the request of the Government or of one-fourth of the Assembly's members. Article 71. The general principles relating to the organization and functioning of the Popular National Assembly shall be determined by law. The methods of application of these principles shall be ordered by internal regulation. The Popular National Assembly shall establish and vote its own internal regulation. Article 72. Laws shall be voted by the Popular National Assembly according to the procedures provided for in this title. In addition to questions sent to the Assembly under other articles of the Constitution, I. The law shall determine: (a) Rules concerning: -- civil rights and fundamental guarantees granted to individuals to exercise their liberties, rights, obligations and duties recognized by this Constitution; -- obligations imposed by national defense on the person and property of citizens; -- nationality, domestic affairs, status and title of individuals, marriage, inheritance and gifts; -- categories of crimes and misdemeanors as well as applicable punishments, criminal procedure and amnesty; -- the creation or modification of the judiciary, respective jurisdictions and applicable procedural rules; -- the status of magistrates and justices of the peace as well as the guarantees for their in-

26

dependence. (b) Rules relating to: -- procedures for election, general organization and operation of assemblies of the decentralized collectives; -- the conditions under which property may be expropriated or requisitioned because of public necessity or recovered because of abandonment or non-exploitation; -- the basis, rate and collection methods for assessments of all types. II. The law shall determine the fundamental principles of: -- organization for national defense; -- the status of civil and military officeholders and public State agents, decentralized collectives and public establishments; -- the legal system of civil and commercial obligations; -- education and professional training; -- organization of the professions. III. The law, in conformity with the Charter, shall approve the plan for national development. IV. Appropriations laws shall determine the assets and debts of the State. V. The law shall determine the limitations on public and individual liberties during exceptional periods. VI. Treaties of alliance, commercial treaties, treaties or agreements related to international organization, those committing State finances, those which modify provisions of a legislative nature, those relating to the status of

27

individuals, peace treaties, treaties which entail cession, exchange or annexation of territory shall not be ratified or approved except under the terms of a law. They shall take effect only after having been ratified or approved. Before their ratification, treaties shall be submitted to the Constitutional High Court for a ruling on their constitutionality. Article 73. Matters other than those which are in the domain of law shall be regulatory. All provisions in the form of legislation on these matters may be modified by decree with the agreement of the Constitutional High Court. Article 74. The power to introduce legislation shall be vested concurrently in the President of the Republic and the deputies. Government bills, with the exception of those concerning the organization of national defense, shall be issued in the Council of Ministers with the agreement of the Supreme Council of the Revolution and shall be filed with the Popular National Assembly. The deputies and the Government shall have the power to amend. Private bills and amendments proposed by deputies shall be made known to the President of the Republic, the Supreme Council of the Revolution and the Government. They shall not be accepted if their adoption entails reduction in public assets or the creation or increasing of State debts. These provisions shall not apply to appropriation bills. Article 75. The Popular National Assembly shall examine appropriations bills during its second session. All amendments to budget proposals entailing an increase in expenditures or a decrease in public assets must be accompanied by a bill for an equivalent increase in income or equivalent savings.

28

Appropriations laws shall be adopted by bloc vote on the entire governmental bill. It, at the close of the session, this bill has not been voted, the President of the Republic may promulgate by ordinance its provisions, including amendments to it adopted by the Popular National Assembly. TITLE VI RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EXECUTIVE AND THE POPULAR NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 76. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the Popular National Assembly by messages which shall not give rise to debate. The members of the Supreme Council of the Revolution and of the Government shall have access to the Popular National Assembly. They may speak there when they so request. They may be assisted by qualified individuals. Article 77. Between sessions, the Supreme Council of the Revolution may, by means of ordinances, regulate matters within the jurisdiction of the law. These ordinances, which shall take effect as soon as they are published, must, however, be submitted to the Popular National Assembl y for ratification at the opening of the next session. Article 78. The Prime Minister shall present the general program of action of his Government to the Popular National Assembly. The deputies shall have the right of amendment according to the provisions established by law. This program, once voted, may no longer be questioned by the Popular National Assembly. However, in the course of implementing the program, if the Government considers that fundamental modifications to the program of action prove necessary, the Prime Minister shall submit

29

said modifications to the Popular National Assembly. If agreement between the two parties on these modifications is not reached, the Prime Minister may commit the responsibility of his Government by calling for a vote of confidence. The vote shall not take place earlier than forty-eight hours after it is called for. If it is defeated by two-thirds of the members composing the Popular National Assembly, the Government shall submit its resignation to the President of the Republic. Within thirty days, at the most, following a vote of no confidence, a new Government shall be formed. If the new Government retains the modifications with some possible alterations, and if the Popular National Assembly rejects them by a majority of two-thirds of its members, the President of the Republic shall dissolve the Popular National Assembly. General elections shall then take place not less than thirty and not more than sixty days following the dissolution. The new Popular National Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session on the second Tuesday following its election. Article 79. The Popular National Assembly shall be informed regarding governmental action by means of oral questions, written questions, summonses, commission hearings, and commissions of inquiry. The law shall determine the conditions and methods of implementing these procedures. Article 80. Each year the Government shall present to the first session of the Popular National Assembly an annual report on the implementation of its program. While debating the annual report, the Popular National Assembly may raise the issue of Governmental responsibility by issuing an opposing resolution if it feels that there is a serious failure in implementing the general program of action. Such a resolution shall only be admissible if it is signed by at least half of the Assembly members. The vote shall not take place earlier than

30

forty-eight hours after the resolution is proposed. Said resolution shall be adopted only if it is voted by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Popular National Assembly. If this opposing resolution is adopted, the President of the Republic shall proceed to an arbitration which may entail modification or dissolution of the Government. In the event of dissolution, a new Government shall be formed within thirty days. Article 81. In order to implement the plan of action, the Supreme Council of the Revolution may ask the Popular National Assembly for a delegation of power for a limited period to effect by ordinance measures which are in the area of law. The President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers, after consultation with both the Constitutional High Court and the President of the Popular National Assembly, may declare a state of emergency or martial law. This declaration shall confer on him special powers for the duration and to the extent authorized by law. Ordinances issued under this article shall not be submitted to the Popular National Assembly for ratification. Article 82. The President of the Republic, with the agreement of the Government or on the recommendation of three-fourths of the members of the Popular National Assembly, may submit for referendum any bill concerning the organization of public offices or the functioning of institutions or any bill which in his opinion requires direct consultation of the people. If the initiative for consultation of the people was taken by the Popular National Assembly, the referendum bill shall be submitted for prior agreement of the committees of FARITANY. If the referendum finally adopts the bill, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it within fifteen days.

31

TITLE VII JURISDICTIONS Subtitle I General Principles Article 83. In the Democratic Republic of Madagascar justice shall be rendered in conformity with the law in the name of the Malagasy people by the Supreme Court, Appeals Courts and tribunals. Bench magistrates, judges and assistant judges shall be independent in all their judicial activities and shall be answerable only to the Constitution and the law. The President of the Republic shall guarantee the independence of bench magistrates.- He shall be assisted by the Superior Council of the Bench over which he shall preside and whose organization, duties and functioning shall be fixed by law. The participation of citizens in the functioning and supervision of justice shall be determined by law by the creation of popular tribunals for the FOKONTANY and the FIRATSAMPOKONTANY. Article 84. Judges and assistant judges shall be elected by assemblies of the decentralized communities within the appropriate jurisdiction. Article 85. Members of the public prosecutor's office shall operate as a hierarchy. The judicial police shall be in their service. Article 86. The Supreme Court shall be composed of professional magistrates elected by the Popular National Assembly under the conditions and methods provided for by law. It shall exercise general control over the judicial activities of appeals courts and tribunals. It shall be responsible to the Popular National Assembly under conditions provided by law; if the Assembly is not in session, it shall answer to the Supreme Council of the Revolution.

32

The First President of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President of the Republic in the Supreme Council of the Revolution. Subtitle II The High Court of Justice Article 87. The President of the Republic, members of the Supreme Council of the Revolution, and members of the Government shall be legally responsible for all acts committed in the exercise of their duties which were classified as crimes or misdemeanors at the time they were committed. They shall be judged by the High Court of Justice. They may be indicted by the Popular National Assembly by public vote of a majority of its members. Members called to participate in the preliminary examination or in the judgment shall not take part in the vote of the Popular National Assembly. of: The High Court of Justice shall be composed -- the First President of the Supreme Court, president; -- the two First Presidents of the Appeals Court; -- six members of the Popular National Assembly. The law shall establish the method for designating titular members, other than the President, and substitute members. It shall also establish the functional and procedural rules applicable before this high court. The public prosecutors for the High Court of Justice shall be representatives of the Popular National Assembly elected from its members and assisted by members of the public prosecutor's office.

33

The High Court of Justice shall be bound by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors as well as by the prescribed penalties of the criminal law in force at the time of the crime. Subtitle III The Constitutional High Court Article 88. The Constitutional High Court shall rule whether laws, ordinances and autonomous regulations are in conformity with the Constitution. It shall also rule on conflicts of jurisdiction between State institutions and between the State and the decentralized collectives. Article 89. The Constitutional High Court shall contain seven members with the title of High Counsellor for the Constitutional High Court. Their term of office shall be in renewable fiveyear terms. Two members shall be designated by the President of the Republic, two by the Supreme Council of the Revolution, one by the Government, and two by the Popular National Assembly. One of the members designated by the President of the Republic, by the Supreme Council of the Revolution, and by the Popular National Assembly, and the member designated by the Government, shall be selected according to their knowledge of judicial matters. The President of the Constitutional High Court shall be appointed by the President of the Republic. He shall have the deciding vote in divided cases. The designation of the other members shall be made by decree of the President of the Republic. Article 90. The office of member of the Constitutional High Court shall be incompatible with holding office in the Supreme Council of the Revolution, the Government, any elective office, or other professional activity. The law shall define the conditions under which the President of the Republic may transfer duties or assignments to the High Counsellors for

34

the Constitutional High Court. Article 91. The Constitutional High Court shall supervise the election of the President of the Republic, the designation of members of the Supreme Council of the Revolution, and the election of deputies. It shall also supervise referenda and declare the results. Article 92. Before laws are promulgated, the President of the Republic shall submit them to the Constitutional High Court for a ruling on their constitutionality. A provision judged unconstitutional by the Constitutional High Court shall not be promulgated. In this case, the President of the Republic may decide to promulgate the other provisions of the law, to submit the entire law for reconsideration by the Popular National Assembly, or not to promulgate the law. Article 93. Ordinances, before their promulgation, and internal regulation of the Popular National Assembly, before taking effect, shall be submitted to the Constitutional High Court for a ruling on their constitutionality. Article 94. If, before any court, a party raises a plea of unconstitutionality, the court shall delay the trial for one month in order to refer the question to the Constitutional High Court, which must rule on the question as quickly as possible. Article 95. The Constitutional High Court may also be consulted by the President of the Republic to determine the constitutionality of any bill or decree. The President of the Republic may request an advisory opinion from the Constitutional High Court on a legislative provision. Article 96. In cases of disputed elections or referenda, the Constitutional High Court shall

35

issue decrees. In other matters that fall within its jurisdiction, aside from the case provided for in Article 95, it shall issue decisions. The decisions and orders of the Constitutional High Court shall be based on specific reasoning; they may not be appealed. They shall be binding on all public officers as well as on all administrative and judicial authorities. Article 97. The law shall determine: the method of applying Articles 88 and 90 of this title; the organizational and functional rules of the Constitutional High Court; and the procedure to be followed before it. TITLE VIII THE MILITARY COMMITTEE FOR DEVELOPMENT Article 98. The Military Committee for Development shall be an advisory organ whose opinion shall be required on all programs for national defense, economic or social development. For this purpose, it shall participate in the formation of economic and social plans, the implementation of which shall be entrusted to the Popular Armed Forces. Article 99. The status, the number of members, the divisions and the working rules of the Military Committee for Development shall be established by law. TITLE IX DECENTRALIZATION Article 100. The decentralized collectives of the State shall be FOKONTANY, FIRAISAMPOKONTANY and FARITANY. These collectives shall be based on the FOKONOLONA. Article 101. The general assembly of citizen electors and an elected executive committee shall manage the affairs of the FOKONTANY.

36

FIRAISAMPOKONTANY, FIVONDRONAMPOKONTANY and FARITANY shall be provided with an elected popular council and an elected executive committee. Article 102. The general assembly for the FOKONTANY and the popular council for the other decentralized collectives shall direct, on their respective levels, local activity aimed at economic, social, cultural or municipal development. The principle of democratic centralism, defined by the Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution, shall apply to the decentralized collectives. Article 103. Public services may be instituted or maintained to facilitate economic coordination, administrative action, and technical support on the local level. Article 104. The law shall establish the rules relating to the organization, functioning and duties of the decentralized collectives. TITLE X AMENDING THE CONSTITUTION Article 105. The initiative to amend the Constitution shall be vested with the President of the Republic, who shall enact it in the Supreme Council of the Revolution and the Council of Ministers meeting in extraordinary session, or with the Popular National Assembly on the proposal of at least half of its members. Article 106. The bill or proposal for amendment shall be adopted only by a three-quarters majority of the members of the Popular National Assembly. Article 107. The President of the Republic, with the Supreme Council of the Revolution convened with the Council of Ministers, may submit the amendment of the Constitution to a direct popular referendum.

37

Article 108. The republican form of the State, as well as the option for a socialist regime, shall not be an issue for amendment. TITLE XI TEMPORARY AND FINAL PROVISIONS Article 109. Until the official proclamation by the Superior Council of Institutions on the national result of the referendum for the ratification of the Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution and adoption of this Constitution, the Supreme Council of the Revolution and the Government shall continue to exercise their powers. Article 110. The President of the Republic, to be elected in the popular referendum referred to in the preceding article, shall have the powers conferred on him by this Constitution as soon as the Superior Council of Institutions has officially proclaimed the result. He shall take an oath during his solemn investiture following the promulgation of the new Constitution. Article 111. Until the installation of the Popular National Assembly provided for by Title V of this Constitution, the Supreme Council of the Revolution, composed of members directly chosen by Presidential decree, shall exercise the Constitutional prerogatives and all duties of the Assembly. He shall legislate by ordinance all matters which fall within the area of law. Article 112. The activities of the Popular National Council for Development shall be ended by a decree of the President of the Republic before the start of the legislative election campaign. Article 113. The President of the Republic shall have full powers to: -- exercise, by issuing ordinances in consul-

38

tation with the Supreme Council of the Revolution, all legislative provisions provided for by the Constitution for the organization of public offices. Before promulgation, these ordinances shall be submitted for the approval of the office responsible for determining the constitutionality of laws, the decision of which shall be applicable to all State authorities and jurisdictions. -- organize the elections to install the new State institutions within eighteen months. Article 114. Until the installation of the Constitutional High Court, the Supreme Council of the Revolution shall continue to function in conformity with existing legislative provisions. Article 115. Until the installation of the Supreme Court provided for in Article 86, the present Supreme Court shall continue to function in conformity with the legislative provisions in force. Article 116. With the exception of possible modifications, existing legislation in the Republic shall remain applicable in all provisions which are not contrary to this Constitution. Article 117. Legislative provisions inconsistent with the common law which have been passed exceptionally since May 13, 1972, shall be repealed by law at the expiration of the period provided for in Article 113 above, provided they are not expressly confirmed and introduced into ordinary legislation before that date. Article 118. This law shall take effect as soon as it is promulgated and shall be published in the Journal officiel of the Republic. It shall be executed as the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar.

39

