CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

MAURITANIA
by MARK P. TARANTINO

Issued November 1981

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1981 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

The existing (and substantively unchanged) charter is now the

CONSTITUTIONAL CHARTER ON THE MILITARY COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL SALVATION

Charter translated by

PATRICE RINALDO
Constitution translated by

SARAH J. CAMPBELL

MAURITANIA THE CONSTITUTIONAL CHARTER OF THE MILITARY COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION July 10, 1978 In light of the proclamation of July 10, 1978, of the Military Committee of National Reconstruction (CMRN); Preamble. Aware of their responsibilities to the people, the Armed Forces took power July 10, 1978, in order to save the country and the nation from ruin and dismemberment and to safeguard National Unity and the existence of the State. They proclaimed their intention to respect all the international agreements made in the name of the State and to adhere to the principles established by the Declaration of Human Rights, the Charter of the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity, and the League of Arab States. Article 1. The provisions of the Constitution relating to the organization and exercise of legislation and executive powers are repealed. Article 2. The National Assembly and the Party of the Mauritanian People are dissolved. Article 3. The National Armed Forces exercise power through the medium of the CMRN. Article 4. The CMRN holds the legislative power. It conceives and determines the general policy of the Nation. It directs and controls the action of the Government. Article 5. The CMRN designates its president in the manner provided by the internal regulations of the Committee.

1

Article 6. The members of the CMRN are named by an ordinance after deliberation of the Committee. Article 7. Decisions of the CMRN are made by an absolute majority of members present. In case of a tie, the vote of the President is deciding. Article 8. The CMRN is convened in ordinary session every fifteen days and in extraordinary session when convened by its president or at the request of one-third of its members. Article 9. The President of the CMRN exercises legislative power. He initiates legislative bills, which he promulgates after their adoption by the CMRN. Article 10. The President of the CMRN enforces decisions of the Committee. Article 11. The President of the CMRN is the Chief of Government. He appoints ministers to whom he delegates certain of his powers. The ministers are accountable to him. Article 12. The President of the CMRN, Chief of the Government, appoints military and civilian officials. He is the Supreme Chief of the National Armed Forces. He accredits ambassadors and extraordinary envoys to foreign powers. Ambassadors and extraordinary envoys are accredited to him. He signs and ratifies treaties and international accords after authorization by the CMRN. He exercises the rights of pardon and amnesty. Article 13. Martial law and states of emergency are declared by the President of the CMRN. Article 14. The present Charter remains in

2

force until new democratic institutions have been established. It will be supplemented, should the need arise, by constitutional enactments. Article 15. Legislation and regulations presently in force remain applicable until such time time as they shall be modified in the manner established by the present Charter. Article 16. This Charter will be published according to emergency procedure in the Journal Officiel. Nouakchott, July 10, 1978, by the President of the Military Committee of National Reconstruction, Lieutenant Colonel Moustapha 0. Mohamed Saleck

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA THE PERMANENT SECRETARIAT OF THE MILITARY COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL SAFETY The Permanent Secretariat of the Military Committee of National Safety has today published the draft constitution which is being submitted for the people's approval, to be decided by sovereign referendum. The Military Committee of National Safety, after having reestablished peace and begun the process of national economic recovery, thus takes up the task of fulfilling its third commitment made to the people on July 10, 1978, namely the establishment of democratic institutions. This is the entire text of this draft constitution, including a preamble, eleven headings, and 66 articles. HONOR - FRATERNITY - JUSTICE DRAFT CONSTITUTION PREAMBLE Trusting in the power of Allah, the Mauritanian people proclaim their desire to guarantee their territorial integrity and to assure their free political, economic, and social evolution. They proclaim their attachment to Islam and to the principles of democracy as they have been defined by the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man, as well as the other international conventions to which the Islamic Republic of Mauritania has subscribed. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania, an Arab, African country, shall work within the framework of the Arab, African, and international organizations to which it belongs for the consolidation of world peace and a just international order. TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS - FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES Article 1. Mauritania is an Islamic, parliamentary Republic, indivisible, democratic and social. The Republic shall assure to all citizens equality before the law, without distinction as to race, religion, or social condition. All divisive propaganda of a racial or ethnic character shall be punished by law.

1

Article 2. Sovereignty is vested in the people who shall exercise it directly by referendum or indirectly, by the intermediary of constitutional institutions. No faction of the people and no individual may usurp its exercise. No partial or total abandonment of sovereignty may be decided upon without the consent of the people. Article 3. Political parties, labor and professional organizations, and regional and communal councils shall contribute to the organization and representation of citizens. There may not be a one-party state. Article 4. Law is the supreme expression of the will of the people. Everyone shall be subject to it. Law may not be retroactive in effect. Article 5. The religion of the people shall be Islam. The Republic shall guarantee to each liberty of conscience and the right to practice his religion with the reservations imposed by morality and public order. Article 6. The official language shall be Arabic. National languages shall be Arabic, Poular, Soninke and Wolof. Article 7. The capital of the State shall be Nouakchott. Article 8. The national emblem shall be a flag with a crescent and gold star on a green background. The State seal and the national hymn shall be established by law. Article 9. The motto of the Republic shall be honor, fraternity, justice. Article 10. Men and women shall enjoy equality of political rights. All citizens of the Republic having attained their majority and possessing civil and political rights shall be electors, including both sexes. Article 11. The constitution shall guarantee to all citizens: -- freedom to travel and to settle in all parts of the territory of the Republic; -- freedom of choice; -- freedom of expression in all forms; -- freedom of assembly;

2

-- freedom of association and freedom to belong to any labor organization of their choice. These freedoms may not be limited except by law. Article 12. No one may be arrested, detained or punished except in the cases and under the forms provided for by law. The domicile shall be inviolable. Article 13. All citizens shall have access under the same conditions to public posts and employment. Article 14. The right to strike shall be guaranteed; an organic law shall specify the conditions and forms under which the right to strike may be exercised. Article 15. The right to property shall be guaranteed. The law may limit its extent and exercise, if exigencies of social and economic development so dictate. Expropriation may not take place except in the cases and under the forms enacted by law. TITLE II THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Article 16. The President of the Republic shall be the Chief of State. He shall be of the Muslim religion and a native-born Mauritanian. Article 17. The Presidentof the Republic shall be the guardian of the constitution. He shall guarantee its application. He shall arbitrate jurisdictional conflicts between parliament and the government. He shall accredit ambassadors to foreign powers, and ambassadors shall be accredited to him. He shall promulgate the laws. He may, with the consent of the constitutional council, dissolve the National Assembly. He may exercise the right of pardon. He shall be supreme chief of the Armed Forces. Article 18. He shall be elected for six years through universal suffrage by an absolute majority of the votes cast. Every native-born Mauritanian citizen, possessing his civil and political rights, at least 35 years of age, shall be eligible to the Presidency of the Republic. Conditions and forms of candidacy to the Presidency of the Republic shall be determined by law.

3

Files on candidates shall be submitted to the constitutional council which shall rule on their regularity. Article 19. The office of President of the Republic shall be incompatible with the exercise of any other public or private post. Article 20. The President of the Republic shall be eligible for one reelection. Article 21. Before taking office, the President of the Republic shall swear before the National Assembly the following oath: "I swear before the One Allah to serve loyally the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and the interests of the Mauritanian people, to respect the Constitution and to safeguard territorial integrity." Article 22. In the event of temporary disability declared by the constitutional council, the president of the National Assembly shall serve temporarily as Chief of State for a period of not more than 3 months. After 3 months the disability shall be considered permanent and elections to fill the post of Chief of State must take place, except in an emergency declared by the constitutional council, not later than 45 days following the beginning of the permanent disability. In the event of vacancy or disability declared to be permanent by the constitutional council, the president of the National Assembly shall serve temporarily as Chief of State to expedite current business. Barring an emergency declared by the constitutional council, the election of a new President of the Republic shall take place within 3 months from the declaration of vacancy or permanent disability. During the intervening period no constitutional modification may be enacted, whether by referendum or organic law. Article 23. In order to declare a vacancy or disability, appeal may be made to the constitutional council by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, or the Prime Minister. TITLE III
THE

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

Article 24. Legislative power shall be vested in the National Assembly, which shall be elected for 4 years. The law shall determine and specify the conditions for election of deputies of the National Assembly, the number of its members, conditions of eligibility, rules regarding ineligibility, and incompatibility. All citizens of the Republic who are native-born, at least 25 years of age, and who possess political and civil rights, shall be eligible.

4

Article 25. The constitutional council shall rule in the event of a dispute over the regularity of the deputies' election or their eligibility. Article 26. No member of the National Assembly may be prosecuted, pursued, arrested, detained or judged because of decisions or votes cast by him in the exercise of his duties. Except in a case of flagrant delicto, no deputy may be prosecuted or arrested for a crime or misdemeanor without the authorization of the Assembly in session or the bureau of the Assembly between sessions. The investigation or prosecution shall be suspended if the Assembly so requests. Article 27. The members' right to vote shall be personal. A committed vote shall be invalid. Any discussion outside the time and place for meetings shall be invalid. The President of the Republic may request that the constitutional council declare such to be invalid. Meetings of the Assembly shall be public. The text of the debates shall be published in the Journal of Debates. At the request of the President of the Republic or of one quarter of the deputies present, the Assembly shall meet in closed session. Article 28. Each year the Assembly shall hold two ordinary sessions. The first session shall open in the first two weeks of November; the second, in the first two weeks of May. The length of each session may not exceed two months. The Assembly may meet in extraordinary session if the majority of its members so requests or upon the initiative of the President of the Republic. The length of an extraordinary session may not exceed one month. Sessions of the National Assembly shall be opened and closed by decree of the Prime Minister with the consent of the constitutional council. Article 29. Ministers shall have access to the Assembly. They may speak when they so request. They may be assisted by Government Commissions. They shall not participate in votes. TITLE IV THE PRIME MINISTER Article 30. The Prime Minister shall be the head of the government. He shall exercise executive power. He shall appoint and dismiss ministers, who shall be responsible to him.

5

Article 31. He shall possess regulatory power. Article 32. He shall make appointments to civil and military posts. Article 33. If imminent danger threatens the institutions of the Republic, the security or independence of the nation, or its territorial integrity, and if the regular functioning of public power is interrupted, the Prime Minister shall take such exceptional measures as circumstances may dictate, following consent of the President of the Republic and the Constitutional Council. He shall so inform the nation by a message and shall convene the National Assembly. The measures taken shall cease to be in force as soon as the circumstances which generated them shall end. Article 34. He shall conceive and conduct the internal and external policy of the State. Article 35. He shall present the program of his government to the National Assembly, and this program must set forth the guidelines for action that the government proposes to take in various sectors of national activity, particularly in areas concerning economic, social, cultural, and external policy. Article 36. The Prime Minister shall be designated by the President from among members of the party or the majority coalition in parliament. His appointment shall take effect following approval of his government by the National Assembly. ated: Article 37. The mandate of the Prime Minister shall be terrain-- whenever parliament passes a vote of no-confidence; -- whenever his resignation, presented to the President of the Republic, is accepted; -- whenever there is a general election for the National Assembly. TITLE V RELATIONS BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 38. Laws shall be voted by the National Assembly. The Assembly may authorize the government to decree measures, which are normally in the domain of law, for a limited period of time and with a definite objective. Decrees shall take effect as soon as they are published, but they must be submitted for ratification to the National Assembly at the end of the time provided for in the enabling law. The enabling law shall lapse if the National Assembly is dissolved. 6

Article 39. In addition to matters which are expressly assigned to the area of law by other articles of this constitution, the following are within the area of law: a) The law shall establish rules concerning: -- civil rights and fundamental guarantees granted to citizens for the exercise of public liberties, and obligations imposed on citizens, their person and their property, by National Defense; -- nationality and the status and capacity of persons; -- determination of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as applicable penalties, amnesty, and penal procedure; -- the bases, rates, and means of collection of taxes of all sorts, and regulation of the coinage of currency; -- electoral regulation for the National Assembly and public bodies; -- creation of categories of public establishments. b) The law shall determine the fundamental principles of: -- the general organization of national defense; -- the general organization of the Administration; -- the organization of jurisdictions and applicable procedures within them; -- the Administration of public bodies, their authority and resources; -- the general regulation of State civil servants; -- education; -- regulation of property, property rights, and civil and commercial obligations; -- the right to work, labor union rights, and social institutions Budgetary laws shall determine the resources and obligations of the State. Planning laws shall determine the objectives of State economic and social action. Article 40. A declaration of war may be authorized by the National Assembly.

7

Article 41. Matters other than those within the domain of law shall fall under the regulatory power. Legislative drafts concerning these areas which appear after this Constitution takes effect may be modified by decree if the constitutional council declares that they are of regulatory character by virtue of the preceding paragraph. Article 42. Initiative regarding laws shall be vested in the Prime Minister and members of the Assembly. Article 43. The agenda of the National Assembly shall give priority to discussion of bills presented by the government. Article 44. Deputies shall have the right of amendment. Bills or amendments presented by deputies may not be received if their adoption would entail a reduction in public revenue or the creation or increase of a public obligation, unless they are accompanied by a bill to increase revenue or to make equivalent savings. They may not be received if they deal with a matter falling within the regulatory power by virtue of Article 41. If the Assembly overrides the ineligibility declared by the government by virtue of one of the two preceding paragraphs, the Prime Minister may appeal to the constitutional council, which shall give a ruling within eight days. Article 45. The Assembly shall deal with the budgetary bill at the opening of the November session. If the Assembly has not voted upon the budget by the expiration of its session, or if it has not voted a balanced budget, the President of the Republic, within two weeks, shall return the bill to the Assembly, convened in extraordinary session. The Assembly must pass upon it within one week. If the budget has not been voted upon within this period, the President of the Republic shall automatically establish it by ordinance based upon the revenue of the preceding year. The Assembly shall supervise the execution of the budget of the State and supplementary budgets. A report on expenditures shall be furnished to the Assembly at the end of each half-year for the preceding half-year. Final accounts for a fiscal year shall be presented in the course of the budgetary session of the following year and shall be approved by a law. The constitutional council shall assist the Prime Minister and the Assembly in supervising the execution of budgets. Article 46. The Prime Minister shall ensure publication of the laws in the Journal Officiel within two weeks following their transmittal to him by the President of the National Assembly. 8

During this period the Prime Minister may send the bill back for a second reading. If the National Assembly declares it adopted by a majority of its members, the law shall be promulgated and published within a second two-week period. He may also appeal to the constitutional council regarding unconstitutionality. Article 47. Martial law or a state of emergency may be decreed by the Prime Minister with the consent of the President of the Republic. Article 48. In the course of the November session the President shall make an annual report to the National Assembly on the state of the Nation and on his activities during the past year and shall set forth the guidelines of his program for the year to come. TITLE VI INTERNATIONAL TREATIES AND AGREEMENTS Article 49. Peace treaties, treaties of commerce, treaties or agreements regarding international organization, treaties committing the finances of the State, treaties modifying legislative provisions, treaties regarding the status of persons, treaties which entail the cession, exchange or annexing of territory may not be ratified except by virtue of a law. They may not take effect until they are ratified or approved. No cession, exchange, or annexation of territory shall be valid without the consent of the people concerned, declared by means of referendum. In the case provided for in the last paragraph of Article 2, the required majority shall be four-fifths. Article 50. If the constitutional council, upon an appeal by the President of the Republic or the President of the Assembly or the Prime Minister, has declared that an international commitment includes a clause contrary to the constitution, authorization to ratify or approve it may only be given after revision of the constitution. Article 51. Treaties or agreements which are duly ratified or approved shall take precedence over laws as soon as they are published, with the reservation that each agreement or treaty be applied by the other party. TITLE VII JUSTICE Article 52. Judicial authority shall be independent of the executive power and the legislative power. Regulation of the judiciary shall be established by law.

9

Article 53. Justice shall be rendered in the name of the Mauritanian people. Article 54. No one may be arbitrarily detained. The judicial authority, the guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure respect for this principle under conditions provided by law. Article 55. The President of the Republic shall guarantee the independence of the judiciary. He shall be president of the Superior Council of the Judiciary. Article 56. In a case of high treason or conspiracy against the security of the State, the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, and Ministers may be indicted by the National Assembly in a public vote by two-thirds majority and then referred to the High Court. The composition of the High Court, rules concerning its function, and applicable procedure shall be established by law. TITLE VIII THE CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL Article 57. The constitutional council shall exercise, in the constitutional area, the duties attributed by this constitution. In this regard it shall supervise the regularity of elections and referenda and shall proclaim the results. Article 58. Members of the constitutional council shall be appointed by the President of the Republic with the approval of the National Assembly by a three-fourths majority. Members of the constitutional council shall be appointed for ten years and shall enjoy parliamentary immunity. The constitutional council shall be composed of five members chosen for their great knowledge, their wisdom, and their integrity. They must be at least 35 years of age and possess their civil and political rights. Article 59. Members of the constitutional council may not belong to the leadership bodies of political parties. Article 60. The constitutional council shall elect its President in accordance with the forms provided by its by-laws. The by-laws of the constitutional council shall be approved by ordinance of the President of the Republic. Article 61. The position of constitutional councilor shall be incompatible with that of deputy and any other position implying subordination. Article 62. The functions of the constitutional council as well as the regulation of benefits and incompatibilities shall be determined and specified by law.
1

0

TITLE IX TERRITORIAL UNITS Article 63. The territorial units in the state shall be the regions and the District of Nouakchott. The territorial units shall be divided into communes. The law shall specify the exercise of power at the regional and communal level. TITLE X REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION Article 64. Revisions of the constitution shall be submitted to a referendum and approved by a simple majority of the votes cast. Article 65. Initiative for revision of the constitution shall be vested in the President of the Republic and the members of the Assembly. No bill for revision by deputies may be discussed unless it is signed by at least one third of the members of the Assembly. Revision bills must be voted by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Assembly in order to be submitted to referendum. No procedure for revision may be undertaken if the bill jeopardizes the existence of the State, the integrity of the territory, or the Republican form of Government. TITLE XI TEMPORARY PROVISION Article 66. Until the institutions provided for by this constitution have been established, the exercise of power shall continue to be regulated by the charter and ordinances of the Military Committee of National Safety.

11

