CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

MONACO
Revised and Updated to 1986 by GISBERT H. FLANZ

Issued December 1986

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

PRINCIPALITY OF MONACO Constitution of December 17, 1962

TITLE I THE PRINCIPALITY--THE PUBLIC POWERS Art. 1 - The Principality of Monaco is a sovereign and independent State within the framework of the general principles of international law and p articular conventions with France. The territory of the Principality is inalienable. Art. 2 - The principle of government is that of a hereditary and constitutional monarchy. The Principality is a legal State committed to the respect of liberties and fundamental rights. Art. 3 - The executive power is derived from the high authority of the Prince. The person of the Prince is inviolable. Art. 4 - The legislative power is exercised by the Prince and the National Council. 5

Art. 5 - The judicial power is exercised by the courts and tribunals. Art. 6 - The separation of the administrative, legislative and judicial functions is assured. Art. 7 - The princely flag is composed of the arms of the House of Grimaldi on a white background. The national flag is composed of two equal horizontal stripes, the upper stripe is red and the lower one is white. The use of these flags remains governed by the provisions of the Sovereign Ordinance of April 4, 1881. Art. 8 - The French lan guage is the official language of the State. Art. 9 - The Catholic religion, apostolic and Roman, is the religion of the State. TITLE II THE PRINCE, THE DEVOLUTION OF THE CROWN Art. 10 - The succession to the throne shall take place after death or abdication within the direct legitimate line of the reigning Prince, by order of primogeniture, with priority being given to males within the same degree of relationship. In the absence of legitimate descendants, an adopted child or an adopted child's legitimate descendants are eligible to succeed. Art. 11 - For the exercise of the sovereign powers, the age of majority is fixed at twenty-one years. The organization and conditions for the exercise of a Regency during the minority of the Prince or in the event of the impossibility for heir to exercise his functions are fixed by the statutes of the Sovereign Family. Art. 12 - The Prince exercises his sovereign authority in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution and the laws. Art. 13 - The Prince represents the Principality in its relations with foreign powers. 6

Art. 14 - After consultation with the Council of the Crown, the Prince signs and ratifies treaties and brings them to the National Council. Treaties which affect constitutional organization, cannot be ratified except by a law. Art. 15 - After consultation with the Council of the Crown, the Prince exercises the right of pardon and of amnesty, as well as the right of naturalization and of reintegration of nationality. Art. 16 - The Prince confers orders, titles and other distinctions. TITLE III THE LIBERTIES AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS Art. 17 - Monegasque citizens are equal before the law. There are no privileges among them. Art. 18 - All individuals born in Monaco or abroad of a Monegasque father are Monegasque. The law regulates other modes of acquiring Monegasque nationality. The law regulates the conditions under which nationality acquired by naturalization may be taken away. The loss of Monegasque nationality in all other cases cannot be foreseen by law except by reason of voluntary acquisition of another nationality or by illegitimately performed service in another army. Art. 19 - Individual liberty and security are guaranteed. No one can be prosecuted except in the cases foreseen by law before the legally designated judges, and in the manner prescribed. Except in cases of flagrante delicto, no one may be arrested except by a judge's order giving the reasons, which must be shown at the time of the arrest or, at the latest, within twenty four hours. Any detention must be preceded by an interrogation. Art. 20 - No penalty may be established or applied except by virtue of law. The penal laws must assure respect for human personality and dignity. No one may be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The death penalty is abolished. The penal laws may not have retroactive effect. 7

Art. 21 - The domicile is inviolable. No domiciliary visit may , take place except in cases and under conditions prescribed by law. Art. 22 - Every person has the right to respect for his private and family life and the secrecy of his correspondence. Art. 23 - Freedom of religion, of its public exercise, and the freedom to express opinions on all matters are guaranteed, except the repression of offences committed in the exercise of these liberties. No one may be forced to participate in acts and ceremonies of any religion nor to observe its days of rest. Art. 24 - Property is inviolable. No one may be deprived of his property except for legally stated public use and against a fair indemnity, established and paid out under conditions provided by law. Art. 25 - Freedom of work is guaranteed. Its exercise is regulated by law. Priority of access to public and private employment is assured to Monegasques under the conditions prescribed by law or by international conventions. Art. 26 - Monegasques have the right to State assistance in case of poverty, unemployment, sickness, disability, old age and maternity, under the conditions and forms prescribed by law. Art. 27 - Monegasques have the right to free primary and secondary education. Art. 28 - Every person may defend the rights and interests of his profession or function by trade union action. The right to strike is recognized within the framework of the laws relating to it. Art. 29 - Monegasques have the right to assemble peacefully without arms in accordance with the laws which may regulate the exercise of this right without making it subject to prior authorization. This freedom does not extend to meetings in the open air which remain subject to police laws. 8

Art. 30 - Monegasques have the right to associate freely with respect for the rules of the Constitution. Art. 31 - Everyone may address petitions to the public authorities. Art. 32 - Foreigners enjoy in the Principality all the public and private rights which are not formally reserved to nationals. TITLE IV THE PUBLIC DOMAIN, THE PUBLIC FINANCES Art. 33 - The public domain is inalienable and imprescriptible. The transfer of an asset belonging to the public domain may not be carried out except by a law. It introduces the transferred asset within the private domain of the State or the Commune, as the case may be. The composition of the rules regarding the public domain are determined by law. Art. 34 - The assets of the Crown are applied to the exercise of Sovereignty. They are inalienable and imprescrible. Their composition and the rules regarding them are determined by the statutes of the Sovereign Family. Art. 35 - Landed rights and properties belonging to the private domain of the State cannot be alienated except in conformity to the law. Art. 36 - Vacant properties without an owner shall belong to the private domain of the State. Art. 37 - The national budget includes all the receipts and expenditures of the Principality. Art. 38 - The national budget expresses the economic and financial policy of the Principality. Art. 39 - The budget is the object of a bill. It is voted and promulgated in the form of a law. Art. 40 - The expenses of the Sovereign house and of the Princely Palace are fixed by the budget 9

law and constitute a prior claim on the general receipts of the budget. Art. 41 - Any excess of receipts over expenditures which is discovered after the execution of the budget and the closure of the accounts is placed in a constitutional reserve fund. An excess of expenditures over receipts is covered by drawing on this fund in accordance with a law. Art. 42 - Control over the management of the finances is assured by a High Commission of Accounts. TITLE V THE GOVERNMENT Art. 43 - The government is exercised, under the high authority of the Prince, by a Minister of State assisted by a Council of Government. Art. 44 - The Minister of State represents the Prince. He directs the executive services. He has control over the civil police. He presides, with a preponderant vote, over the Council of Government. Art. 45 - Sovereign Ordinances are considered in the Council of Government. They are presented to the Prince under the signature of the Minister of State. They contain mention of the deliberations to which they pertain. The signature by the Prince gives them their executory force. Art. 46 - The following Sovereign ordinances do not require deliberation by the Council of Government and presentation by the Minister of State: matters relating to the direction of the judicial services; the appointment of members of the Sovereign House, of the diplomatic and consular services, of the Minister of State, of Counsellors of the Government and similar officials, of magistrates of the judicial order; those granting exequatur to consuls, those dissolving the National Council, those conferring honorary distinctions. Art. 47 - Ministerial decrees are considered in the Council of Government and signed by the
1

0

Minister of State; they make pertinent m ention of deliberations. They are transmitted to the Prince within twenty-four hours of their signature and become executory ten days after their transmission by the Minister of State if there has been no express opposition by the Prince within this period. The Prince may, always, inform the Minister of State that he does not intend to make use of his right of opposition to certain decrees or categories of decrees. They then acquire executory force from the time of their signature by the Minister of State.
Art. 48 - Except for contrary legislative dispositions, the division of subjects between Sovereign Ordinances and ministerial decrees (arretes) is made by Sovereign Ordinance. Art. 49 - The deliberations of the Council of Government are contained in minutes recorded in special register signed, after a vote, by the members present. The minutes mention the vote of each member. They are transmitted within five days from the meeting to the Prince, who may object under the conditions provided in Article 47. Art. 50 - The Minister of State and the Counsellors of the Government are responsible toward the Prince for the administration of the Principality. Art. 51 - The obligations, rights and fundamental guarantees of officials and their civil and criminal responsibilities are fixed by law.

TITLE VI THE COUNCIL OF STATE
Art. 52 - The Council of State is charged to give its advice on all bills and ordinances submitted to it by the Prince. It may be consulted on other matters. Its organization and functioning are fixed by a Sovereign Ordinance.

TITLE VII THE NATIONAL COUNCIL
Art. 53 - The National Council consists of eighteen members elected for five years by universal
1
1

direct suffrage and by list vote. All citizens of both sexes of at least twentyone years of age who have possessed Monegasque nationality for at least five years have the right to vote, with the exception of those deprived of the right to vote for any of the causes provided by law. Art. 54 - All Monegasque voters of both sexes of at least twenty-five years of age are eligible to vote unless they have been deprived of their eligibility for any of the causes provided by law. The following shall be incompatible with the mandate of National Counsellor: the functions of members of the Sovereign House, Counsellor of Government, diplomatic or consular agent, magistrate of the judicial order. The same incompatibility concerns: the Commissioner-General of the Department of Public Works and Social Affairs; the Comptroller-General of Health; the Director of the Budget and the Treasury; the Administrator of the Domains; the Chief Engineer for public works; the Government Commissioner attached to monopoly companies; the Treasurer-General of finances; the Secretary-General of the judicial services; the Private Secretary to the Minister of State; the chief secretary of the Mayor's office; officials of the legislative services of the State; officials forming the secretariat of ministerial departments; members of the High Commission of Accounts; agents of the police and security forces. Art. 55 - Control over the regularity of elections is entrusted to the courts under the conditions provided by law. Art. 56 - Members of the National Council do not incur civil or criminal responsibility for their opinions or votes in the exercise of their mandate. They may not, without the authorization of the Council, be prosecuted or arrested during a session for crimes or misdemeanors except in cases of flagrante delicto. Art. 57 - The newly elected National Council meets on the eleventh day after the elections to 12

elect its secretariat. The oldest National Counsellor presides at this meeting. Subject to Article 74, the powers of the preceding National Council expire the day the new one meets. Art. 58 - The National Council meets automatically each year in two ordinary sessions, on the first working day of the months of May and November. The duration of sessions may not exceed two months. Closure is pronounced by the President. Art. 59 - The National Council meets in extraordinary session, either on the convocation of the Prince or, at the request of at least two thirds of its members, on the convocation of its President. Art. 60 - The secretariat of the National Council consists of a President and Vice-President elected each year by the Assembly from among its members. The functions of mayor are incompatible with those of President of the National Council. Art. 61 - Subject to constitutional and, where appropriate, legislative provisions, the organization and functioning of the National Council are determined by the rules of procedure drawn up by the Council. Before being put into force, these rules of procedure must be submitted to the High Court, which rules on their conformity to constitutional and, where appropriate, legislative provisions. Art. 62 - The National Council draws up its agenda. It is communicated to the Minister of State at least three days in advance. At the request of the Government, at least one meeting out of two must be devoted to bills presented by the Prince. The agenda of extraordinary sessions convoked by the Prince is contained in the notice of convocation. Art. 63 - Meetings of the National Council are public. But the Council may decide, by a two-thirds majority of the members present, to sit in camera. The report of public sessions is printed in the Journal de Monaco.

13

Tribunal, particularly the qualifications required for membership, incompatibilities, the statute for members, rotation of members of the administrative section, the procedure to be followed before the Tribunal, the effects of appeals and decisions, the procedures and effects of conflicts of jurisdiction and the required transitional measures-. TITLE XI AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION Art. 93 - The Constitution cannot be suspended. Art. 94 - Total or partial amendment of the Constitution is contingent upon a common agreement of the Prince and the National Council. Art. 95 - In cases involving the initiative of the National Council, the deliberation must be taken by a majority of two thirds of the normal membership of the assembly. TITLE XII FINAL PROVISIONS Art. 96 - All former constitutional provisions are abrogated. The present Constitution enters into effect immediately. The renewal of the National Council and of the Communal Council shall take place within three months. Art. 97 - Laws and regulations actually in effect remain applicable insofar as they are not incompatible with the present Constitution. Should this be the case they must be brought into harmony as soon as possible. Given in Our Palace in Monaco the seventeenth of December one thousand nine hundred and sixty two.

19

Art. 64 - The Prince communicates with the National Council by messages which are read by the Minister of State. Art. 65 - The Minister of State and the Counsellors of the Government have their entrance and their places reserved at meetings of the National Council. They must be heard if they so request. Art. 66 - A law implies an agreement reached between the Prince and the National Council. The Prince has the right to initiate laws. The National Council has the right to deliberate and enact laws. The Prince has the right to approve laws and by their promulgation gives them obligatory force. Art. 67 - The Prince signs bills which are presented to him by the Council of Government under the signature of the Minister of State. The National Council has the right to propose laws which follow, where appropriate, the procedure provided in the preceding paragraph. Art. 68 - The Prince issues the necessary ordinances for the execution of laws and for the application of treaties and international agreements. Art. 69 - Laws and Sovereign Ordinances become applicable on the day following their publication in the Journal de Monaco. Art. 70 - The National Council votes the budget. No direct contribution may be established except at the wish and with the consent of the National Council. No indirect contribution may be established except by a law with the exception of those resulting from an international treaty. Art. 71 - The budget bill is presented to the National Council before 31 October. The budget law is voted upon during the course of the November session of the National Council. Art. 72 - The budget is voted upon chapter by chapter. Transfers from one chapter to another are 14

forbidden except in the cases authorized by law. The budget includes under expenses, in particular, the sums placed at the disposition of the Communal Council for the coming financial year in accordance with Article 87. Art. 73 - If the credits requested by the Government in accordance with Article 71 have not been passed before December 31, the credits corresponding to the services passed may be opened by Sovereign Ordinance with the consent of the Council of State. The above applies also to receipts and expenditures resulting from international treaties. Art. 74 - The Prince may, after consulting the Council of the Crown, pronounce the dissolution of the National Council. In that case, new elections must then take place within three months. TITLE VIII THE COUNCIL OF THE CROWN Art. 75 - The Council of the Crown consists of seven members of Monegasque nationality appointed for a term of three years by the Prince. The President and three other members are freely designated by the Prince. Three members are appointed upon the nomination of the National Council and from outside. The functions of Minister of State and of Counsellor of Government are incompatible with those of the President or member of the Council of the Crown. Art. 76 - The Council of the Crown meets at least twice a year on the convocation of the Prince. The Prince may convene it whenever he considers it necessary either on his own initiative or at the suggestion of the President of the Council of the Crown. Art. 77 - The Council of the Crown may be consulted by the Prince on matters touching the higher interests of the State. It may present its suggestions to the Prince. The Council of the Crown must be consulted about the following matters: international treaties, dissolution of the National Council, requests for 15

naturalization or resumption of nationality, pardons and amnesty.
TITLE IX THE COMMUNE

Art. 78 - The territory of the Principality forms one single commune. Art. 79 - The commune is administered by a municipality consisting of a Mayor and associates appointed by the Communal Council from among its members. All citizens of both sexes of at least twentyone years of age who have possessed Monegasque nationality for at least five years have the right to vote, with the exception of those persons deprived of the right to vote for any of the reasons provided by law. Art. 80 - The Communal Council consists of fifteen members elected for four years by universal direct suffrage and by list vote. No incompatibility exists between the office of Communal Counsellor and that of National Counsellor. Art. 81 - The Communal Council meets every three months in ordinary session. The duration of each session must not exceed fifteen days. Art. 82 - Extraordinary sessions may be held at the request or with the authorization of the Minister of State for specific purposes. Art. 83 - The Communal Council may be dissolved by ministerial decree with specified reasons upon consultation with the Council of State. Art. 84 - In case of dissolution or of the resignation of all the members of the Communal Council, a special delegation shall be charged by ministerial decree, to exercise its functions until the election of a new Council. Such election is to take place within three months. Art. 85 - The Communal Council is presided over by the Mayor, or, in his absence, by his assistant or the counsellor who replaces him in order of the roll. 16

Art. 86 - The Communal Council deliberates in public session on the affairs of the commune. Its decisions shall be executory fifteen days following their communication to the Minister of State except when specified opposition has been stated in a ministerial decree. Art. 87 - The communal budget is met by the revenue from communal properties and the ordinary resources of the commune. In the event of an excess of expenditures, the National Council is called upon each year when the budget is presented by the Communal Council to deliberate what credits can be placed at the disposal of the commune. TITLE X JUSTICE Art. 88 - The judicial power belongs to the Prince who, by this Constitution, delegates its full exercise to the courts and tribunals. The tribunals render justice in the name of the Prince. The independence of the judges is guaranteed. The organization, the competence and the functioning of the tribunals and the statute of the judges are fixed by law. Art. 89 - The Supreme Tribunal is composed of five regular members and two alternates. Members of the Supreme Tribunal are appointed by the Prince in the following manner: one regular member and one alternate nominated by the National Council from the outside; one regular member and one alternate nominated by the Council of State from the outside; one regular member nominated by the Council of the Crown from the outside; one regular member nominated by the Court of Appeal from the outside. Each of the bodies listed above make two nominations for each seat. If the Prince does not agree to the nominations, he may ask for new ones. The President of the Supreme Tribunal is appointed by the Prince.

17

Art. 90 - A. In constitutional matters the Supreme Court decides in sovereign capacity: (1) on the confirmity of the internal regulations of the National Council with constitutional and, where appropriate, legislative provisions, under the conditions stated in Article 61; (2) on the annulment, upon petition, of the validity of verdicts and indemnity in questions involving threats to the rights and freedoms guaranteed by Title III of the Constitution, which do not fall under paragraph B of this article. B. In administrative matters the Supreme Court determines with finality: (1) on the recourse to annulment of acts in excess of power by various administrative authorities and Sovereign Ordinances issued for the execution of laws and on the imposition of indemnities resulting therefrom; (2) on the recourse for reversal of final decisions of administrative courts; (3) on the petitioning for interpretation and recourse on questions of the validity and decisions of the various administrative authorities and of Sovereign Ordinances taken for the execution of laws. C. The Supreme Tribunal decides conflicts of jurisdiction. Art. 91 - The Supreme Tribunal deliberates either in plenary assembly of five members or in administrative section of three members. It meets and deliberates in plenary assembly: (1) on constitutional matters: (2) to decide conflicts of jurisdiction; (3) on administrative matters transferred to it by the President of the Supreme Tribunal or decided upon by the administrative section. It meets and deliberates in administrative section in all other cases. Art. 92 - A Sovereign Ordinance determines the organization and the functioning of the Supreme 18

