Constitutions of the Communist Party-States
Edited by

JAN F. TRISKA

The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace Stanford University

The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, founded at Stanford University in 1919 by the late President Herbert Hoover, is a center for advanced study and research on public and international affairs in the twentieth century. The views expressed in its publications are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Hoover Institution.

Hoover Institution Publications

[70]

© 1968 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University All rights reserved Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 67-29975 Printed by Cathay Press, Hong Kong

CONSTITUTION OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC'
Adopted by the First Great Huruldan2 November z6, 1924
conformity with the interests of the broad masses who manifested their will during the revolution of the eleventh year (1921), by which revolution the foreign oppressors were driven out by the revolutionary people, and also in consideration of the death of the hitherto head of state Bogda Khan Damba Hutuktu on the seventeenth day of the fourth month (May 24), the government, elected by the revolutionary people, decided: 1. To entrust the seal of Bogda Khan to the custody of the government. 2. To adopt in the country a republican constitution, without president as head of state, which will vest the highest authority in the People's Great Huruldan and in the government elected by it (Great Huruldan). 3. To commemorate each year the era of the Mongolian People's Republic together with the day of the establishment of the Mongolian State on the sixth day of the sixth month. 4. To rename the period of government of Olana Ergugdeksen from this date (10 July 1924) of this fourteenth year to such and such successive year of the Mongolian State. The Great Huruldan of the whole nation, at this its first convention, confirms the above fundamental decrees of the government and the following Fundamental Law [Constitution] of the Mongolian People's Republic. The above-mentioned. Fundamental Law shall be made public by the central and local authorities and posted in all public places. The Great Huruldan commits to the government the teaching of the fundamental regulations of this constitution in schools and to the military forces.
IN

PROCLAMATION OF RIGHTS OF THE MONGOLIAN WORKING CLASSES
1. Mongolia is declared an independent Republic, in which all power belongs to the working classes. The people exercise their supreme power through the Great Huruldan of the entire nation and through the government elected thereby.

2. The fundamental task of the Mongolian Republic is to obliterate the remains of the feudo-theocratic system and to consolidate the new republican order on the principle of a more complete democratization of the government. 3. In order to realize the authority of the people in the government and to confirm this Constitution, the following fundamental principles are established: (a) In accordance with the Mongolian way of life which is consistent with the principles of the prevailing order, all the land and all the wealth contained therein, with its mineral resources, forests, and waters are property of the people. Private ownership thereon is not permitted; everything is at the disposal of the working people. (b) All international treaties and commitments regarding loans, entered into by the Mongolian authorities before the revolution of the eleventh year (1 921), as imposed by force, are declared null and void. (c) Inasmuch as debts of private persons and institutions to foreign usurers, contracted at the time of foreign dominion and based on reciprocal guarantees, proved to be a very heavy burden on the economy of the country and on the people, the government decree of the present fourteenth year regarding cancellation of the balance of the above-mentioned debts and the decree of the eleventh year regarding abolition of the reciprocal guarantees system are confirmed. (d) A uniform economic policy of the country is concentrated in the hands of the state; a state monopoly of foreign trade is introduced as one of the preliminary conditions of liberation of the masses and confirmation of the authority of the people.
NOTE:

The state monopoly of foreign trade will be gradually introduced and to such extent as feasible.

(e) In order to protect the absolute power of the working classes and to eliminate every possibility of the restoration of power of foreign or domestic exploiters, the armament of the workmen will be maintained by the organization of a Mongolian revolutionary army, as well as by military training of the young people of the working class. (f) In order to guarantee freedom of conscience of the working people, the Church is separated from the state, and religion is declared a personal matter. (g) In order to guarantee the right of free expression of the workers, the Mongolian People's Republic organizes the press; it will be turned over to the working people. (h) In order to guarantee the real freedom of assembly, meetings, and [street] processions, the state places at the disposal of the working people halls for public meetings with accommodations and equipment. (1) In order to guarantee the right of forming associations, the Mongolian People's Republic helps the poorer working classes (arats and craftsmen) to unite and form organizations by procuring material and other assistance.

(j) In order to enable the working masses to acquire education, the Mongolian People's Republic takes upon itself to organize a general educational system, free of charge. (k) The Mongolian People's Republic recognizes the equality of rights of its citizens, irrespective of their nationality, religion or race. (1) The Mongolian People's Republic, in the interests of the working masses, may deprive individual persons or groups of their rights or limit these rights should they be exercised to the detriment of the interests of the Republic. (m) Titles and ranks of former ruling princes and taijis [overlords] as well as rights to govern of hutuktus and hubilgane3 are abolished. (n) Taking into consideration that the workers of the whole world are striving to overthrow capitalism and to establish communism, the People's Republic of workmen must shape its foreign policy in a way consistent with the interests and fundamental tasks of the oppressed smaller nations and revolutionary workers of the whole world.
NOTE:

It is not impossible, however, depending on circumstances, to establish friendly relations with another power; on the other hand, every attempt to undermine the independence of the Mongolian People's Republic should be met with determined resistance.

STRUCTURE OF THE ORGANS OF HIGHEST AUTHORITY
4. The highest authority in the Mongolian People's Republic is vested in the People's Great Huruldan; during the interval between sessions of the Great Huruldan—in the Little Huruldan; and in the interval between sessions of the latter—in the Presidium [of the Little Huruldan] and in the government. 5. The jurisdiction of the highest organs of authority extends to : (a) Representation of the Republic in international relations, control over diplomatic relations, conclusion of political, commercial and other treaties with [foreign] countries. (b) Alteration of boundaries of the Mongolian state, declaration of war and of peace, ratification of international treaties. (c) Conclusion of loans, foreign and domestic, payment of interest on capital and [repayment] of the principal, extension of these loans, as well as granting of external loans. (d) Supervision of foreign trade and establishment of a system of internal trade. (e) Planning of the economy of the Republic, granting, revising and abolishing concession and monopoly rights. (f) Organization of transport and of the post and telegraph system.

(g) Organization of and control over the armed forces of the Mongolian Republic. (h) Approval of the state budget, establishment of taxes and revenues. (i) Organization of the money and credit system, issue of paper money and minting of coins. (j) Establishment of basic principles in the field of agriculture, as well as establishment of boundaries for the aimaks 4 and hosun,5 promulgation of decrees concerning utilization of mineral resources, forests and other natural resources. (k) Establishment of principles of judicial organization, judicial procedure, and penal and civil codes of the Republic. (1) Legislation concerning national education. (m) General measures in the field of national health protection. (n) Establishment of a weights and measures system. (o) Organization of statistics of the Republic. 6. Approval and revision of the fundamental laws of the Republic rest solely with the Great Huruldan.

THE GREAT HURULDAN
7. The Great Huruldan is composed of deputies of the aimaks, townspeople, and armed forces. The number of deputies is proportionate to the population of the electoral district. Deputies are elected for the term of one year.
If for any reason the aimak meeting does not take place, deputies of the hosun will be delegated. NOTE 2: The procedure for the election to the Great Huruldan is governed by regulations set forth in the decree concerning elections to the Great Huruldan.
NOTE s :

8. Regular sessions of the Great Huruldan are convened once a year by the Little Huruldan. 9. Extraordinary sessions of the Great Huruldan are convened by the Little Huruldan in its official capacity, or upon demand of [not less than] one-third of the members of the Great Huruldan, or upon demand of the voters of the aimaks representing [not less than] one-third of the [entire] population of the Republic. o. The Great Huruldan elects the Little Huruldan, which consists of thirty members. 11. The Little Huruldan is totally responsible to the Great Huruldan.

THE LITTLE HURULDAN
12. The Little Huruldan promulgates laws, decrees and orders, combines in itself the work of supervision of higher organs of the Republic, determines the field of activities of the Presidium of the Little Huruldan and of the government; gives a general direction concerning the activities of the government, and exercises control over the putting into effect of the Constitution of the Republic and the carrying out of the decrees of the Little Huruldan. 13. The Little Huruldan convenes at least twice a year. 14. Extraordinary sessions of the Little Huruldan are convened by the Presidium of the Little Huruldan on the motion of the government or upon demand of [not less than] one-third of the members of the Little Huruldan. 15. The Little Huruldan elects at its sessions a permanent Presidium consisting of five members; it also elects the government and, when necessary, working committees. 16. The Little Huruldan is accountable to the Great Huruldan for all its activities and keeps the Great Huruldan informed of its general policy and of its particular problems. 17. Members of the Little Huruldan work in the Presidium or in other offices by order of the chairman [sic].
NOTE:

A special decree will be issued by the Presidium concerning the rights of the members of the Little Huruldan.

PRESIDIUM OF THE LITTLE HURULDAN
i8. The Presidium of the Little Huruldan governs at the sessions of the Little Huruldan. 19. It prepares materials for the sessions of the Little Huruldan. 20. It presents to the plenary sessions of the Little Huruldan bills for approval. 21. It exercises control over the carrying out of the decrees of the Little Huruldan. 22. It exercises control over the government in the spheres of local and other problems; it deals with the respective agencies through the government [Council of Ministers] and in especially important cases it deals directly with the agencies. 23. It makes decisions regarding general and partial amnesty. 24. In the interval between the sessions of the Little Huruldan, the Presidium confirms laws and decrees, returns them to the Council of Ministers for amendment, or suspends them to present them for decision at the following plenum of the Little Huruldan, and appoints and dismisses individual ministers. 25. Any problems and differences of opinion between the ministers or complaints against them are settled by the Presidium of the Little Huruldan. 26. The Presidium of the Little Huruldan is accountable to the Little Huruldan for all its activities.

COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
27. The Council of Ministers is in charge of the management of the affairs of the Mongolian People's Republic. The following are members of the government: the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, the Vice-Chairman, Deputies of the War and Economic Councils, the Commander-in-Chief, the State Controller, the Minister of Domestic Affairs, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Military Affairs, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Justice, and the Minister of Education. 28. The Council of Ministers is in charge of all matters which are mentioned in the decree concerning questions within its province.

THE ECONOMIC COUNCIL
29. In compliance with a special decree an Economic Council of the Mongolian Republic will be appointed in order to coordinate policies regarding economic and agricultural measures.

SELF-GOVERNMENT
3o. Local huruldans of aimaks, hosun, somun, baksi, and • zenhthae and towns are established in conformity with laws concerning self-government. 31. For the current work of economic and administrative nature local huruldans elect, for the term of one year, from their own members the executive organs of aimaks, hosun, somun, baksi, zenhthOfe and towns authorities. 32. The executive organs are responsible to the local huruldans by which they have been elected. 33. The assemblies of the aimaks, hosun, somun, baksi, zenhthOfe and their executive organs are governed by, and their duties are set forth in, the decree concerning local self-government.

THE PASSIVE AND ACTIVE RIGHT TO VOTE
34. The following categories of citizens of the Republic (both men and women) who were eighteen years of age on the day of the election have the right to vote and to be elected in the assemblies (the Great Huruldan, the Little Huruldan and the local ones): (a) Those who earn their living, as well as persons who are self-employed. (b) Ciriks6 of the national revolutionary army. 35. Those who cannot vote or be elected:

(a) Persons who make their living solely by exploiting others in order to derive obvious profit. (b) Businessmen and usurers who live on the work of others, on interest on capital, or on their private income, etc. (c) Former princes, hutuktus, and those clergymen who permanently live in monasteries. (d) Persons who are legally declared insane or feeble-minded. (e) Persons who have been convicted by the courts for self-seeking or dishonorable offenses. 36. The conduct of the elections, verification, and so on, are in accordance with a special electoral law.

THE BUDGET LAW
37. Government revenues and expenditures of the Mongolian Republic are combined in an overall state budget. 38. The state budget is confirmed by the Great Huruldan or, in exceptional cases, by the Little Huruldan. 39. The state budget is submitted for approval of the highest organs of authority at least two months before the beginning of the budgetary period. 40. If the state budget is not approved by the beginning of the budgetary Period, the government makes use of the credits in the budget of the preceding year; [this may be done] however only during the first four months of the new fiscal year. 41. The government cannot make any disbursement whatsoever of state funds unless such expenditure is provided for by the state budget or authorized by a special decree. 42. Funds provided by the state budget are expended in accordance with their allocation within the limits of the established estimates and only within the stated budget subdivision and will not be used to serve any other needs unless by special decree of the government. 43. The Great Huruldan and the Little Huruldan determine what kinds of revenues and taxes are designated for the state budget and which are allocated for the needs of local self-governments. 44. General state needs will be met by general state funds. To satisfy regional needs, organs of local self-governments may assess taxes in accordance with one of the decrees enacted by the central government. 45. Local organs prepare half-yearly and yearly budgets covering local needs. The budgets of the somun are determined by the hosun committees, the budgets of the hosun administration—by the aimak committees, the budgets of the aimaks committees—by the government in yearly and half-yearly state budgets.

46. Local administration organs will apply to the appropriate ministry for expenditures which have not been provided for in the budgets, as well as for supplementary credits for general state needs, should this be necessary.

THE STATE SEAL, EMBLEM AND FLAG
47. The seal of the Great Huruldan, the government, the ministries and other authorities is quadrangular; in the middle on the obverse of the seal is the word `Soyunba' and on both sides of the seal the inscription of the name of the authority in question. 48. The state emblem consists of the above-mentioned word `Soyunba' and a lotus flower depicted below the word. 49. The flag is red with the national emblem in the middle. 5o. The Great and the Little Huruldans convene in Ulan Bator Hoto (Urga). This Constitution was confirmed at 4:17 on the 3oth day of the loth month of the 14th year of the State of Mongolia (November z6, 1924) at the 14th session of the Great Huruldan of the Mongolian Republic. The chairman of the Huruldan: (signed) Dscha Damba The assistant to the chairman: (signed) Badaraho The secretaries: (signed) Geleksengge, Dogarschantsan

