CONSTITUTION of the MONGOL PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
June 30, 19401 

Chapter I Social Organization Art. 1. The Mongol People's Republic is an independent state of workers (Arat cattle raisers, workers, and intelligentsia), who have annihilated the imperialistic and feudal yoke, ensuring a non-capitalistic approach to the development of the country to pave the way to socialism in the future. Art. 2. The Khurals of Arat workers, which came into being as a result of the overthrow of the feudal order and the seizure of political power by the people, the abolition of privilege and arbitrary law, the political and economic subjugation and exploitation, which were inflicted upon the broad masses of the Arats by the feudal overlords (khans, vans, guns, taidzhis, khutukhta, and khubilgans)-constitute the political foundation of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 3. In the Mongol People's Republic all power belongs to the urban and rural workers as represented by the workers' Khurals. Art. 4. The development of the Mongol People's Republic along non-capitalistic lines and the transition in the future to socialism are guaranteed by the achievement, in accordance with the state plan, of reforms in the economic, cultural, and social life of the Mongol People's Republic, that is: by assistance on the part of the state, in every way possible, toward the development and improvement of the Arat labor economy, by assistance on the part of the state to the voluntary and collective organizations of Arat workers, by the development of a network of stations for mowing machines drawn by horses, by the development in the country of cattle raising, industry, transport and communications. The development of the national economy of the Mongol People's Republic is being carried out with the aim of increasing the public wealth, of steadily improving the material welfare and the cultural level of the working people, of consolidating national independence and the defensive capacity of the country. Art. 5. All the land and its natural resources, the forests, the waters, and all the wealth contained therein, the factories, mills, mines, gold production, the railroad, automobile, water and air transport, means of communication, banks, mowing machine stations, and state enterprises are state property, that is, they belong to the people as a whole. Private ownership of the above is forbidden. Art. 6. The right of citizens to private ownership of cattle, agricultural implements and other tools of production, raw material, manufactured products, dwelling houses and outhouses, yurts, and household articles, incomes and savings, as well as the right of inheritance of private property, is protected by law. Art. 7. Public enterprises in the cooperative organizations and the Arat associations, together with their equipment and stock, their manufactured products, as well as their voluntarily socialized property, cattle, agricultural implements, and public buildings, constitute public ownership of these cooperative organizations and Arat associations. Art. 8. The land, being state property, that is, the common property of the people, is given free of charge to citizens as well as to voluntary associations of workers for use as pastures and agricultural tracts. Art. 9. Honest and conscientious labor is the basis of the development of the people's economy, of the consolidation of the defensive capacity, and of the further growth of the well-being of the workers of the Mongol People's Republic, and is the honorable duty of every able-bodied citizen. Chapter II The Organization of the State Art. 10. The jurisdiction of the Mongol People's Republic, as represented by its highest organs of authority and organs of government, extends to: (a) Representation of the Mongol People's Republic in international relations; the conclusion and ratification of treaties with other states. (b) General control over the domestic policy of the Mongol People's Republic and the development of its economic and cultural life. (c) The organization of defense, control over the armed forces, and the preservation of the independence of the Mongol People's Republic. (d) The fixing and alteration of state boundaries. (e) Questions of war and peace. (f) Control over the observance of the Constitution. (g) Establishment of the administrative divisions of the Republic. (h) The guarantee of the political, economic, and cultural development of the people who inhabit the Mongol People's Republic, in accordance with their national peculiarities. (i) Foreign trade on the basis of a state monopoly, and control over the system of domestic trade. (j) Maintenance of the security of the state, of order, and the rights of citizens. (k) Approval of the national economic plan. (1) Control over the monetary and credit system, approval of the state budget, and the establishment of taxes, levies, and revenues. (m) Administration of state banks, industries, agricultural and trade enterprises, and institutions. (n) Organization of the state, as well as of social insurance.



(o) Conclusion and approval of foreign loans and the issue of domestic loans. (p) Control of transport and the organs of communications. (q) Organization of the protection and exploitation of the natural resources of the country and the establishment of regulations for the use of the land, pastures, forests, waters, and the wealth contained therein. (r) Organization and administration of the development of cattle raising and agriculture. (s) Establishment of a system of weights and measures. (t) Organization of the state inventory, accounts, and statistics. (u) Administration of dwelling houses and communal economy, of construction and public utilities in the cities and of road construction in the country. (v) Administration of national education and culture, public health, scientific, and physical culture organizations. (w) Organization of court organs and of the organs of the procurators. (x) Award of orders, certificates of merit, and the conferring of honorable titles of the Mongol People's Republic. (y) Legislation concerning citizenship in the Mongol People's Republic. (z) Issuance of regulations concerning amnesty and pardon. Art. 11. The Mongol People's Republic consists of aimaks: the Central, Kentei, Eastern, East-Gobi, South-Gobi, Uburkhangai, Arakhangai, Dzapkhyn, Kobdos, Khubsugul, Bulgan, Selengin, Ubsanur, and the city of Ulan-Bator.1 Art. 12. The aimaks are divided for administrative purposes into somons. The somons, in their turn, are divided into bags. The city of Ulan-Bator is divided into khorons, and the khorons into khorins. Chapter III The Great People's Khural Art. 13. The highest organ of state authority of the Mongol People's Republic is the Great People's Khural. Art. 14. The Great People's Khural is composed of deputies of the urban workers, the aimaks and the armed forces of the People's Revolutionary Army, elected by the urban and aimak Khurals, on the basis of one deputy for every 1,500 of the population. Art. 15. The Great People's Khural is convened by the'Little Khural once in three years. Special (extraordinary) sessions of the Great People's Khural are convened at the discretion of the Little Khural, or upon the demand of the local organs of authority representing not less than onethird of the entire population. Art. 16. The exclusive jurisdiction of the Great People's Khural extends to: (a) Approval and revision of the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Mongol People's Republic.

(b) Establishment of basic principles and measures in the sphere of foreign and domestic policy. (c) Election of members of the Little Khural.

Art. 17. In the interval between sessions of the Great People's Khural, the highest authority in the Mongol People's Republic is vested in the Little Khural. Chapter IV The Little Khural and the Presidium of the Little Khural Art. 18. The Little Khural is elected by the Great Khural for a term of three years, on the basis of one member for every 10,000 of the population. Art. 19. The jurisdiction of the Little Khural extends to: (a) Convocation of the Great People's Khural. (b) Formation of the Council of Ministers, confirmation of the newly organized Ministries, or the reorganization of existing Ministries and the central organs of the state administration. (c) Annulment, whenever necessary, of the decisions and orders of the Council of Ministers. (d) Confirmation of laws and regulations adopted by the Presidium of the Little Khural in the interval between the sessions of the Little Khural. (e) Examination and confirmation of the state budget. (f) Receiving the reports of the Presidium of the Little Khural and the Council of Ministers, and the examination of questions of state, economic, and cultural development. (g) Election of the Supreme Court of the Mongol People's Republic. (h) Appointment of the Procurator of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 20. Regular sessions of the Little Khural are convened once a year. Special, extraordinary sessions may be convened by the Presidium of the Little Khural at its discretion, as well as upon the demand of not less than one-third of the members of the Little Khural. Art. 21. For the conduct of current business, the Little Khural elects from its own members a Presidium consisting of seven members: a President, Vice-President, Secretary, and four members. Art. 22. The Presidium of the Little Khural, in the interval between the sessions of the Little Khural, is the highest organ of state authority. Art. 23. The Presidium of the Little Khural: (a) Exercises control over the putting into effect of the Constitution of the Mongol People's Republic and the carrying out of the decisions of the Great People's Khural and the Little Khural. (b) Convenes sessions of the Little Khural. (c) Passes new laws, subject to the subsequent confirmation of the Little Khural; interprets existing laws. (d) Suspends, when it deems necessary, the decisions of the Council of Ministers and submits proposals for their annulment for the confirmation of the Little Khural. (e) Appoints and removes Ministers from their duties upon representation of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, subject to the subsequent confirmation of the Little Khural. (f) Makes decisions as to amnesty and exercises the right of pardon. (g) Awards decorations and certificates of merit of the Mongol People's Republic, and confers titles of honor.
479

(h) Receives the credentials and letters of recall of diplomatic representatives accredited to it by foreign states. (i) Appoints and recalls plenipotentiary representatives of 'the Mongol People's Republic to foreign states. (j) Ratifies treaties and agreements with other states. (k) In the interval between the sessions of the Little Khural proclaims a state of war, in the event of an armed attack on the Mongol People's Republic, and likewise whenever necessary to fulfill international treaty obligations concerning mutual defense against aggression. (1) Orders general or partial mobilization. (m) Exercises control over admission to citizenship in the Mongol People's Republic. (n) Annuls, when it deems necessary, the decisions of local Khurals. Art. 24. The Presidium of the Little Khural is accountable to the Little Khural for all its activities. Art. 25. The President of the Presidium of the Little Khural presides over the Little Khural and exercises jurisdiction over its internal organization. Art. 26. The members of the Little Khural may not be prosecuted or arrested without the consent of the Little Khural, and during the interval between sessions of the Little Khural-without the consent of the Presidium of the Little Khural. Chapter V The Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic Art. 27. The highest executive and administrative organ of state authority of the Mongol People's Republic is the Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 28. The Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic is responsible for its activities to the Great People's Khural and to the Little Khural, and in the interval between sessions of the latter, to the Presidium of the Little Khural. Art. 29. The Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic issues decrees and orders on the basis and in pursuance of existing laws, and supervises their execution. Art. 30. Decrees and orders of the Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic are binding throughout the territory of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 31. The Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic: - (a) Coordinates and directs the work of the Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic and other agencies under its jurisdiction. (b) Adopts measures for the carrying out of the national economic plan, state and local budgets, taxes, and the credit system. (c) Exercises general guidance in respect to relations with foreign states. (d) Exercises general supervision over defense and the building up of the armed forces of the country, and likewise determines the annual contingent of citizens to be called up for military service. (e) Adopts measures for the maintenance of public order, for the protection of the interests of the state, and for the safeguarding of the personal and property rights of citizens. (f) Directly supervises and controls the work of the aimak and Ulan-Bator autonomous institutions and other local Khurals and their Presidiums.

480

Constitutions of Nations (g) Revises and annuls orders, instructions, and decrees of the agencies directly subordinate to the Council of Ministers, the Ministers, and the local organs of authority. (h) Sets up, when it deems necessary, central administrative agencies under the Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic to deal with economic and cultural development. (i) Approves patterns and issues the permit for the preparation of the state seal for the use of organs and institutions of the government.

Art. 32. The Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic is appointed by the Little Khural and consists of: The Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic. The Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic. The head of the Commission on State Planning, Inventory, and Control. The Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 33. The following Ministries are functioning in the Mongol People's Republic: War Foreign Affairs Cattle Raising and Agriculture Industry and Construction Transport Trade Finance Domestic Affairs Education Public Health Justice 

Art. 34. Directly subordinate to the Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic are: (a) The Commission on Planning, Inventory, and Control (b) The Commission on Communications (c) The Committee on the Arts (d) The Committee on Science (e) The State Publishing House' Art. 35. The Ministers and Chairmen of the central agencies of the Mongol People's Republic each direct a corresponding branch of state administration and assume full responsibility for it before the Council of Ministers. Art. 36. The Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic and Chairmen of the central government agencies, within the limits of their competence, 
 
issue orders and instructions, and also supervise their execution. Orders and instructions are issued on the basis of, and in conformity with, the existing laws, decrees, and orders of the Council of Ministers of the Mongol People's Republic. Chapter VI Local Organs of State Authority Art. 37. The highest organs of authority in the aimaks, in Ulan-Bator, in the somons, khorons, khorins, and bags are the Khurals of Arat workers. Art. 38. The aimak, somon, and khoron Khurals, as well as the Khural of the city of Ulan-Bator, are composed of deputies in conformity with the below-mentioned Khurals, which are elected on the basis of: in the city of Ulan-Bator, one deputy for every 200 of the population; in the aimaks, one deputy for every 400 of the population; in the somons and khorons, one deputy for every 50 of the population. The bag and khorin Khurals are composed of all citizens of the bag and khorin who have the right to vote. Art. 39. Regular sessions of the aimak Khurals of workers, and of the Khural of workers of the city of Ulan-Bator, are convened once in three years. Regular sessions of the somon, khoron, bag, and khorin Khurals of workers are convened once a year. Special sessions of the workers' Khurals are convened upon the demand of not less than half of all the voters of the aimak, somon, bag, khoron, or khorin, or upon the demand of not less than two-thirds of the members of the elected Khural, and also upon the recommendation of the Presidium of the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 40. The aimak, somon, khoron, khorin, and bag Khurals, as well as the Khural of the city of Ulan-Bator, receive the reports of the organs of administration subordinate to them, and conduct elections of local organs of administration and of deputies to the above-mentioned Khurals. Art. 41. In the interval between sessions of the Khurals of the aimaks and the city of Ulan-Bator, the highest organs of authority in the aimaks and in the city of Ulan-Bator are the Little Khurals, elected by the workers' Khurals of the aimaks and the city of Ulan-Bator for a term of three years, on the basis of one deputy for every 1,000 of the population. Art. 42. The Khurals of the aimaks and of the city of Ulan-Bator are convened twice a year. Art. 43.- For the conduct of current business, the Little Khurals of the aimaks and the city of Ulan-Bator elect from their own members a Presidium of from 7 to 13 persons, consisting of: a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and members. Art. 44. The executive and administrative organs of the somon, khoron, bag, and khorin Khurals of workers elect local, self-governing bodies of from three to 13 persons, each consisting of: a Chairman, a Secretary, and members of the self-governing body, for a term of one year. The Chairmen of the self-governing bodies direct all the business, convene sessions of the self-governing bodies, and preside over them. Art. 45. The Little Khurals of the aimaks and of the city of UlanBator and their Presidiums, as well as the somon and khoron self-governing bodies: (a) Direct cultural-political and economic development in their territories. (b) Draw up the local budget. (c) Direct the work of the organs of administration subordinate to them.

(d) Ensure the maintenance of public order, the observance of the laws and protection of the rights of the citizens. (e) Annul the decrees and orders of the below-mentioned organs of authority, in the event that they are at variance with the laws of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 46. The Little Khurals of the aimaks and of the city of UlanBator and their Presidiums, the somon, khoron, bag, and khorin selfgoverning bodies, pass resolutions and give orders, within the limits of the powers vested in them by the laws of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 47. The Presidiums of the Little Khurals of the aimaks, and of the city of Ulan-Bator, as well as of the somon, khoron, bag, and khorin self-governing bodies, are directly accountable to their Khurals, elected by the workers, and to the above-mentioned organs of administration. Art. 48. The Presidiums of the Little Khurals of the aimaks and of the city of Ulan-Bator have the following departments: Cattle Raising and Agriculture Finance Public Health Education War Chapter VII The Courts and The Procurator's Office Art. 49. In the Mongol People's Republic justice is administered by the Supreme Court of the Republic, by the city court of Ulan-Bator, by the aimak courts, and by the district people's courts. Art. 50. Judicial proceedings in all the courts are conducted by permanent judges, with the participation of People's assessors, with the exception of cases specially provided for by law. Art. 51. The Supreme Court of the Mongol People's Republic is the highest judicial organ. The Supreme Court is charged with the supervision of the judicial activities of all the judicial organs of the Mongol People's Republic. The Supreme Court directly tries the most important cases submitted to its consideration by the Procurator of the Republic, and likewise reviews complaints and protests, in the capacity of a court of appeal and supervision, of cases tried by the courts mentioned below. Art. 52. The Chairman and members of the Supreme Court and the special courts are elected by the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic for a term of four years. Art. 53. The city, aimak, and district people's courts are elected by the city and aimak Little Khurals for a term of three years. Art. 54. Judicial proceedings are conducted in the Mongol language, persons unfamiliar with the language being ensured an opportunity to become fully acquainted with the proceedings through an interpreter, and likewise the right to use their own language in court. Art. 55. In all courts, cases are heard in public, the accused being guaranteed the right to be defended by counsel. Closed judicial sessions are permitted in cases specially provided for by law. Art. 56. Judges are independent and are subject only to the law. Art. 57. Supreme supervisory power over the strict execution of the laws by all the Ministries, central organs and agencies subordinate to them, as well as by public servants and citizens of the Mongol People's Republic, is vested in the Procurator of the Republic.

Art. 58. The Procurator of the Mongol People's Republic is appointed by the Little Khural for a term of five years. Art. 59. In the cities, somons, and bags, the Procurator's power is exercised by the city and aimak procurators, who are appointed by the Procurator of the Mongol People's Republic for a term of four years. Art. 60. Local procurators exercise their functions independently of any local organs whatsoever, being subordinate solely to the Procurator of the Republic. Chapter VIII The Budget of The Mongol People's Republic Art. 61. The entire financial policy of the Mongol People's Republic is directed toward the betterment and well-being of the broad masses of workers, the decisive restriction and dislodging of the exploiting elements and, at the same time, the strengthening by every possible means of the authority of the workers, as well as the independence and defensive capacity of the country. Art. 62. Government revenues and expenditures of the Mongol People's Republic are combined in the over-all state budget. Art. 63. The state budget is prepared by the Ministry of Finance and examined by the Council of Ministers. The budget as approved by the Council of Ministers is subject to the confirmation of the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 64. The Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic elects the budget committee, which reports to the Little Khural its conclusions on the state budget of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 65. There can be no disbursement whatsoever of state funds, unless it is provided for by the state budget, or unless such expenditure is authorized by a special decree of the Presidium of the Little Khural or the Council of Ministers. The funds provided for by the state budget are expended solely in accordance with their direct allocation, within the limits of the established estimates. Art. 66. The Little Khural distributes the revenues among the state and local budgets. Art. 67. Laws regarding taxes and levies are passed by the Presidium of the Little Khural, subject to the subsequent confirmation of the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic. No other organs of authority have any right whatsoever to introduce taxes and levies. Art. 68. Somon estimates of revenues and expenditures are confirmed by the Little Khural of the aimak or its Presidium, the estimates 'of the khorons-by the Little Khural of the city of Ulan-Bator or its Presidium, aimak estimates and the estimates of the city of Ulan-Bator-by the Presidium of the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 69. The report on the execution of the state budget, after its examination by the Council of Ministers, is approved by the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic. Chapter IX The Electoral System of The Mongol People's Republic Art. 70. Elections of all organs of authority are conducted in the Khural by voice vote. Each member of the Khural may nominate candidates for membership in the executive organs and candidates as deputies for the above-mentioned Khurals. The name of each candidate nominated must be submitted for discussion in the Khural prior to the voting. Each member of the Khural is guaranteed the right of free expression for or against the candidate nominated. Candidates who have received a simple majority of votes are considered elected. Art. 71. All citizens of the Mongol People's Republic who have reached the age of eighteen have the right to participate in elections and to be elected, irrespective of their sex, nationality, religion, education, nomadic or settled mode of life, and property status, with the exception only of exploiters who hire workers for profit, usurers, former khutukhta, khubilgans, higher Lamas, active dzasak and nadzasak, khans, vans, beili, beisi, guns, and also those who have had slaves and cruelly oppressed their slaves, government officials, who managed the khoshun and shabin institutions, influential shamans, active participants in the White Army and counter-revolutionary uprisings, as well as the insane and persons convicted by the court, whose sentence includes deprivation of electoral rights.' Art. 72. In elections all voters have equal rights; each voter has one vote. Members of the armed forces have the right to participate in the elections on an equal footing with all citizens. Art. 73. Women have the right to elect and be elected on equal terms with men. Art. 74. For the conduct of elections, central and local electoral commissions are appointed, which act in accordance with instructions and regulations approved by the Presidium of the Little Khural. Chapter X Fundamental Rights And Duties of Citizens Art. 75. The Constitution of the Mongol People's Republic consolidates the right won by the people to free use of pastures, in order to promote the greater development of cattle raising, as well as the application by the citizens of their knowledge and labor in all branches of state, economic, and cultural development. Art. 76. Citizens of the Mongol People's Republic have the right to rest. This right is ensured by the reduction of the working day to 8 hours for employees and workers, the institution of annual vacations with full pay for workers and employees, and the provision of theaters, clubs, sanatoriums, and rest homes for the accommodation of the working people. Art. 77. Citizens of the Mongol People's Republic have the right to education. This right is ensured by education free of charge, by the development of a network of schools, technical schools, and by instruction in schools in the native language. Art. 78. Citizens of the Mongol People's Republic and hired laborers have the right to material assistance in old age, as well as in the event of illness and loss of the capacity to work. This right is ensured by a system of social insurance for workers and employees at the expense of the state or employer, free medical service for the working people, and the development of a network of health resorts. 

 
Art. 79. All citizens of the Mongol People's Republic, irrespective of their nationality, have equal rights in all spheres of the state, economic, cultural, and socio-political life of the country. All direct or indirect restrictions on the rights of citizens, the manifestation of imperialistic chauvinism, discrimination, and propaganda on nationalistic grounds, are punishable by law. Art. 80. Women in the Mongol People's Republic are accorded equal rights with men in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, and socio-political life. The opportunity to exercise these rights is ensured by granting women equal rights with men in regard to work, rest, social insurance, education, state protection of the interests of the mother and child, and by granting hired women pre-maternity leave with full pay. Interference, in any way whatsoever, with the emancipation and equal rights of women, that is: marrying them off before they have come of age, taking them in marriage, giving or receiving ransom for a bride, polygamy, preventing them from attending school, or from participating in the economic, state, cultural, and socio-political life, etc., is punishable by law. Art. 81. In the Mongol People's Republic religion is separated from the state and the school. Citizens of the Mongol People's Republic have freedom of religion and of antireligious propaganda. Art. 82. In conformity with the interests of the workers, and in order to develop the organizational initiative and political activity of the working masses, citizens of the Mongol People's Republic are ensured the right to unite in public organizations: trade unions, cooperative associations, youth organizations, sport and defense organizations, cultural, technical, and scientific societies; and the most active and politically-conscious citizens in the ranks of the workers, Arat workers, and intelligentsia, are united in the Mongol People's Revolutionary Party, which is the vanguard of the working people in their struggle to strengthen and develop the country along non-capitalistic lines into a party which is the foremost nucleus of all organizations of workers, both public and state. Art. 83. Every citizen of the Mongol People's Republic has the right freely to submit written or oral complaints or declarations against the unlawful acts of the organs of authority, or against individual officials in the corresponding organs of the government and administration, up to the very highest. All organs of authority and officials are obligated to examine forthwith the declarations and complaints submitted, and to give the complainant a reply bearing upon the declaration or complaint. Art. 84. All citizens of the Mongol People's Republic have the right to move about freely, and to select a place of residence. Art. 85. In conformity with the interests of the workers, and in order to develop and strengthen the state system of the Mongol People's Republic, citizens of the Mongol People's Republic are guaranteed by law: (1) Freedom of speech (2) Freedom of the press (3) Freedom of assembly and meetings (4) Freedom of street processions and demonstrations. Art. 86. Citizens of the Mongol People's Republic are guaranteed inviolability of the person. No person may be placed under arrest, except by decision of a court or with the sanction of a procurator. Art. 87. The inviolability of the homes of citizens and privacy of correspondence are protected by law.

Art. 88. The Mongol People's Republic affords the right of asylum to foreign citizens persecuted for defending the interests of the workers, or for their struggle for national liberation. Art. 89. It is the duty of every citizen of the Mongol People's Republic to abide by the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Mongol People's Republic, to observe the laws, to maintain labor discipline, to promote in every way possible the economic, cultural, and political development of the country, and to perform their public duties honestly. Art. 90. Compulsory military service is the law of the land. Military service in the Mongol People's Revolutionary Army is obligatory for citizens of the Mongol People's Republic. Art. 91. The defense of the motherland is the sacred duty of every citizen of the Mongol People's Republic. Treason to the motherland-the violation of the oath of allegiance, desertion to the enemy, impairment of the military power of the state, and espionage-is punishable as the most heinous of crimes. Chapter XI Arms, Flag, Capital Art. 92. The State Emblem of the Mongol People's Republic consists of a circle, in which is depicted an Arat with a lariat in his hands, galloping on horseback toward the sun. Inside the circle is depicted a typical Mongol landscape (a forested steppe, a desert, mountains). Around the edge of the circle, which is framed in green, on two sides there are depicted in small circles the heads of a sheep, a cow, a camel, and a goat. At the base of the circle is the ornament "Alkha" in one line. In the center of the upper part of the circle is a five-pointed star. At the base of the circle is a bunch of greens tied with a ribbon, with the inscription "The Mongol People's Republic." Art. 93. The flag of the Mongol People's Republic consists of a red cloth with the State Emblem depicted in the center, and with the inscription on either side "Mongol People's Republic." Art. 94. The capital of the Mongol People's Republic is Ulan-Bator. Chapter XII Procedure for Amending the Constitution of the Mongol People's Republic Art. 95. The Constitution of the Mongol People's Republic is amended only by the decision of the Great People's Khural, adopted by not less than a two-thirds majority vote. 

THE CONFERRING OF ELECTORAL RIGHTS UPON PERSONS DEPRIVED OF THESE RIGHTS BY ARTICLE 71 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE MONGOL PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC Decree of the Presidium of the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic September 28, 1944 With a view to the further expansion of democracy to all citizens of the Mongol People's Republic, and also with the object of strengthening the



people's revolutionary order in our country and the development of the political consciousness and activity of the working people, taking into consideration in this connection that: (a) Whereas persons deprived of electoral rights do not represent at the present time an organized force in opposition to the people's revolutionary order, and do not constitute a threat to its existence, especially since their number in the Republic is insignificant and amounts only to 0.08 percent of the entire population of the Mongol People's Republic; (b) Whereas the overwhelming majority of persons deprived of electoral rights have for more than the past ten years been occupied in useful public work and in reality are workers; (c) Whereas, in depriving individual citizens of their electoral rights, local organs of authority have in many cases acted without due consideration, as a result of which the interests of the Arat workers were injured; Therefore, the Presidium of the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic decrees: 1. That electoral rights be granted to all those citizens of the Mongol People's Republic heretofore deprived of these rights by Article 71 of the Constitution of the Mongol People's Republic, with the exception of the insane, and persons deprived of political rights by the court, which will promote the further strengthening of the people's revolutionary order. 2. That Article 71 of the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Mongol People's Republic be amended to read as follows: "Article 71. All citizens of the Mongol People's Republic, who have reached the age of eighteen, have the right to participate in elections and to be elected, irrespective of their sex, nationality, religion, education, nomadic or settled mode of life, and property status, with the exception of the insane and persons convicted by the court, whose sentence includes deprivation of electoral rights." That the changes indicated be submitted for approval to the regular session of the Little Khural of the Mongol People's Republic and the regular session of the Great People's Khural of the Mongol People's Republic.
