CONSTITUTIONS of NATIONS
VOLUME II - ASIA, AUSTRALIA and OCEANIA
by

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Formerly Ambassador of the United States of America to Australia, Secretary-General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the San Francisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author of INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONSTHEIR CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS (Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague; and Justice House, New York, 2nd Ed., 1961), A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams, 1942), UNITED NATIONS GOVERNMENT (Putnams, 1945), and co-author of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

* *
REVISED THIRD EDITION
In four Volumes Prepared by Dorothy Peaslee Xydis Formerly officer in the Secretariat of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

Unchanged reprint 1974

Copyright 1966 by Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, Netherlands All rights reserved, including the right to translate or to reproduce this book or parts thereof in any form

ISBN 90 247 0444 8 (Two parts) 90 247 0446 4 (Part II)

PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS

CONSTITUTION of the MONGOLIAN PEOPLES REPUBLIC
July 6, 1960 PREAMBLE The Great October Socialist Revolution, that laid the foundation for mankind's transition from capitalism to communism, marked a turningpoint in the history of the age-old struggle of the Mongolian people for liberation that provided them with an opportunity to establish their own independent, sovereign people's democratic state. The Mongolian People's Republic emerged and became established as a result of the victorious popular revolution of 1921, when the Mongolian people abolished the rule of the imperialist colonialists, overthrew the power of the feudal lords and put an end to serfdom. The Mongolian People's Republic grew and gained strength with the fraternal socialist aid of the Soviet Union and as a result of the consolidation of its political and economic independence in a stubborn struggle against imperialist aggression and internal reaction, as a result of overcoming the evil consequences of the former system of national and social oppression, the abolition of the feudal class and the creation of a socialist economy and culture. In the course of the transition from feudalism to socialism, bypassing the capitalist stage of development in accordance with the teachings of Lenin, radical revolutionary, socio-economic reforms were made in the Mongolian People's Republic, a new socialist economy was built up, socialist production relations became victorious throughout the national economy and tremendous achievements were recorded in promoting the welfare and culture of the working people. The Mongolian People's Republic sets itself the aim of completing socialist construction and of building, in the future, communist society. The Mongolian People's Republic pursues a foreign policy aimed at ensuring durable peace, friendship and co-operation between all peoples

on the basis of the principles of peaceful co-existence, consolidating the fraternal relations, close co-operation and mutual assistance that have been established and are developing between the nations of the socialist world, founded on the principle of proletarian internationalism. The supreme duty of the M.P.R., the most important prerequisite for its prosperity and the strengthening of its independence, is to promote an ever-growing unity and solidarity between the peoples of the socialist countries on the basis of Marxist-Leninist principles. In the M.P.R., the guiding and directing force of society and of the state is the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party which is guided in its activities by the all-conquering theory of Marxism-Leninism. I. THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC Chapter One. The Nature and General Principles of State Organization
Art. 1. The M.P.R. is a socialist state of workers, arats (herdsmen and farmers) organised in co-operatives, and working intellectuals, based on the alliance of the working class and the arats. Art. 2. The Mongolian People's Republic is a socialist state in the form of a People's Democracy. Art. 3. All power in the Mongolian People's Republic is vested in the working people who implement that power through the state representative bodies—the Hurala1 of People's Deputies. Art. 4. The Hurals of People's Deputies are elected by citizens of the M.P.R. on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. The system of election of deputies to the organs of state power is laid down in a special ordinance. Art. 5. Democratic centralism is the fundamental principle of the organisation and functioning of all state bodies. The state bodies are duty bound to draw support from the working masses and constantly to strengthen their ties with them. Art. 6. The Hurals of People's Deputies are responsible and accountable to their electors. Every deputy is duty bound to give an account of his work and the work of the Hurals of People's Deputies to the electorate and may be recalled by the electorate at any time in the manner provided by the law. Art. 7. The state bodies are duty bound to abide exactly by the Constitution and the laws of the M.P.R.

Chapter Two. The Fundamental Economic Principles and Functions of the State Art. 8. The economic basis of the M.P.R. is the socialist system of economy and the socialist ownership of the means of production established as a result of the long and arduous struggle of the working people and realized as a result of the abolition of the private ownership of the means of production and the elimination of the exploitation of man by man. Art. 9. Socialist property in the M.P.R. has two forms: state property (belonging to the entire people) and co-operative property (belonging to agricultural associations and other types of co-operatives). Art. 10. The land, its mineral resources, the forests, the waters and their wealth, state factories, mines, power-stations, rail, road, water and air transport, arterial roads, communications, banks, state-owned agricultural enterprises (state farms, machine and livestock stations, etc.), municipal enterprises and the bulk of the dwelling houses in the towns and other inhabited centres, raw materials, the materials and produce of state enterprises, state trading establishments and warehouses, scientific and cultural establishments and also the property of all state organizations and institutions are state property, i.e., the property of the whole people. Art. 11. The socialized enterprises of the agricultural associations and other co-operative organizations with all their machinery and equipment, their produce, buildings, tractors, harvester combines and other farm machines and implements, transport facilities, livestock and other socialized property are the socialist property of those associations and cooperative organizations. Every family in an agricultural association obtains its main income from personal participation of each of its members in the social production of the association and has a personal subsidiary husbandry of a size fixed by the rules of the association. Art. 12. The land occupied by an agricultural association is allotted to it for its permanent use free of charge. Art. 13. The law protects the personal property right of citizens in respect of their incomes and savings from work, their dwelling houses and personally-owned small holdings, livestock and articles of domestic use, as well as the right of citizens to inherit personal property. The right to own personal property shall not be used to the detriment of state and public interests. Art. 14. The socialist state protects and strengthens socialist property, ensures the active participation of members of society in economic and cultural activities, in every way strengthens socialist labor discipline, and organizes the defense of the country against imperialist aggression. Art. 15. The economic life of the Mongolian People's Republic is determined and directed by a single state economic plan with a view to ensuring

the continuous growth and development of the country's productive forces, the uninterrupted expansion of socialist reproduction and a continuous rise in the living standard and cultural level of the working people. State economic policy serves the purpose of correctly reflecting the requirements of the economic laws of socialism in the national economic plan. The economic plan of the M.P.R., approved by the Great National Hural, has the force of a law. The guidance of the economy by the state must invariably be accompanied by the strictest accounting and by control over production and distribution, over the measure of labor and the measure of consumption. Art. 16. The finance and credit policy of the M.P.R. has as its purpose the regular growth of the economic might of the country, the development and consolidation of socialist property, the development of socialist culture and the improvement of the living standard of the working people. The state draws up its annual finance plan in the form of a state budget in accordance with the national economic plan, and it is approved and published as a law. The basic source of budget revenue is the income from socialist economy and its accumulation. Art. 17. The purpose of socialist production in the M.P.R. and its motive force is the creation of a social product of regularly increasing dimensions for the accumulation of a national income necessary for the maximum satisfaction of the constantly growing personal and collective needs of the members of socialist society. The entire national income of the M.P.R.—after deducting the social fund which is used for the expansion of socialist production, the creation of reserves, the development of education and the health services, the maintenance of the aged and the disabled, as well as for other collective needs of the members of society—is distributed among the members of society in accordance with the quality and quantity of labor expended on the socialist principle: "from each according to his ability, to each according to his work." Labor in the M.P.R. is an essential condition and the basis of the realization of extended socialist reproduction; it is the source of the material and spiritual benefits necessary for a constant improvement in the living standard of the working people.

II. THE STATE STRUCTURE OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC Chapter Three. The Higher Organs of State Power (A) THE GREAT NATIONAL HURAL OF THE M.P.R.
Art. 18. The highest of state power in the Mongolian People's Republic is the Great National Hural. Art. 19. Legislative power in the M.P.R. is exercised exclusively by the Great National Hural. The right to initiate legislation is vested in the Standing Committees of the Great National Hural of the M.P.R., the Presidium of the Great National Hural of the M.P.R., the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R., the Supreme Court of the M.P.R. and deputies to the Great National Hural of the M.P.R. Art. 20. The Great National Hural of the M.P.R. exercises the full measure of state power. In particular, the following come within the jurisdiction of the Great National Hural: (a) approval and amendment of the Constitution of the M.P.R.; (b) the passing of laws; (c) the determination of basic principles and measures in the sphere of domestic and foreign policy; (d) election of the Presidium of the Great National Hural; (e) the formation of the Council of Ministers; (f) approval of newly-organized, abolished or reorganized Ministries and other central state administrative bodies that go to make up the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R.; (g) the examination and approval of the economic plan of the Republic; (h) the examination and approval of the state budget and the report on its realization; (i) the confirmation of decrees adopted by the Presidium of the Great National Hural in the period between sessions of the Great National Hural and subject to the approval of the Great National Hural; (j) the promulgation of acts of amnesty; (k) decisions on questions of peace and the defence of the socialist fatherland. Art. 21. The Great National Hural is elected by citizens of the Mongolian People's Republic, election districts of four thousand people each electing one deputy. Art. 22. The Great National Hural is elected for a term of three years. Art. 23. The election of a new Great National Hural of the M.P.R. is ordered by the Presidium of the Great National Hural two months before the expiration of the term of office of the Great National Hural. Art. 24. The newly-elected Great National Hural is convened by the

Presidium of the outgoing Great National Hural not later than two months after its election. Art. 25. Regular sessions of the Great National Hural are convened once a year. Extraordinary sessions of the Great National Hural may be convened both on the initiative of the Presidium of the Great National Hural and on the demand of not less than one third of the deputies. Art. 26. The Great National Hural elects a Chairman of the Great National Hural and four Vice-Chairman. The Chairman presides at sessions of the Great National Hural and takes charge of all proceedings. Art. 27. The Great National Hural elects a Credentials Committee which verifies the credentials of the deputies to the Great National Hural of the M.P.R. Art. 28. The Great National Hural appoints the Budget and Economy, Legislative Proposals, Foreign Affairs and Nationalities Standing Committees. In case of necessity the Great National Hural appoints Select Committees. The terms of reference of the Committees are laid down by the Great National Hural. Art. 29. The Great National Hural elects the Presidium of the Great National Hural consisting of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary and six members. Art. 30. A law is considered adopted if passed by the Great National Rural of the M.P.R. by a simple majority vote. Laws and decisions adopted by the Great National Rural are published over the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Presidium of the Great National Hural of the M.P.R. with the exception of the decision on the election of the Presidium of the Great National Hural, which is published over the signature of the Chairman of the Great National Hural. Art. 31. Deputies to the Great National Hurals and also deputies to the local Hurals have the right to question members of the relevant state administrative bodies on matters coming within their jurisdiction. The administrative body concerned must reply to the deputy's question. Art. 32. A deputy to the Great National Hural of the M.P.R. may not be arrested or prosecuted without the sanction of the Great National Hural, or, in the period between sessions, without the sanction of its Presidium. (B) THE PRESIDIUM OF THE GREAT NATIONAL RURAL Art. 33. The Presidium of the Great National Hural is the highest organ of state power in the period between sessions of the Great National Hural. Art. 34. The Presidium of the Great National Hural: (a) exercises control over the application of the Constitution and the laws of the M.P.R.;

(b) orders elections to the Great National Hural; (c) convenes sessions of the Great National Hural; (d) interprets operative laws; (e) issues decrees; (f) conducts nation-wide polls (referendums); (g) annuls decisions and orders of the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R. and of local Hurals of People's Deputies in the event of their being unconstitutional; (h) establishes new and abolishes or reorganizes existing ministries and other central state administrative bodies, such acts to be subsequently submitted to the Great National Hural for approval; (i) appoints Ministers and other members of the government or releases them from posts held on the representation of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, such acts to be subsequently submitted to the Great National Hural for approval; (j) exercises the right of pardon; (k) institutes orders and medals and also honorary, military and other titles of the M.P.R.; (1) awards orders and medals of the M.P.R. and confers honorary titles on the representation of the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R.; (m) appoints and recalls diplomatic representatives of the M.P.R. to foreign states; (n) receives the letters of credence and recall of diplomatic representatives accredited to the Presidium by foreign states; (o) authorizes the Council of Ministers to conclude treaties and agreements with other states; (p) ratifies and denounces treaties and agreements with other states; (q) in the intervals between sessions of the Great National Hural proclaims a state of war in the event of an armed attack on the M.P.R. and also when necessary to fulfil international treaty obligations in respect of mutual defence against aggression; (r) orders general or partial mobilization; (s) grants citizenship of the M.P.R. and permits the relinquishing of citizenship of the M.P.R.; (t) on the representation of the Council of Ministers approves the formation or abolition of aimaks (towns), somons,1 horons,2 and also their administrative subdivision. Art. 35. On the expiration of the term of office of the Great National Hural of the M.P.R., its Presidium remains in office until the newlyelected Great National Hural forms a new Presidium of the Great National Hural of the M.P.R.

Art. 36. The Presidium of the Great National Hural is responsible and accountable to the Great National Hural for all its activities. Chapter Four. The Higher and Central Organs of State Administration Art. 37. The highest executive body of state administration in the Mongolian People's Republic is the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R. Art. 38. The Council of Ministers of the M.P.R. is responsible and accountable for its activities to the Great National Hural, or, in the intervals between sessions of the latter, to the Presidium of the Great National Hural. Art. 39. The Council of Ministers of the M.P.R. issues decisions and

orders on the basis and in pursuance of operative laws and verifies their execution. Art. 40. The decisions and orders of the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R. are binding throughout the territory of the M.P.R. Art. 41. The Council of Ministers of the Mongolian People's Republic: (a) co-ordinates and directs the work of the Ministries of the M.P.R. and other bodies under its jurisdiction in their guidance of state, economic and cultural organization; (b) guides the planning of the economy, adopts measures for the implementation of the state economic plan and of the state and local budgets, and exercises control over the implementation of finance and credit policy; (c) exercises general direction in the sphere of relations with foreign states, exercises a monopoly in foreign trade; (d) exercises general guidance in matters concerning the defense of the country and the organization of the armed forces and determines the contingent of citizens to be conscripted for military service; (e) adopts measures to protect the interests of the state and to protect and consolidate socialist property as the economic basis of the socialist state; (f) adopts measures to ensure public order and protect the personal and property rights of citizens; (g) directs and guides the work of the aimak (town) executive boards of the Hurals of People's Deputies; (h) in case of necessity amends or annuls the orders and instructions of the Ministries and of the bodies under the jurisdiction of the Council of Ministers, and other administrative bodies; (i) when necessary sets up departments and institutions under the Council of Ministers to deal with economic and cultural development; (j) approves designs and grants permits for the manufacture of state seals for the organs and institutions of state power.

Art. 42. The Council of Ministers of the M.P.R. is set up by the Great National Hural and consists of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R., the Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R., and the Ministers of the M.P.R. Art. 43. The Ministries and Departments are the central organs of state administration of the M.P.R. The Ministers and Heads of Departments of the M.P.R. guide the relevant branches of state administration and are fully responsible for their condition and their activities to the Council of Ministers. The work of the Ministries and Departments of the M.P.R. is organized on the principle of personal managerial responsibility and the collective discussion of questions, and is based on a rising level of individual responsibility on the part of every worker. Art. 44. The competency of each Ministry and Department is defined in the relevant Regulations which are drawn up on the basis of the laws and are approved by the Council of Ministers of the M.P.R. Art. 45. The Ministers of the M.P.R. and the Heads of Departments issue orders and instructions within the limits of their competency and verify their execution. These orders and instructions are issued on the basis and in pursuance of the operative laws of the M.P.R. and the orders and decisions of the Council of Ministers of the Mongolian People's Republic.
Chapter Five. The Local Organs of State Power and State Administration

Art. 46. The territory of the M.P.R. is divided administratively in aimaks and towns. The aimaks are subdivided into somons and the towns into horons. Art. 47. The organs of state power in the aimaks, towns, somons and horons are the Hurals of People's Deputies elected by the population of
the respective territorial divisions for a term of two years. Art. 48. The number of members of the local Hurals of People's Deputies per administrative unit is laid down by the Presidium of the Great National Hural of the M.P.R. Art. 49. Regular sessions of aimak and town Hurals of People's Deputies are convened by their executive boards at least twice a year. Sessions of somon and horon Hurals of People's Deputies are convened by their executive boards at least three times a year. Extraordinary sessions of local Hurals of People's Deputies are convened on the demand of at least one half of the deputies to the Hural or on the initiative of the executive board and also on the orders or the Presidium of the Great National Hural. The executive board of a local Hural informs the population in good

time of the date and agenda of a regular session of the Hural and ensures the participation of the people's representatives in the work of the session of the Hural. Art. 50. A chairman and a secretary are elected for each session to conduct meetings of the aimak, town, somon and horon Hurals of People's Deputies. Art. 51. Aimak and town Hurals of People's Deputies elect, as their administrative organs, executive boards of seven to eleven deputies consisting of a chairman, vice-chairmen, an executive secretary and members. Art. 52. The administrative bodies of the somon and horon Hurals of People's Deputies are the executive boards of five to nine deputies which they elect and which consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary and members. Art. 53. The chairman of the executive board guides the work of the board, convenes its sittings and presides at them. Art. 54. On the expiration of the term of office of the aimak, town, somon and horon Hurals of People's Deputies, their executive boards remain in office until new executive bodies are again elected by the
Hurals. Art. 55. The aimak, town, somon and horon Hurals of People's Deputies

and their executive boards: (a) guide economic, cultural and political development within their own territorial subdivisions; (b) guide and control the work of economic and co-operative organizations ; (c) approve the economic plan and the local budget and adopt measures for their implementation; (d) guide the activities of the administrative bodies under their jurisdiction; (e) ensure adherence to the rules of the socialist way of life, the protection of the rights and interests of state enterprises and institutions, agricultural associations and other co-operative organizations and also the protection of the rights of citizens; (f) ensure the exact observance of the laws and also the strict implementation of the decisions of higher organs; (g) ensure the extensive participation of the working people in all fields of state, economic and cultural development. Art. 56. The local Hurals of People's Deputies adopt decisions within the limits of the powers vested in them by the law. Art. 57. The higher Hurals of People's Deputies have the right to amend or annul decisions of lower Hurals of People's Deputies as well as the decisions and orders of their executive boards. Art. 58. The higher executive boards of Hurals of People's Deputies have the right to amend or annul the decisions and orders of lower ex-

ecutive boards and to suspend decisions of lower Hurals of People's Deputies. Art. 59. The executive board of a local Hural of People's Deputies is directly accountable to the Hural of People's Deputies that elected it and to the executive body of a higher Hural of People's Deputies. Art. 60. The local Hurals of People's Deputies set up standing committees for various branches of their activities and ensure the participation of an extensive group of working people in their activities. Art. 61. For the guidance of the different branches of work, aimak and town executive boards set up divisions and departments. In their work they are under the jurisdiction of the executive board of the aimak or town Hural of People's Deputies as well as the relevant Ministry or Department of the M.P.R. Art. 62. Deputies to local Hurals of the M.P.R. may not be arrested or arraigned without the sanction of the Hural concerned, or, between sessions of the Hural, without the sanction of the executive body concerned.
Chapter Six. The Courts and the Procurator's Office

(A) THE COURTS
Art. 63. Justice in the M.P.R. is administered in accordance with the laws by the Supreme Court of the Republic, aimak and town courts, special courts of the M.P.R. and district people's courts. Art. 64. In all courts cases are tried by permanent judges sitting with people's assessors, except in cases for which special provision is made in the law. Art. 65. The Supreme Court of the M.P.R. is the highest judicial body. The Supreme Court is charged with the guidance of all judicial bodies in the M.P.R. and also with supervision over their judicial activities. Art. 66. The Supreme Court of the M.P.R. is elected by the Great National Hural for a term of three years. The Supreme Court is responsible and accountable to the Great National Hural of the M.P.R. and its Presidium. Art. 67. Town and aimak courts are elected by the town and aimak Hurals of People's Deputies for a term of two years. Art. 68. People's courts are elected by the citizens of the aimak, somon, town or horon concerned on the basis of universal, direct and equal suffrage by secret ballot for a term of two years. Citizens who have reached the age of twenty-three and have never been convicted by a court may be elected judges and people's assessors. Art. 69. Court proceedings are conducted in the Mongolian language, persons not knowing that language being guaranteed the right to acquaint themselves fully with the material of the case through an interpreter and likewise the right to use their own language in court.

Art. 70. All cases are heard in public and the accused are guaranteed the right to defence. Courts may sit in camera in cases for which special provision is made in the law. Art. 71. Judges are independent in their examination of cases and are subject only to the law.

(B) THE PROCURATOR'S OFFICE
Art. 72. Supreme supervisory power over the strict observance of the law by all Ministries and other central administrative bodies and the institutions and organizations subordinated to them, by local state bodies and also all public and co-operative organizations as well as people in office and citizens of the M.P.R. is vested in the Procurator of the Republic. Art. 73. The Procurator of the M.P.R. is appointed by the Great National Hural for a term of three years. The Procurator of the M.P.R. is responsible and accountable to the Great National Hural of the M.P.R. and its Presidium. Art. 74. Procuratorial supervision in the localities is vested in the aimak, town and district Procurators appointed by the Procurator of the M.P.R. for a term of three years. Art. 75. Local procurators are subordinated only to the procurator of higher rank in fulfilling their functions.

III. THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC Chapter Seven. The Fundamental Rights and Liberties of Citizens and how they are ensured
Art. 76. Citizens of the M.P.R. enjoy equal rights irrespective of sex, race and nationality, religion or social origin and position. Art. 77. Citizens of the M.P.R. have the right to work and to payment for their work in accordance with its quantity and quality. This right is ensured by the advantages accruing from the socialist system of economy established in the M.P.R., which gives each citizen every opportunity to employ his knowledge and labor in any branch of economy and culture without let or hindrance, and to receive a guaranteed recompense according to the labor expended. Art. 78. Citizens of the M.P.R. have the right to leisure. This right is ensured by the establishment of a maximum working day of eight hours, the reduction of the working day in a number of special trades, the establishment of a weekly rest-day and annual paid holidays for factory, office and professional workers, and by placing at the disposal of the working people sanatoria, holiday homes, theatres, clubs and other welfare institutions.

The policy of the M.P.R. is directed towards increasing, in the future, as the productive forces of the country develop, the amount of free time available to the working people by reducing working time and by improving social services and placing them more within the reach of the working people so that they may employ their leisure for recuperation, for their physical and spiritual growth and for the improvement of their knowledge. Art. 79. Citizens of the M.R.P. have the right to maintenance in old age, in cases of disability, in cases of sickness or the loss of the breadwinner. This right is ensured by the granting of assistance through the social insurance system, by state pensions, through the special funds of cooperative organizations as well as by extending the network of medical institutions and holiday resorts, by free medical attention for the people and by the development of the labor protection system. Art. 80. Citizens of the M.P.R. have the right to education. This right is ensured by free tuition, the extension of the network of schools providing general education, special secondary schools and higher educational establishments and by a system for improving trade qualifications as well as by a state system of scholarship grants for students of special secondary schools and higher educational establishments. Art. 81. Citizens of the M.P.R. have the right to participate freely in the administration of the state and society and also in guiding the economic life of the country both directly and through their representative bodies. This right is ensured by granting all citizens the real possibility to play an extensive part in all spheres of the country's political, economic and cultural life, in particular, to participate in elections, referendums, the organization of various democratic societies, etc. All citizens of the M.P.R. who have attained the age of 18, with the exception of those found insane, are granted the right to vote in elections and be elected to all organs of state power. Art. 82. Citizens of the M.P.R. have the right to unite in public organizations : trade unions, co-operative associations, youth, sports and other organizations, cultural and scientific societies, and also societies for strengthening world peace, etc. The more active and politically conscious citizens in the ranks of the working class, members of co-operatives and working intelligentsia unite in the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party, which is the vanguard and leader of all state and other mass organizations of the working people. Art. 83. Citizens of the M.P.R., irrespective of their nationality, have equal rights in all spheres of economic, cultural, social and political life of the country. Any direct or indirect restriction of the rights of citizens on account of their nationality or race and the advocacy of the ideas of chauvinism or

nationalism are forbidden by law. The M.P.R. ensures representatives of all nationalities living on the territory of the Republic the opportunity to develop their national culture and to receive tuition and conduct business in their own native language. The M.P.R. grants the right of asylum to foreign citizens persecuted for their defence of the interests of the working people, for participation in the national-liberation movement, for their activities to strengthen peace and for scientific activities. Art. 84. Women in the M.P.R. are accorded the same rights as men in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and political life. The realization of these rights is ensured by according women the same conditions of work, leisure, social insurance and education as men, by the state promotion of mother-and-child welfare, state assistance for mothers of large families, leave of absence from work before and after confinement with full pay and the extension of the network of maternity hospitals, nurseries and kindergartens. The infringement, in any form whatsoever, of the equal rights of men and women is forbidden by law. Art. 85. Every citizen of the Mongolian People's Republic has the right freely to apply to any of the organs of state power and administration and to submit written or verbal complaints and statements concerning illegal acts on the part of state organs or people in office, and concerning facts of bureaucratic treatment or red tape. State organs and people in office shall, without delay, examine all complaints and statements submitted, adopt measures to check infringements of law and order and give an answer on the substance of the statement or complaint. Art. 86. Religion in the M.P.R. is separated from the state and from the school. Citizens of the M.P.R. are granted freedom of worship and freedom of anti-religious propaganda. Art. 87. In conformity with the interests of the working people, and in order to strengthen the socialist state system of the M.P.R., its citizens are guaranteed by law: 1. Freedom of speech; 2. Freedom of the press; 3. Freedom of assembly, including mass meetings; 4. Freedom to hold demonstrations and processions. These freedoms are ensured by placing at the disposal of the working people and their organizations the material requisites for their realization. Art. 88. Citizens of the Mongolian People's Republic are guaranteed inviolability of the person and the home and privacy of correspondence. No person may be arrested except by order of the court or with the sanction of the Procurator.

Chapter

Eight. The Fundamental Duties of Citizens

Art. 89. It is the duty of every citizen of the M.P.R.: (a) to devote all his efforts and knowledge to the building of socialism, remembering that honest and conscientious work for the benefit of society is the source of the increasing wealth and might of the socialist state and and of the rising living standard of the working people; (b) to conform strictly to the Constitution of the M.P.R., abide strictly by the laws and observe labor discipline, adhere to the rules of the socialist way of life and struggle actively against all anti-social manifestations; (c) to ensure the unity of personal and social interests and give priority to social and state interests; (d) to safeguard, as something dear to him, the sacred and inviolable foundation of the socialist system—public socialist property—and to do everything to strengthen and increase it; (e) to regard the strengthening of international friendship between peoples as an objective necessity, and in his own practical work to promote greater friendship and solidarity among the working people, to promote the unity and solidarity of the peoples of the socialist camp, headed by the Soviet Union, to struggle with determination against all manifestations detrimental to this sacred friendship and unity; (f) to train the rising generation in a spirit of industry, discipline and organization, collectivism and respect for the interests of society, in a spirit of a communist attitude to labor and to socialist property, a spirit of unbounded loyalty to the socialist fatherland, the ideas of communism and the principles of proletarian internationalism, in a spirit of respect for all working people regardless of their nationality; (g) to promote the consolidation of the people's democratic system, to preserve strictly state secrets and to be vigilant in respect of enemies; (h) to defend the socialist fatherland from its enemies as something sacred. Military service in the People's Army of the M.P.R. is the honorable duty of citizens of the M.P.R.; (i) to fulfil impeccably all his civic duties and to demand the same of other citizens. IV. MISCELLANEOUS
Chapter Nine. Arms,

Flag, Capital

Art. 90. The coat of arms of the Mongolian People's Republic reflects the nature of the state and the idea of the friendship of the peoples, and displays the national and economic peculiarities of the country. The arms of the M.P.R. consists of a circle surrounded by ears of corn

whose stalks are affixed to a cog-wheel. They are bound with a red and blue ribbon bearing the inscription "M.P.R." In the centre of the circle is the symbolic figure of a working man on horseback galloping towards the sun—communism—against the background of a landscape typical for the M.P.R. (mountains, forest-steppe and desert). Where the ears of corn meet in the upper part of the circle, a red fivepointed star is depicted, with the "Soyombo" sign inscribed on it. Art. 91. The state flag of the Mongolian People's Republic is based on the state coat of arms and consists of red and blue stripes, the center stripe of the flag, one third in width, being sky-blue and the two other stripes flanking it being red. In the upper part of the red stripe nearest the flagpole is a golden fivepointed star below which is the "Soyombo" symbol, also golden in color The ratio of width to length is 1 : 2. Art. 92. The capital of the Mongolian People's Republic is the city of Ulan Bator. Chapter Ten. Procedure for Amending and Abolishing the Constitution of the M.P.R.

Art. 93. The Constitution of the Mongolian People's Republic may be amended only by a decision of the Great National Hural adopted by a majority of no less than two thirds. Art. 94. As various functions of the state gradually cease to exist under communism they will be effaced from the Constitution. The Constitution of the M.P.R. will be abolished when there is no longer any need for the existence of the state, the chief instrument for the building of socialism and communism, when the state will be replaced by a communist association of working people.

