CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

MOROCCO
by I. WILLIAM ZARTMAN

Issued December 1971

Oceana Publications, Inc.
Dobbs
Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1971 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION

KINGDOM

OF

MOROCCO

Preamble The Kingdom of Morocco, a sovereign Muslim state, whose official language is Arabic, is a part of the Greater Maghreb. As an African nation, Morocco has adopted, among other objectives, the achievement of African unity. Realizing the need to place its action within the framework of the international organisations, the Moroccan Kingdom, which has already become an active and dynamic member of these organizations, subscribes to the principles, rights and obligations embodied in their Charters. It also affirms its determination to continue to act to maintain world peace and security. CHAPTER ONE GENERAL PROVISIONS Basic Principles Article 1. Morocco is a constitutional, democratic and social monarchy. Article 2. Sovereignty belongs to the nation, which exercises it directly through referendum and indirectly through the constitutional institutions. Article 3. The political parties, labor unions, communal councils and the professional chambers will contribute to the organization and representation of the people. There can be no single party. Article 4. The law is the supreme expression of the nation's will. All must submit to it. The law shall have no retroactive effect. law. Article 5. All Moroccans are equal before the

Article 6. Islam is the religion of the State. The State guarantees the individual's freedom to worship. 7

Article 7. The State's flag is red with a green five-pointed star in its centre. The State's emblem is "God, Country, King." The Citizens' Political Rights Article 8. Men and women enjoy equal political rights. Every adult citizen, male or female, has the right to vote provided he has not been deprived of his/her civil or political rights. Article 9. The Constitution guarantees to all citizens: Freedom of movement and settlement in any part of the Kingdom; Freedom of opinion, of speech in all forms, and of assembly; Freedom of associations, and freedom to join any trade union or political organization of his own choice; No restrictions shall be imposed on such freedom other than by law. Article 10. No one shall be arrested, detained or punished otherwise than as prescribed under the law and in accordance with its provisions. The home shall be inviolable. There shall be no search or investigation without due process of the law. Article 11. The secrecy of mail shall not be violated. Article 12. All citizens are equally eligible to hold civil and public posts. The Citizens' Economic and Social Rights Article 13. All citizens shall enjoy the right to education and employment. Article 14. The right to strike is guaranteed. An administrative law shall lay down the conditions 8

and procedures for practicing this right. Article 15. The right to property is guaranteed. The use and extent of this right may be restricted by law, should the need for it arise in the economic and social planning and development of the country. Expropriation of property shall not be permitted, otherwise than under such circumstances as are prescribed by law, and in accordance with its provisions. Article 16. All citizens contribute to the defense of the country. Article 17. Every citizen is liable to taxation, according to his capacity to meet public expenditure which shall be determined and allocated under law, and in accordance with the procedures detailed in this Constitution. Article 18. All citizens shall bear collectively the expenditures required to meet national disasters (that befall the country). CHAPTER TWO The Royalty Article 19. The King is the Commander of the Faithful, the Supreme Representative of the nation, the symbol of its Unity and the Guarantor of its existence and continuity. He is the Defender of the Faith and the Guardian of respect for the Constitution. The King has the responsibility for safeguarding the Rights and the Liberties of the citizens, communities and social groups. The King is the Guarantor of the independence of the nation and the territorial integrity of the Kingdom within its authentic boundaries. Article 20. The Throne and its constitutional prerogatives are hereditary and shall be transmitted from father to son among the direct male descendants by primogeniture from H.M. King Hassan II, except when the King during his lifetime appoints a successor among his sons other than his eldest son. If the King is childless, the Throne shall pass over to 9

his nearest male next-of-kin, and thereafter to his son, in accordance with the conditions stated earlier. Article 21. The King shall not be considered to have come of age until he completes his eighteenth year. Until he comes of age, a Trusteeship Council shall exercise the jurisdiction of the Throne, and its constitutional prerogatives, except the power to revise the Constitution. The Council shall act as a Consultative Body until the King becomes twentytwo years of age. The King's eldest male next-of-kin shall be the President of the Council, provided he has completed his twenty-first year. In addition to the President, the Council shall consist of the First President of the Supreme Court, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and seven persons to be appointed by the King by his own will. An administrative law shall define the procedures of the Council. Article 22. The King shall be entitled to a Civil register. Article 23. The King's person is sacred and inviolable. Article 24. The King shall appoint the Prime Minister, and other Ministers, and may relieve them of their portfolios at his own instance or if they resign. Article 25. The King shall preside at the Council of Ministers. Article 26. The King shall promulgate the law. He may submit it to a referendum, or request a new reading in accordance with the terms prescribed in Chapter Five. Article 27. The King has the right to dissolve the House of Representatives by decree, in accordance with the conditions laid down in Article 69 and 71 of Chapter Five. Article 28. The King has the right to address the House of Representatives and the Nation. The content of his address is not subject to debate. 10

Article 29. The King shall exercise administrative authority. Royal edicts shall define the spheres in which such authority can be delegated to the Prime Minister. Royal Decrees may be signed upon the recommendation of the Prime Minister, except the Decrees specified in this article, and in Articles 21, 24, 35, 66, 69, 77, 84 and 94. Article 30. The King shall be the Commander-inChief of the Royal Armed Forces. He has the right to appoint personnel to civil and military posts. He may also authorize other persons to exercise this right. Article 31. The King shall appoint Ambassadors to other Nations and to International Organizations. The Ambassadors or Representatives of International Organizations shall be accredited to him. The King shall sign and ratify Treaties. However, he shall not sign any Treaties which involve the State in financial expenditure without the prior approval of the House of Representatives. Such Treaties as are inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution are to be approved according to the procedures concerning the revision of the Constitution. Article 32. The King shall be the President of the Higher Council for National Promotion and Planning. Article 33. The King shall preside over the Higher Judicial Council and shall appoint the judges in accordance with Article 77. He shall also preside over the Higher Educational Council. Article 34. The King shall exercise the Right of Amnesty. Article 35. If the territorial integrity of the country is threatened, or if events take place susceptible of interfering with the proper functioning of the constitutional institutions, the King may declare by edict a State of Emergency after consulting with the Speaker of the House and addressing the Nation. In consequence thereof he shall have 11

the power, notwithstanding any other contradictory provisions, to adopt such measures as may be needed for the defense of the territorial integrity of the Kingdom, for the restoration of constitutional institutions, and for the conduct of the affairs of the State. The State of Emergency shall be terminated by the same procedures as its promulgation. CHAPTER THREE The House of Representatives Organization of the House of Representatives Article 36. The members of the House of Representatives shall be elected by the Nation. The right to vote is personal and cannot be delegated. Article 37. No member of the House shall be prosecuted, searched, arrested, persecuted, detained or put on trial for his views or votes expressed while carrying out his responsibilities, unless such expressed views criticize the monarchial regime or the Muslim religion or are such as to undermine the respect due to the King. During the sessions, no Representative shall be prosecuted or arrested on any criminal charge or for any misdemeanor other than those mentioned in the preceding paragraph except by the authority of the House, or if caught in the act. No member shall be arrested during the recess periods without the authority of the Secretariat of the House, unless he is caught in the act of committing the crime, or is the subject of authorized legal action or of a final sentence. The detention and trial of any member of the House shall end upon a request by the House, unless he was caught in the act of committing the crime, or was the subject of authorized legal action or of a final sentence. Article 38. The House of Representatives shall hold two sessions in a year. The King shall preside over the opening of the first session which convenes on the second Friday in October. The second 12

session shall convene on the second Friday in April. If any session continues for more than two months, it may be terminated by Decree. Article 39. The House of Representatives may be called into extraordinary session either by an absolute majority of the House or by Decree. An extraordinary session may be convened for discussing a specified agenda. When discussion of all items on this agenda is completed the session is to be terminated by Decree. Article 40. The Ministers are entitled to attend the meetings of the House and its various Committees. They may be assisted by delegates of their own selection. Article 41. The meetings of the House of Representatives are public. The minutes of the discussions shall be published in full in the Official Gazette. The House may hold closed meetings at the request of the Prime Minister or of one-third of its members. Article 42. The House of Representatives draws up and votes on its own internal rules. These cannot, however, come into force until the Constitutional Committee of the Supreme Court certifies that they are consistent with the provisions of the Constitution. Article 43. The representatives shall be elected for six years. They will be called Representatives. The House of Representatives shall consist of: Members elected by an electoral college of communal councillors, members elected by electoral colleges comprising elected members of the professional chambers and the labor representatives. An administrative law shall establish the number of representatives of each category, the method of their election, and the conditions of their eligibility and of conflicts of interests. The Speaker, and the officers of the House, shall be elected every year, at the beginning of the October session. The officers shall be elected in proportion to the Parliamentary groups. 13

Powers of the House of Representatives Article 44. Laws are voted by the House. The House may authorize the Government, for a limited period and for specified objectives, to issue decrees approved by the Council of Ministers on matters on which legislation may normally be passed. Such decrees shall become operative upon promulgation. They shall however be presented to the House for approval, on the expiry of the specified period for which they were promulgated. That period shall be terminated automatically should the House be dissolved. Article 45. Legislation may be passed on the following subjects, in addition to areas specified in other articles of the Constitution: Individual and collective rights mentioned in Chapter One of this Constitution; Basic principles of Criminal and Civil law; Creation of new Courts; Basic guarantees given to the Civil and Military personnel of the Government. An administrative law may clarify and complete these provisions. Article 46. Items which do not fall within the purview of the law shall be considered to fall within the competence of administrative powers. Article 47. The text by Royal Decree, after the stitutional Chamber of the law enters into the domain of a law may be changed endorsement of the ConSupreme Court, if the of administrative powers.

Article 48. Martial Law may be declared for thirty days by Royal Decree approved by the Council of Ministers. The duration of the Martial Law cannot be extended except by law. Article 49. The budget shall be voted by the House of Representatives in accordance with conditions prescribed by an administratative statute. The financial allocations required for the implementation of the Development Plan shall be 14

approved by the House at the same time as it approves the Plan. This approval shall be valid throughout the duration of the Plan. The Government alone has the right to propose legislation aimed at amending the Plan. If the Budget is not approved by December 31, the Government shall make available the credits needed for the operations and functions of the public services on the basis of the allocations made in the draft budget awaiting approval. Article 50. Bills and amendments proposed by the members of the House can be submitted only if their adoption would not lead to a reduction in the State's revenue or to a new tax or an increase in any existing levy. The Exercise of Powers Article 51. The Prime Minister and the members of the House of Representatives shall enjoy the right of introducing draft legislation. Bills are deposited with the Secretariat of the House. Article 52. The Government may reject any proposal, or amendment, which is outside the purview of the law. In the event of a dispute, the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court shall settle the dispute within eight days at the request of either the Government or the House. Article 53. Drafts of bills and proposals shall be referred to Committees which shall continue to work between sessions. Article 54. Between sessions, the Government may, with the agreement of the Committees concerned, issue decrees which must be presented to the House for approval during its next session. Article 55. The Secretariat of the House shall prepare the Agenda. The Agenda shall contain the draft bills presented by the Government and proposals for legislation acceptable to it, with priority and in an order defined by the Government. One meeting per week shall be fixed for ques15

tions by the members, and for Government's replies, with priority. Article 56. The members of the House, and the Government, shall have the right to present amendments. After the opening of debate, the Government may oppose the discussion of any amendment which was not presented earlier to the Committee concerned. If the Government so moves, the House shall decide by a single vote either the entire text under discussion, or a part of it, including only the amendments proposed or accepted by the Government. Article 57. Administrative statutes shall be adopted or amended in accordance with the following conditions: No draft bill or proposal shall be presented for discussion, and eventual vote, before the expiry of ten days from the date of its filing. Administrative statutes shall not be issued before being approved by the Constitutional Committee of the Supreme Court. CHAPTER FOUR The Government Article 58. The Government shall comprise the Prime Minister and the Ministers. Article 59. The Government is responsible to the King and the House of Representatives. After the appointment of the Government by the King, the Prime Minister shall in person present to the House the programme he intends to execute. Article 60. The Government shall supervise the execution of the law. The Administration shall be responsible to the Government. Article 61. The Prime Minister has the right to introduce bills. He may not introduce a bill in the House before it has been discussed by the Council of Ministers.

16

Article 62. The administrative measures initiated by the Prime Minister, within the authority prescribed in Article 29, are countersigned by the Minister charged with their implementation. Article 63. The Prime Minister shall coordinate ministerial activities. CHAPTER FIVE The Relations Between the Various Authorities: The Relations Between the King and the House of Representatives Article 64. The King has the right to ask the House for a second reading of any bill submitted to him for signature. Article 65. The second reading shall be requested by a message from the King. Article 66. The King may, by Edict, submit any bill or proposal to a referendum. Article 67. The results of such a referendum shall be binding on all. Article 68. Should the people through a referendum approve a bill rejected by the House, the House shall be dissolved. Article 69. The King shall have the right to dissolve the House by Royal Decree after consulting the President of the Constitutional Chamber and addressing the Nation. Article 70. A new House of Representatives shall be elected within three months, at the maximum, from the date of dissolution of the last. In order to avoid a vacuum during the intervening period, the King shall wield, besides the powers granted to him under the Constitution, the powers of the House. Article 71. In the event of a House of Representatives being dissolved, the succeeding House cannot be dissolved until after a year of its election. 17

Article 72. War will be declared after notifying the House. Relations Between the House of Representatives and the Government Article 73. After deliberation in the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister may ask the House for a vote of Confidence regarding a statement of general policy or a bill presented for the approval of the House. The confidence in the Government cannot be withdrawn or the bill rejected except by an absolute majority of the members of the House. The vote on a question of Confidence cannot take place before three days from the date of the motion. Defeat of a motion of Confidence causes the collective resignation of the Government. Article 74. The House may challenge the Government's responsibility by approving a vote of Censure. The request for Censure shall not be accepted unless signed by at least one-quarter of the members of the House. The Censure must be approved by an absolute majority of the House. The voting on the Censure motion shall not take place before three days from the date of the request for Censure. Approval of the motion for Censure shall lead to the collective resignation of the Government. Should the House approve a motion for Censure, it may not pass another such motion for one year. CHAPTER SIX The Judiciary Article 75. The Judiciary is independent of the Legislature and the Executive. Article 76. Judgments shall be pronounced and executed in the name of the King.

18

Article 77. The judges shall be appointed by Royal Edict on the recommendation of the High Judicial Council. Article 78. The judges shall not be dismissed or transferred. Article 79. The King shall assume the Presidentship of the High Judicial Council. In addition to him, it shall comprise: The Minister of Justice - Vice-President; The First President of the Supreme Court; The King's Attorney General in the Supreme Court; The Chairman of the first chamber of the Supreme Court; Two judges elected by the judges of the Court of Appeal; Two judges elected by the judges of the regional Courts; Two judges elected by judges of Courts of Primary Jurisdiction. Article 80. The High Judicial Council shall supervise the implementation of guarantees given to the judges concerning conditions of promotion and discipline. CHAPTER SEVEN The Special Court Article 81. The members of the Government shall be answerable for any crime or misdemeanor which they may commit during the discharge of their responsibilities. Article 82. In case the House makes a charge against a member of the Government, it will be referred to a Special Court. Article 83. The question of referring the charges to the Special Court shall be settled by the House by a two-thirds majority of the members voting by secret ballot excluding those members who may be entrusted with the investigation, prosecution and 19

pronouncing of sentence. Article 84. The Special Court shall comprise members elected by the House. The Court's President shall be appointed by Royal Edict. Article 85. An administrative law shall determine the number of the members of the Special Court, the method of their election and the procedures to be followed. CHAPTER EIGHT The Local Communities Article 86. The Kingdom's local communities are the provinces, prefectures, and communes, as well as any other communities which may be established by law. Article 87. The local communities shall elect councils charged with the democratic management of their affairs in accordance with provisions defined by law. Article 88. The Governors of the Provinces and Districts shall implement the decisions of the Provincial and District Councils, coordinate the activities of the administration and supervise the application of the law. CHAPTER NINE The Higher Council for National Promotion and Planning Article 89. A Higher Council for National Promotion and Planning shall be established. Article 90. The King shall preside over the Higher Council for National Promotion and Planning. An administrative law shall define the constitution of this Council. Article 91. The draft plan shall be referred to the Higher Council for National Promotion and Planning for study and consideration. Article 92. The draft plan shall be presented to the House of Representatives for acceptance after 20

its adoption by the Council of Ministers. CHAPTER TEN The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court Article 93. A Constitutional Chamber shall be formed within the Supreme Court. The Chamber shall be presided over by the First President of the Supreme Court. Article 94. The Constitutional Chamber shall include in addition to the President, a judge from the administrative department of the Supreme Court, a professor of law from the Faculty of Law; both appointed by Royal Decree for a six-year term; and a member appointed by the Speaker of the House, at the beginning of the term of the House. Article 95. An administrative law shall define the basis for organizing the Constitutional Chamber and its procedure. Article 96. The Constitutional Chamber shall undertake such responsibilities as are delegated to it under the Constitution. It will decide also on the validity of the elections of the Representatives and the referendum. CHAPTER ELEVEN Revision of the Constitution Article 97. The King shall have the right to take the initiative to revise the Constitution. Article 98. The House of Representatives may propose to the King the revision of the Constitution if two-thirds of the members agree. Article 99. The revision of the Constitution shall become final when approved in a referendum. Article 100. The monarchial form of the State and provisions relating to Islam shall not be subject to revision.

21

CHAPTER TWELVE Transitional Provisions Article 101. Until the investiture of the House of Representatives, the King shall carry out the necessary legislative and administrative functions for maintaining the constitutional establishments, operation of the public authorities and the conduct of the affairs of the State.

22

