THE CONSTITUTION of NEPAL
1962 (1st of Poush 2019 Years of the Bikram Sambat)
PREAMBLE Whereas it is desirable in the best interest and for all-round progress of the kingdom of Nepal and of the Nepalese people to conduct the government of the country in consonance with the popular will; And Whereas We are firmly convinced that such arrangement is possible only through Panchayat system rooted in the life of the people in general, and in keeping with the national genius and traditions, and as originating from the very base with the active co-operation of the whole people, and embodying the principles of decentralisation; And Whereas the happiness and prosperity of Our beloved subjects have been always Our only objective for the accomplishment of which We are solemnly resolved; And Whereas it is desirable for the said purpose to enact and promulgate a Constitution for the Kingdom of Nepal; Now Therefore, I, King Mahendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva, in exercise of the sovereign powers and prerogatives inherent in Us according to the constitutional law, custom and usage or Our country and which devolved on Us from Our August and Revered Forefathers, do hereby enact and promulgate this Constitution. PART 1 PRELIMINARY 1. Constitution as the Fundamental Law. This Constitution is the fundamental law of Nepal and all laws inconsistent with it, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, and subject to the provisions of this Constitution, be void. I Published in English by the Ministry of Law and Justice, 1963. Supplied by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in December 1964. Ed.

2. The Nation. (1) Having common aspirations and united by the common bond of allegiance to the Crown, the Nepalese people irrespective of religion, race, caste or tribe collectively constitute the nation. (2) It is the indefeasible and inalienable right of the Nation to develop its political, economic and cultural life and to determine its relations with other nations, in accordance with its own genius and traditions. 3. The State. (1) Nepal is an independent, indivisible and sovereign monarchical Hindu State. (2) The territory of Nepal shall comprise of; (a) the territory at the commencement of this Constitution; and (b) such other territory as may be acquired after the commencement of this Constitution. 4. National Language. The national language of Nepal is the Nepali language in the Devanagari script. 5. National.Flag. The national flag of Nepal, as handed down by tradition, consists of two juxtaposed triangular figures with crimson-colored base and deep blue borders, there being a white emblem of the crescent moon with eight rays visible out of sixteen in the upper part and a white emblem of twelve rayed sun in the lower part. The method to draw out the flag and other particulars relating to it are laid down in Schedule 1. 6. National Anthem, etc. (1) The Royal salute as given in Schedule 2 is the national anthem of Nepal. (2) Rhododendron Arboreum is the national flower, crimson color is the national color, cow is the national animal and lophophorus is the national bird, of Nepal. (3) The coat-of-arms of Nepal shall be as given in Schedule 3. Provided that the coat-of-arms may be enlarged or reduced in size according to necessity and such color may be used therein as may be prescribed by His Majesty's Government.

PART 2 CITIZENSHIP 7. Citizenship at the Commencement of the Constitution. Every person who has his domicile in Nepal and: (a) who was born in Nepal; or (b) either of whose parents was born in Nepal; or (c) who is a woman having any kind of matrimonial relation with a citizen of Nepal in accordance with the laws and customs of Nepal; or (d) who has already obtained a certificate of citizenship in accordance with the laws of Nepal; shall be a citizen of Nepal at the commencement of this constitution.

8. Acquisition and Termination of Citizenship to be Regulated by Law.

(1) After the commencement of this constitution, the acquisition and termination of citizenship of Nepal and other matters related thereto shall be regulated by law. (2) While making laws in pursuance of clause (i) it shall be, inter alia, stipulated that a foreigner may qualify for the acquisition of citizenship if: (a) he can read and write the national language of Nepal; (b) he, engaged in an occupation, resides in Nepal; (c) he has taken steps to renounce the citizenship of the country of which he is a citizen; and (d) he has resided in Nepal for not less than a period of two years in case of a person of Nepalese origin, and for not less than a period of twelve years in case of a person other than of Nepalese origin. (3) While making laws in pursuance of clause (i) it shall be, inter alia, stipulated that the citizenship of a person may be terminated if : (a) he has raised arms or has made an attempt to raise arms, against Nepal or has committed any other offence against the State; or (b) he has not served or avoids to serve the State, during war or any other emergency, in the manner prescribed by law. PART 3 FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES AND RIGHTS
9. Fundamental Duties of the Citizen. (1) Devotion to the Nation and loyalty to the State are the fundamental duties of every citizen. (2) To exercise one's right with due regard to law and without infringing upon the right of others is also a fundamental duty of every citizen. 10. Right to Equality. (1) All citizens are entitled to equal protection of law. (2) No discrimination shall be made against any citizen in the application of general laws on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, tribe or any of them. (3) There shall be no discrimination against any citizen in respect of appointment to the government service or any other public service only on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, tribe or any of them. 11. Right to Freedom. (1) No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty save in accordance with law. (2) Subject to the other provisions of this Part all citizens shall have the right to following freedoms: (a) Freedom of speech and expression; (b) Freedom to assemble peaceably and without arms;

(c) Freedom to move to or reside in any part of Nepal; and (d) Freedom to acquire or enjoy property, or to dispose it of by sale or otherwise. (3) No person shall be punished for an act which was not punishable by law when the act was done, nor shall any person be subjected to a punishment greater than that prescribed by law for an offence when the offence was committed. (4) No person shall be prosecuted and punished more than once for the same offence in any court. (5) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself. (6) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as is practicable, of the grounds of such arrest, nor shall he be denied the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice. Explanation. For the purposes of this clause, "legal practitioner" includes any person who, under the law for the time being in force, is authorized to represent any other person in any court. (7) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before a judicial authority within a period of twenty four hours from such arrest, excluding the period of journey from the place of arrest to the court of judicial authority, and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period except on the order of such authority. (8) Nothing in clauses (6) and (7) shall apply to a person who: (a) is an enemy alien; or (b) is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention. 12. Right against Exile. No citizen shall be exiled. 13. Right against Exploitation. Traffic in human beings, slavery and forced labor are prohibited. Provided that it shall not be a bar to provide for compulsory service by law for public purposes. 14. Right to Religion. Every person, having regard to the traditions, may profess and practise his own religion as handed down from ancient times. Provided that no person: shall be entitled to convert another person from one religion to another. 15. Right to Property. No person shall be deprived of his property save in accordance with law. 16. Right to Constitutional Remedies. Right to proceed in accordance with Article 71, for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part, is guaranteed. 17. Restrictions on the Exercise of Fundamental Rights for Public Good. (1) Laws may be made for the sake of public good to regulate or control the exercise of fundamental rights specified in this. Part.

(2) If it is expressed in the preamble of any Act that it has been made for any or all of the following purposes, such Act, or rule, order or bye-law made under such Act and having the force of law shall be deemed to be a law made for the sake of public good: (a) For the preservation of the security of Nepal; (b) For the maintenance of law and order; (c) For the maintenance of friendly relations with foreign states; (d) For the maintenance of good relations among the people of different classes or professions or between the people or different areas; (e) For the maintenance of good conduct, health, comfort, economic interest, decency or morality of the people in general; (f) For the protection of the interest of minors or women; (g) For the prevention of internal disturbance or external invasion; (h) For the prevention of contempt of court or contempt of the Rashtriya Panchayat; and (i) For the prevention of any attempt to subvert this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force or for the prevention of any other like attempt.

PART 4 OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL POLICY 18. Application of Principles. The principles laid down in this Part are for general guidance and they shall not be enforceable by any court. 19. Objectives and Principles. (1) The aim of the State shall be to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting a just social order which brings about harmony in the national life by integrating and consolidating the interests of different classes and professions from a comprehensive national outlook. (2) Towards the fulfilment of the objectives laid down in clause (1) such policy, in particular, shall be followed as a result of which: (a) all citizens may have equal opportunity and facility to develop their personality and to make economic progress; (b) citizens may have reasonable and adequate means of livelihood; (c) the ownership and control of the material resources of the com-unityaresgldmbinaouteqldsrbinof wealth and as may best subserve the common good, and also afford reasonable protection and encouragement to private enterprise in the allotted sectors of industry and trade; (d) the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age of children may not be abused;

(f) The Auditor-General, ex officio member; (g) The Chairman of the Public Service Commission, ex officio member; (h) The Attorney General, ex officio member; (i) The Mool Purohit, ex officio member; and (j) Such other members as His Majesty may appoint from among persons who are renowned in different fields of national life or who have rendered distinguished service to the country or who are considered fit to be members of the Raj Sabha. (3) A person appointed under sub-clause (j) of clause (2) shall remain a member during the pleasure of His Majesty. (4) A meeting of the Raj Sabha shall be summoned by the command of His Majesty and shall be presided over by Him if present at the meeting, and if His Majesty is not present at the meeting, the Crown Prince, if He has attained the age of eighteen years, shall preside and if the Crown Prince has not attained the age of eighteen years the meeting shall be presided over by a Vice-Chairman generally or specifically designated by His Majesty and in case no Vice-Chairman is so designated the meeting shall be presided over by such member as the Raj Sabha by a resolution may decide at that meeting. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4) a meeting of the Raj Sabha shall be summoned by the Secretary of the Raj Sabha in the following circumstances, and such meeting shall be presided over by such person as may be decided by a resolution in that meeting: (a) on the demise of His Majesty or if His Majesty proclaims His abdication; or (b) if at least one fourth of the total number of members of the Raj Sabha (of whom at least four shall be Ministers of the Crown) sign a requisition declaring that His Majesty is unable, by reason of mental or bodily infirmity, to command the summoning of a meeting. (6) The meeting summoned under the circumstances of sub-clause (a) of clause (5) shall proclaim: (a) the accession to the Throne of the heir-apparent to His Majesty, in accordance with the law, custom and usage relating to the succession to the Throne; and (b) a Regent or a Council or Regency subject to the concerned laws, in case His Majesty is below the age of eighteen years. Provided that the Regency or the Council of Regency proclaimed under this sub-clause shall terminate when His Majesty attains the age of eighteen years. (7) (a) The meeting summoned under the circumstances of sub-clause (b) of clause (5) shall decide whether His Majesty is unable, by reason of mental or bodily infirmity, to command the summoning of a meeting; and (b) If the Raj Sabha decides in the affirmative by a majority of at

least two thirds of its total membership, it shall proclaim the Crown Prince to be the. Regent if He has attained the age of eighteen years and, if He has not, shall, subject to the concerned laws, proclaim a Regent or a Council of Regency. Provided that the Regency or the Council of Regency proclaimed under this sub-clause shall, subject to concerned laws, terminate on the demise or abdication by His Majesty or when His Majesty informs the Raj Sabha that He is fit to resume the royal functions. (8) The Regent or the Council or Regency proclaimed under clause (6) or (7) shall have no power to decide or to give approval to anything which shall be prejudicial to the interest of His Majesty or His successor. (9) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (6) shall prevent the heir-apparent to His Majesty from exercising the powers of the Crown pending a Proclamation under that sub-clause. (10) (a) A Standing Committee consisting of seven to fifteen members of the Raj Sabha designated by His Majesty may perform all functions of the Raj Sabha under this Constitution in the name of the Raj Sabha except those mentioned in clause (5), (6) and (7). Provided that it shall not prevent His Majesty, if He so desires, from causing any decision taken by the Standing Committee in the name of the Raj Sabha to be placed in the meeting of the .Raj Sabha for its consideration. (b) The Standing Committee mentioned in clause (a) shall be presided over by His Majesty in person or by a person designated by Him, and the Secretary of the Raj Sabha shall be the Secretary of the Standing Committee, (c) The term of office of the members of the Standing Committee of the Raj Sabha shall be for three years, (d) The Standing Committee mentioned in sub-clause (a) may, if it so desires, associate other members of the Raj Sabha, during its deliberation on any subject. (11) The Raj Sabha or its Standing Committee shall transact its business notwithstanding the absence of any of its members in any meeting provided that : (a) notice of such meeting has been sent to all who were members on the date of the issue of the notice or such notice has been published in the Nepal Gazette; and (b) at least one third of the total number of members are present. (12) His Majesty may, in addition to the matters on which he has to consult the Raj Sabha according to this Constitution, also seek its advice in connection with performance of any of His other functions. (13) Unless otherwise provided for, the decision of the Raj Sabha or its Standing Committee shall be made by a majority of the members present and voting.

(14) Subject to this Article, the Raj Sabha or its Standing Committee may make rules for the conduct of its business, and until such rules are made, its business shall be conducted by rules made by His Majesty. (15) The Secretary of the Raj Sabha shall be appointed by His Majesty. (16) Members of the Raj Sabha shall take oath in the manner and form prescribed by His Majesty. PART 7 COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 24. Exercise of the Executive Power. (1) The executive power of Nepal shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and other laws for the time being in force by His Majesty either directly or through Ministers or other officers subordinate to Him. (2) The question whether His Majesty has consulted any person or authority under the provisions of this Constitution and whether any person or authority has submitted any advice or recommendation and, if so, what advice or recommendation has been submitted, shall not be inquired into in any court. (3) All executive action to be done by His Majesty under this Constitution, shall be expressed to be taken in the name of His Majesty's Government except in cases where the rules made under clause (4) provide to be expressed in the name of His Majesty. (4) Orders, decisions and other instruments made and executed in the name of His Majesty or His Majesty's Government shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by His Majesty, and the validity of an order, decision or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order, decision, or instrument made or executed by His Majesty or by His Majesty's Government as the case may be. 25. Formation of the Council of Ministers. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers under the Chairmanship of His Majesty, consisting of such Ministers as may be appointed by His Majesty, to aid and advise Him in the exercise of His functions. Provided that His Majesty may designate any Minister to be the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers. (2) If any Minister is designated by His Majesty to be the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers, he shall preside over the meetings of the Council of Ministers. Provided that His Majesty, if present at a meeting of the Council of Ministers, shall preside over it. 26. Ministers of the Crown. (1) His Majesty shall appoint Ministers from among the members of the Rashtriya Panchayat.

Provided that any person who is not a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat may also, if His Majesty deems fit, be appointed as a Minister for a period not exceeding six months. (2) The Ministers shall be responsible to His Majesty. (3) A Minister may be removed from his office if: (a) his resignation in writing is accepted by His Majesty; or (b) he ceases to be a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat; or (c) he was appointed in accordance with the proviso to clause (1) and has failed to become a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat within a period of six consecutive months; or (d) a resolution, passed by a majority of the total membership of the Rashtriya Panchayat and by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting, to the effect that he does not have the support of the Rashtriya Panchayat, is approved by His Majesty; or (e) His Majesty desires to remove him. 27. Assistant Ministers. (1) His Majesty may appoint an Assistant Minister from among the members of the Rashtriya Panchayat to assist any Minister of the Crown in the discharge of his functions. (2) The provisions of clause (3) of Article 26 excepting those of subclause (c) and (d) shall apply also to Assistant Ministers. 28. Remuneration. Remuneration of the Ministers of the Crown and of the Assistant Ministers shall be determined by an Act and until so determined shall be as determined by rules made by His Majesty. 29. Conduct of Government Business. (1) The allocation of business and the transaction of business, of His Majesty's Government, shall be done in accordance with the rules approved by His Majesty. (2) The question whether the rules made under clause (1) have or have not been observed, shall not be inquired into in any court. PART 8 LOCAL PANCHAYATS AND NATIONAL PANCHAY AT

Chapter 1. Local Panchayats
30. Gaun Panchayat. (1) The Gaun Sabha shall be the base of the Panchayat system. A village or a group of villages notified in accordance with law shall be known as Gaun Sabha. (2) Every Gaun Sabha shall elect an executive committee which shall be known as Gaun Panchayat. (3) The organization, powers and functions of the Gaun Sabha and the Gaun Panchayat shall be defined by law. 31. Nagar Panchayat. (1) There shall be Nagar Panchayats in such cities as may be notified in accordance with law.

(2) The organization, powers and functions of the. Nagar Panchayat shall be defined by law. 32. Zilla Panchayat. (1) In every district there shall be a Zilla Sabha which shall include the representatives elected by Gaun Panchayats and Nagar Panchayats of that district. (2) Every Zilla Sabha shall elect an executive committee which shall be known as Zilla Panchayat. (3) The organization, powers and functions of the Zilla Sabha and the Zilla Panchayat shall be defined by law. 33. Anchal Panchayat. (1) In every zone there shall be an Anchal Sabha which shall include all the members of Zilla Panchayats of that zone. (2) Every Anchal Sabha shall elect an executive committee which shall be known as Anchal Panchayat. (3) The organization, powers and functions of the Anchal Sabha and the Anchal Panchayat shall be defined by law.

Chapter 2. National Panchayat
34. Constitution of Rashtriya Panchayat. (1) There shall be a Rashtriya Panchayat in Nepal which shall be the apex of the Panchayat system and whose constitution, powers and functions shall be as laid down in this Constitution. (2) The Rashtriya Panchayat shall consist of the following members: (a) Members elected by Anchal Sabhas, as specified in Schedule 4; (b) Members elected by the class organizations and professional organizations, as specified in Schedule 5; (c) Members elected from among the graduates, as specified in Schedule 6; and (d) Members nominated by His Majesty being fifteen percent of the total number of members elected under sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c). (3) Every Anchal Sabha shall elect members for the Rashtriya Panchayat from among the members of the Anchal Sabha in such number as specified in Schedule 4 and in the manner prescribed by law. Provided that an Anchal Sabha, while electing members for the Rashtriya Panchayat, shall elect at least one member from each district within the zone. (4) Members specified in Schedules 5 and 6 shall be elected in the manner prescribed by law. (5) Schedules 4, 5 and 6 may be amended from time to time by an Act. 35. Qualification for Membership. In order to become a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat a person: (a) should be a citizen of Nepal; (b) should have attained the age of twenty-five years;

(c) should not be a servant of the Crown other than a Minister or an Assistant Minister; (d) should not have been expelled in accordance with clause (2) of Article 38; and (e) should not be disqualified under any Act. Provided that the restriction laid down in clause (d) may be waived in respect of any person by His Majesty at such time and in such circumstances as He may deem fit. 36. Decision as to the Disqualification of the Members. If a question arises whether any member of the Rashtriya Panchayat does not possess or has ceased to possess any of the qualifications as laid down in Article 35, the final decision in respect of it shall be made by His Majesty after consultation with the Raj Sabha. 37. Term of Office of the Members. The term of office of the members of the Rashtriya. Panchayat shall be as follows: (a) Six years in case of members specified in sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 34; and (b) Four years in case of members specified in sub-clause (b), (c) or (d) of clause (2) of Article 34. Provided that the term of office, for the first term, of the elected members specified in sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 34 shall be two years for one third of such members and four years for another one third. Which of such members shall have a term of two years and which of such members shall have a term of four years shall be determined by the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat by lot in the manner prescribed by him. 38. Vacation of Seats. (1) The seat of a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall become vacant : (a) upon his death; or (b) if, by notice in writing to the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat, he resigns his seat; or (c) if he ceases to have the qualifications mentioned in Article 35; or (d) if, without the leave of the Rashtriya Panchayat, he absents himself from the meetings of the Rashtriya Panchayat for a continuous period of three months; or (e) on the expiry of the term of office under Article 37. (2) If a commission consisting of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat, and a Judge of the Supreme Court and a member of the Raj Sabha (other than a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat), designated by His Majesty, submits a report with a finding that a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat has committed breach of secrecy by conduct not befitting his office, and if the report is approved by His Majesty, such a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be expelled and on such expulsion his seat shall be automatically vacant. (3) When a seat in the Rashtriya Panchayat falls vacant it shall be filled

up as soon as possible. The vacancy shall be filled up in the same manner, either by election or nomination, as the member whose seat has fallen vacant was elected or nominated. (4) When a seat of a member falls vacant before the expiry of his term of office, the election or nomination, as the case may be, for such seat shall be only for the remaining term. 39. Chairman. (1) The Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be appointed by His Majesty, on the recommendation of the Rashtriya Panchayat, from among its members. (2) The term of office of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be for two years and he shall be eligible for reappointment. (3) The office of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall become vacant: (a) if his resignation from his office is accepted by His Majesty; or (b) if he ceases to be a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat; or (c) on the expiry of the term of his office; or (d) if His Majesty removes him from his office on the recommendation made by a majority of two thirds of the total membership of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (4) If the office of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat falls vacant or if the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat is unable to perform the duties of his office on account of illness or any other reason, the ViceChairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat may be authorized by His Majesty to perform the duties of the Chairman. (5) When the office of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat falls vacant, it shall be filled up as soon as possible in accordance with clause (1). (6) Pending the appointment of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat and also when there is no Vice-Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat, a person designated by His Majesty may act as the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat. 40. Vice-Chairman. (1) The members of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall elect a member from among themselves to be the Vice-Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (2) In the absence of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat the ViceChairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall preside over the meetings of the Rashtriya Panchayat and if authorized under clause (4) of Article 39 shall also perform other duties of the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (3) The term of office of the Vice-Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be for two years and he shall be eligible for reappointment. (4) The office of the Vice-Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall become vacant : (a) if, by notice in writing to the Chairman, he resigns his office; or

(b) if he ceases to be a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat; or (c) on the expiry of the term of his office. (5) When the office of the Vice-Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat falls vacant, it shall be filled up as soon as possible in accordance with clause (1). 41. Steering Committee. (1) There shall be a Steering Committee consisting of twenty-one members to advise the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat with regard to proper arrangement of business before the Rashtriya Panchayat and also in other matters. Other functions of the Steering Committee shall be as laid down in the rules of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (2) The Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the Rastriya Panchayat shall be the ex officio Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the Steering Committee respectively and Ministers of the Crown for Law, Finance, Home and Panchayat Affairs shall be ex officio members. Other members of the Steering Committee shall be elected by the members of the Rashtriya Panchayat in the manner laid down in the rules of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (3) The term of office of the members of the Steering Committee, except that of the ex officio members, shall be for two years. 42. Session. (1) After the commencement of this Constitution His Majesty shall, as early as possible, summon the members of the Rashtriya Panchayat to its first session. (2) Thereafter subject to the provisions of this Constitution His Majesty may from time to time summon the members of the Rashtriya Panchayat to its other sessions. (3) His Majesty may prorogue the sessions of the Rastriya Panchayat. Provided that the period between the prorogation of one session and the beginning of the next session shall not ordinarily exceed six months. (4) While the Rashtriya Panchayat stands adjourned His Majesty may, if He thinks necessary to summon a meeting of the Rashtriya Panchayat at an earlier date, fix the date and time of such meeting and the meeting shall be held on the date and time so fixed. (5) Subject to its rules the Rashtriya Panchayat may adjourn by a motion passed. (6) The proceedings of the Rashtriya Panchayat or any of its committee shall not be held in open. Provided that: (a) any person may observe a meeting on the occasion of an address to the Rashtriya Panchayat by His Majesty or by any distinguished invitee if the Chairman or the Secretary or the Rashtriya Panchayat gives permission; and (b) a summary record of the proceedings of every meeting of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be published as soon as possible for the

information of the general public in accordance with the rules of the Rashtriya Panchayat. 43. Address and Message by and from His Majesty. (1) His Majesty may address the Rashtriya Panchayat and for that purpose may command the attendance of the members. (2) His Majesty may send messages to the Rashtriya Panchayat and the Rashtriya Panchayat after considering the contents of the message as soon as possible shall submit its opinion to His Majesty. 44. Address to His Majesty by the Rashtriya Panchayat. The Rashtriya Panchayat may, by a motion passed by a majority of the members, present an address to His Majesty. 45. Restrictions on Debate. (1) No discussion shall take place in the Rashtriya Panchayat with regard to the conduct of His Majesty, Her Majesty the Queen and the successors to the Throne. Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to restrict criticism of. His Majesty's Government. (2) No discussion shall take place in the Rashtriya Panchayat with respect to the conduct of a Judge in the discharge of his duties. Provided that this clause shall not be deemed to restrict the discussion with respect to the conduct of the Chief. Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court in the discharge of his duties, on a motion in connection with sub-clause (b) of clause (4) of Article 69. (3) No discussion shall take place in the Rashtriya Panchayat with respect to any matter relating to a cause pending in any court in Nepal. 46. Voting. Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution any question put before the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting. The person presiding shall not ordinarily have a right to vote, but in the event of an equality of votes he shall exercise a casting vote. 47. Power to Transact the Business of the Rashtriya Panchayat in Case of Vacancy. The Rashtriya Panchayat shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof and any proceedings therein shall be valid even if it is discovered subsequently that some person not entitled so to do took part in the proceedings. 48. Penalty for Unauthorized Presence or Voting. (1) If a person sits or votes as a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat before he has complied with the requirements of Article 52 or when he knows that he is not qualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of every day in which he so sits or votes to a penalty of one hundred rupees and that penalty shall be realized as a sum due to the Government. (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to a Minister appointed under the proviso to clause (1) of Article 26, and he shall be entitled to sit and take part in the proceedings of the Rashtriya Panchayat.

Provided that he shall not be entitled to vote therein until he becomes a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat. 49. Quorum. If at any time during a meeting of the Rashtriya Panchayat, the attention of the person presiding is drawn to the fact that less than one third of the total number of members of the Rashtriya Panchayat are present, the person presiding may, subject to the rules of the Rashtriya Panchayat, either suspend the meeting until there is such quorum or adjourn the meeting to the next sitting day. 50. Procedure relating to the Conduct of Business. (1) The Rashtriya Panchayat may, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, make rules in respect of itself or its committees for the conduct of business, for the preservation of order at meetings and for regulating any other matter. (2) Until the rules are made in accordance with clause (1) the matters referred to in that clause shall be regulated by rules made by His Majesty. 51. Privileges of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (1) Subject to the Provisions of this Constitution and the rules of the Rashtriya Panchayat, there shall be full freedom of speech in the Rashtriya Panchayat and no member of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be arrested, taken into custody or be liable to proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote cast by him in the Rashtriya Panchayat or any of its committees. (2) The Rashtriya Panchayat shall have full powers to regulate its internal matters and only the Rashtriya Panchayat shlal have authority to decide whether any proceedings of the Rashtriya Panchayat is regular or otherwise and no question thereof shall be raised in any court. (3) No proceedings of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be interpreted in such a way as to question the bona fides of the Rashtriya Panchayat and nothing shall be published which deliberately puts wrong or misleading construction in respect of any thing spoken by any member. (4) No member or officer of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be arrested: (a) during the session of the Rashtriya Panchayat; and (b) during the period between the issuance of the notice of the summoning of the session and prior to the commencement of the session. Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prohibit the arrest of any member or officer in accordance with the law providing for preventive detention or in respect of any criminal prosecution, and in case of such arrest of any member or officer, the Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be immediately informed by the officer making such arrest. (5) No person shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of publication of any report or other papers or of votes or proceedings under the authority of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (6) A breach of the privileges of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall constitute contempt of the Rashtriya Panchayat, and the Rashtriya Panchayat shall have power to decide whether or not there has been any breach of such privileges.

(7) (a) If a person commits contempt of the Rashtriya Panchayat, the officer presiding over a meeting of the Rashtriya Panchayat may, by a decision of the Rashtriya Panchayat, pass an order sentencing such person to a term of imprisonment which may, at the most, extent to the end of the session. Provided that no person charged with such offence shall be punished without giving him an opportunity to show cause as to why he should not be punished. (b) The officer presiding over a meeting of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall have, in respect of the offence liable to be punished under this clause, power to issue a warrant of arrest or a summons, to summon witnesses, to take evidence, to cause documents to be produced and to record statements. (c) The Rashtriya Panchayat shall be entitled to cause detention of the person to whom it has power to punish under this clause, in the charge of any of its officers or in any government jail. 52. Oath. Every member of the Rashtriya Panchayat, before taking his seat for the first time, shall have to take oath before the person presiding over a meeting of the Rashtriya Panchayat in the manner and form prescribed by His Majesty. 53. Remuneration. The remuneration of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman and other members of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be determined by an Act and until so determined shall be as determined by rules made by His Majesty. 54. Secretary. The Secretary of the Rashtriya Panchayat shall be appointed by His Majesty. PART 9 LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE 55. Introduction of bills. Subject to this Constitution and the rules of the Rashtriya Panchayat, any member of the Rashtriya Panchayat may introduce a bill in the Rashtriya Panchayat. Provided that : (a) before introducing any bill or amendment in respect of any of the following matters by a member other than a Minister of the Crown or an Assistant Minister, prior sanction of His Majesty shall be necessary and such sanction may be obtained through a Minister of the Crown or an Assistant Minister: (i) Imposition or collection of or increment in taxation; (ii) Appropriation or expenditure of any amount or increment in the amount sought to be appropriated or expended out of the Consolidated Fund or any other government fund; or

(iii) Any matter relating to national debt; or (iv) Any matter relating to Royal Armed Forces. (b) No bill, which expresses in its preamble to have been made for any or all of the purposes as laid down in clause (2) of Article 17, shall be introduced without the sanction of His Majesty, and before giving such sanction His Majesty may consult the Raj Sabha, 56. Assent to a Bill. (1) When a bill is passed by the Rashtriya Panchayat, it shall be presented to His Majesty for His assent and if His Majesty is willing to give His assent, He shall notify His assent ordinarily within one month of the presentation of the bill and if He desires to withhold His assent or desires to give His assent with amendments He shall proceed in accordance with clause (2). (2) If His Majesty desires to withhold His assent or desires to give assent with amendments to a bill passed by the Rashtriya Panchayat, He may, after consulting the Raj Sabha return the bill to the Rashtriya Panchayat with a message, and the Rashtriya Panchayat shall, after giving consideration over such message, submit its recommendations to His Majesty as soon as possible, and His Majesty, after having considered such recommendations, shall finally decide whether to give or to withhold His assent or to give His assent with amendments. (3) If His Majesty, after consultation with the Raj Sabha, deems it expedient in respect of any bill discussed in the Rashtriya Panchayat but not passed, to get it passed in the form in which it was introduced in the Rashtriya Panchayat or with amendments, He may send a message accordingly, stating reasons thereof to the Rashtriya Panchayat and the Rashtriya Panchayat shall, after giving consideration over such message as soon as possible, submit its recommendations to His Majesty, and His Majesty may, after having considered such recommendations, give His assent to the bill in the form in which it was introduced in the Rashtriya Panchayat or with amendments. (4) When assent is given by His Majesty to a bill in accordance with this Article, such bill shall become an Act and such assent shall be deemed to have been given after the Red Seal is affixed to the bill. 57. Ordinance. (1) If at any time except when the Rashtriya Panchayat is in session, His Majesty is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for Him to take immediate action, He may, after consultation with the Raj Sabha if He so desires, promulgate such ordinance as the circumstances appear to Him to require and which is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution. (2) An ordinance promulgated under clause (1) shall have the same force and effect as an Act. Provided that every such ordinance: (a) shall be laid before the Rashtriya Panchayat within seven days of its sitting subsequent to such promulgation;

(b) may be withdrawn at. any time by His Majesty; and (c) shall ipso facto cease to have effect after the lapse of forty-five days of the sitting of the Rashtriya Panchayat if it is not , withdrawn according to sub-clause (b). PART 10 FINANCIAL PROCEDURE 58. No Tax to be Imposed or Loans to be Raised Except in Accordance with Law. (1) No tax shall be levied and collected except in accordance with law. (2) No loan shall be raised by His Majesty's Government except in accordance with law. 59. The Consolidated Fund. Except His Majesty's private revenues, and the trust funds and local taxes, all revenues received by His Majesty's Government, all loans raised on the security of the public revenues, and all moneys received in, repayment .of any loan made under the authority of an Act shall, unless otherwise provided by an Act, be credited to a public fund to be known as the Consolidated Fund. 60. Expenditure from the Consolidated Fund. No expenditure shall be incurred out of the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund other than the Emergency Fund except in accordance with an Appropriation Act or an Act made under Article 64 or 65 or except such sums as are chargeable on the Consolidated Fund. 61. Expenditure, Chargeable on the Consolidated Fund. The following expenditure shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund: (a) Civil list of the Royal Family as provided by an Act; (b) The remuneration payable to: (i) the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the Rashtriya Panchayat, (ii) the Chief Justice , and other Judges of the Supreme Court, (iii) the Chairman and members of the Public Service Commission, and (iv) the Auditor-General; (c) The administrative expenses, of the Raj Sabha, the Rashtriya Panchayat, the Supreme Court, the Public Service Commission and the department of the Auditor-General; (d) All charges relating to debts; (e) Any sum required to satisfy any judgment or decree made by any court against His Majesty's Government; and (f) Any other sum declared by an Act to be so charged. 62. Estimates or Revenues and Expenditure. (1) His Majesty shall, in respect of every financial year, cause to be laid before the Rashtriya Panchayat, an annual estimate, showing among others the following items:

(a) the estimate of revenue; (b) the sums required to meet the charges on the Consolidated Fund; and (c) the sums required to meet the expenditure to be provided by an Appropriation Act. (2) The sums required to meet the expenditure to be provided by an Appropriation Act shall be specified under heads and shall be included in an Appropriation Bill. 63. Supplementary Estimates. (1) His Majesty shall, in respect of any financial year, cause to be laid before the Rashtriya Panchayat, a supplementary estimate if it is found: (a) that the amount authorized to be spent for a particular service by the Appropriation Act for the current financial year is insufficient or that if a need has arisen- for expenditure upon a new service not provided by the Appropriation Act for that year; or (b) that the expenditure made during that financial year is in excess of the amount authorized by the Appropriation Act. (2) The sums included in the supplementary estimates shall be specified under heads and shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill. 64. Votes on Account. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, any portion of the expenditure estimated for, the financial year may be incurred in advance by an Act pending the enact ment of the Appropriation Bill. (2) A Vote on Account shall not be submitted until the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure have been presented in accordance with the provisions of Article 62 and the amount of the Vote on account shall not exceed one-third of the Estimates of Expenditure for the financial year. (3) The expenditure incurred in accordance with the Vote on Account Act shall be included in the Appropriation Bill. 65. Votes of Credit. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, when owing to a local or national emergency, whether due to natural causes or the threat of external aggression or internal disturbance or otherwise, His Majesty is satisfied that it is impracticable or undesirable from the view-point of the security or interest of the State to specify the details required under Article 62, He may cause to be laid before the Rashtriya Panchayat a Vote of Credit Bill giving only such particulars of the expenditure proposed which He may consider desirable. (2) The expenditure incurred under the Vote of Credit Act shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill as soon as possible. 66. Contingency Fund. An Act may create a Contingency Fund into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by an Act. Unforeseen expenditure shall be met out of this Fund as approved by His Majesty. The amount of the expenditure so met shall be replaced as soon as possible by a Supplementary Appropriation Act.

67. Act relating to Financial Procedure. Matters relating to the transfer of the sums appropriated for one head to another and other financial procedures may be regulated by an Act. PART 11 SUPREME COURT 68. Supreme Court. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of Nepal consisting of a Chief Justice of Nepal and, unless a larger number is prescribed by law, of not more than six other Judges. (2) The Supreme Court, subject to the provisions of this Constitutions, shall be a court of record and shall have power to give punishment prescribed by law for contempt of itself or of courts subordinate to it. 69. Judges of the Supreme Court. (1) His Majesty shall appoint the Chief Justice after consultation, if He so desires, with such members of the Raj Sabha whom He thinks fit and also after consultation with other Judges of the Supreme Court, and other Judges of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by Him after consultation with the Chief Justice. (2) Subject to the provisions of clause (4) the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years. (3) No person shall be qualified for appointment as a Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court unless: (a) he has, at least, held for five years the post of a district judge or an equivalent judicial post; or (b) he has, at least, worked for seven years in the capacity of a government or private pleader; or (c) he is, in the opinion of His Majesty, a jurist. (4) The Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court : (a) may resign his office by submitting a petition in writing to His Majesty; or (b) may be removed from office by His Majesty if a Commission, consisting of a person or persons qualified to be a judge of the Supreme Court, appointed by His Majesty on His own accord or as a result of an address presented to Him by the Rashtriya Panchayat, reports with a finding that the Chief Justice or the Judge, as the case may be, is unable to perform his duties due to incapacity or misbehavior. Provided that the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supremo Court so charged shall not be denied a reasonable opportunity for defending himself before the Commission. (5) The Commission appointed under sub-clause (b) of clause (4) shall have power similar to that of a court to summon witnesses, to take evidence and to punish for its contempt.

(6) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief Justice and other Judges of the Supreme Court shall be determined by an Act and until so determined shall be as determined by rules made by His Majesty. The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be varied to his disadvantage during his term of office. (7) When the office of the Chief Justice is vacant or when the Chief Justice is, by reason of ill-health or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of that office, shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Supreme Court as may be appointed by His Majesty to be the Acting Chief Justice. (8) His Majesty may, after consultation with the Chief Justice, appoint, as many ad hoc or additional Judges as may be necessary for the Supreme Court for such period and with such remuneration and facilities as His Majesty may specify in that behalf. Provided that such Judges shall be required to have the same qualifications as laid down in clause (3). (9) No person who has held office as a permanent Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act in any Court or before any authority. 70. Ordinary Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction as prescribed by law including the jurisdiction to try original cases, to hear appeals or references and to revise non-appealable cases decided by lower courts. 71. Extraordinary Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions, orders or writs including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari for the enforcement of rights conferred by Part 3 of this Constitution or for the enforcement, in cases where no other remedy is provided for, of rights conferred by other laws for the time being in force. Provided that nothing in this Article shall apply in relation to matters falling within the jurisdiction of a court martial. 72. Supreme Court not to overrule its own decision. The Supreme Court shall not itself overrule its final decision. Provided that the Supreme Court : (a) may review any decision made by it on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by, law; and (b) may revise its previous decision in a case and finally decide in accordance with law if His. Majesty issues a command for the revision of that case (already decided by the Supreme Court) on the recommendation of a Judicial Committee appointed for that purpose on the application of the concerned party within the time fixed by law. 73. Law declared by the Supreme Court to be binding. The law declared by the Supreme Court in cases within its jurisdiction as conferred by this

Constitution or other laws for the time being in force, shall be binding on all courts. Provided that the law declared by the. Supreme Court before the commencement of this Constitution may not be binding on the Supreme Court as a precedent after the commencement of this Constitution. 74. Judicial Service Commission. (1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission consisting of the Chief Justice, the Minister of Justice, and the Chairman of the Public Service Commission. His Majesty's Government. shall, on the recommendation of that Commission and in accordance with law, make appointment, transfer and promotion in the gazetted posts of the Judicial Service, and take departmental action against and give punishment to officials of such posts. Provided that His Majesty's Government shall have to consult the Public Service Commission while appointing a person, not in the government service, to a post in the Judicial Service. (2) Other powers and functions and procedure of the Judicial Service Commission shall be as prescribed by law. PART 12 AUDITOR-GENERAL 75. Auditor-General. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General of Nepal who shall be appointed by His Majesty after consultation, if He so desires, with the Raj Sabha. (2) The Auditor-General shall hold his office until the expiration of his term of office. Provided that: (a) he may resign his office by submitting a petition in writing to His. Majesty; or (b) he may be removed from his office on similar grounds and in like manner as a Judge of the Supreme Court. (3) The tenure of office, remuneration and other conditions of service of the Auditor-General shall be determined by an Act and until so determined by rules made by His Majesty. The tenure of office, remuneration and other conditions of service of the Auditor; General shall not be varied to his disadvantage during his term of office. (4) A person who has held office as an Auditor-General shall not be eligible for appointment in government service. 76. Functions and Powers of the Auditor-General. (1) The accounts of all the departments and offices of the Government and of all the courts along with the offices of the Raj Sabha, the Rashtriya Panchayat, the Supreme Court and of the Public Service Commission and also the accounts of the Government-owned Corporate bodies shall be audited by, the

Auditor-General in the, manner prescribed .by law. The Auditor-General and his deputies shall at all times be entitled to have access to all documents, relating to such accounts. (2) The accounts of all the departments and offices of the Government and of the courts shall be kept in such form as may be prescribed, subject to the Act relating to audit, by the Auditor-General and until so prescribed the existing form shall be maintained. (3) Other functions of the Auditor-General relating to audit shall be as determined by law, and in that respect he may exercise such powers as are conferred on him by the concerned law. (4) The Auditor-General shall submit to His Majesty an annual report on the work done by him under this Article, and His Majesty shall cause such report to be laid before the Rashtriya Panchayat. PART 13 PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 77. Public Service Commission. (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission of Nepal and it shall consist of such number of members as His Majesty may prescribe, and one of such members designated by His Majesty shall be the Chairman of the Commission.. (2) At least one third of the members of the Public Service Commission shall be such as have not, at any time during the period of, five years immediately preceding, been in government service. (3) His Majesty shall appoint the members of the Public Service Commission after consultation, if He so desires, with the Raj Sabha. (4) A member of the Public Service Commission shall hold office for a period of six years from the date of his appointment. Provided that: (a) he may resign his office by submitting a petition in writing to His Majesty; or (b) he may be removed from his office by His Majesty in accordance with the finding of the Supreme Court on a reference to that Court for its opinion, in case His Majesty after consultation with the Raj Sabha feels that the member is unable to perform his duties due to incapacity or misbehavior. (5) A member of the Public Service Commission charged under sub clause (b) of clause (4) shall not be denied a reasonable opportunity for defending himself. (6) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the members of. the Public Service Commission shall be determined by an Act and until so determined shall be , as determined by rules made by His Majesty. The; remuneration and other conditions of , service of a member of. the: Public

Service Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage during his term of office. (7) A person who has held office as a member of the Public Service Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in government service. 78. Functions of the Public Service Commission. (1) The Public Service Commission shall be consulted: (a) on legal matters relating to conditions of civil services; (b) on the general principles to be followed in making appointments and promotions to civil services or to civil posts; (c) on the suitability of candidates in making permanent appointment by recruitment to a permanent civil post carrying an initial salary of more than twelve hundred rupees per annum or in making appointment in such post for a period exceeding six months; (d) on the suitability of candidates in making transfer or promotion from one category of civil services to another category of civil services or from any other government service to civil services; and (e) on matters relating to departmental punishments proposed to be given to gazetted civil servants. Provided that in cases where under this Constitution: (1) certain powers and functions are alloted to the Judicial Service Commission, the same shall be followed; and (2) an employee, holding a post which does not require consultation with the Public Service Commission, is to be permanently transferred or promoted to a post for which the consultation with the Public Service Commission is required, it shall be done after consultation with the Public Service Commission. (2) After the commencement of this Constitution no person who is appointed permanently by recruitment to a civil post with an initial salary of more than twelve hundred rupees per annum not accepting the advice given by the Public Service Commission, shall be entitled to pension. (3) His Majesty may consult the Public Service Commission on any matter relating to any government service or post. (4) For the purposes of this Article all employees of His Majesty's Government except the military officers and jawans, the officers and other ranks of the police force and the employees appointed to such posts as are declared not to be civil posts by an order of His Majesty, shall be civil servants and the services or posts of such employees shall be deemed to be civil services or civil posts. (5) Subject to the provisions of this Article the procedure of the Public Service Commission shall be as determined by law. (6) The Public Service Commission shall submit to His Majesty an annual report on the work done by it and His Majesty shall cause such report to be laid before the Rashtriya Panchayat. His Majesty shall also

cause to be sent along with such report a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Public Service Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before the Rashtriya Panchayat. PART 14 ATTORNEY GENERAL 79. Attorney General. (1) There shall be an Attorney General for Nepal who shall be appointed by His Majesty. (2) No person shall be eligible for being appointed as Attorney General unless he is qualified to be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court. (3) The Attorney General shall hold his office during the pleasure of His Majesty. The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Attorney General shall be determined by an Act and until so determined shall be as determined by rules made by His Majesty. The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Attorney General shall not be varied to his disadvantage during his term of office. 80. Duties of the Attorney General. It shall be the duty of the Attorney General, if his advice is sought for on constitutional and legal matters, to give advice to His Majesty, His Majesty's Government and such other authorities as His Majesty may specify, and to perform such other duties as may be assigned to the Attorney General by or under this Constitution and other laws for the time being in force.

PART 15 EMERGENCY POWERS 81. Emergency Powers. (1) If His Majesty is of the opinion that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of the whole of Nepal or any part thereof is threatened by war, external aggression or internal disturbance, His Majesty may, by Proclamation, (a) suspend, except this Article, all or any of the Articles of this Constitution or any provision of such Articles; and (b) assume to Himself all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Rashtriya Panchayat or any other governmental body or authority. (2) Any Proclamation made under sub-clause (1) may be altered or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation, and such Proclamation shall continue to operate until His Majesty is satisfied after consultation, if He so desires, with the members of the Steering Committee of the Rashtriya

Panchayat and the members of the Standing Committee of the Raj Sabha,

that grave emergency no longer exists. (3) Laws made by His Majesty after assuming powers under this Article shall, in so far as they are inconsistent with other Articles of this Constitution, ipso facto cease to operate at the expiration of six months after the Proclamation ceases to operate under sub-clause (2). PART 16 AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
82. Amendment of the Constitution. (1) His Majesty may, by Proclamation, amend this Constitution. (2) His Majesty shall exercise the power specified in sub-clause (1) only after consultation with the Special Committee specified in sub-clause (3) and only when it is consented to by a majority of at least two thirds of the total membership of that Committee. (3) A Special Committee consisting of the following members may, after discussion, suggest any change if to be made in the draft of the Royal Proclamation for the amendment of this Constitution: (a) Members of the Standing Committee of the Raj Sabha; and (b) Members of the Steering Committee of the Rashtriya Panchayat. (4) A person, elected by the members of the Special Committee formed under sub-clause (3) from among themselves, shall preside over meetings of that Committee. (5) Any amendment made by His Majesty by a Proclamation under this Article shall form an integral part of this Constitution.

PART 17 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
83. Supreme command of the Royal Armed Forces. The supreme command of the Royal Armed Forces is vested in His Majesty. 84. Pardon. His Majesty shall have power to grant pardons and to remit, suspend or commute any sentence passed by any judicial authority or special court or any authority appointed in accordance with an Act. Provided that in the exercise of the power under this Article His Majesty, if He thinks appropriate, may consult the Raj Sabha. 85. Titles, Honors and Decorations. (1) Titles, honors and decorations shall be conferred only by His Majesty. (2) No citizen of Nepal shall accept any title, honor or decoration from any foreign state except with the approval of His Majesty. 86. Provision as to Royal Representative. His Majesty may by warrant

under His Red Seal authorize any person or more than one person to exercise, subject to such conditions as the warrant may prescribe, the dayto-day functions of His Majesty during His Majesty's absence from Nepal or for any specified period. The functions exercised by such person or persons within the terms and limits specified in the warrant shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Constitution, to have been exercised by His Majesty. 87. Bar of Jurisdiction of Courts. His Majesty shall not be amenable to any court for the exercise of the powers or the performance of the duties of His office, or for any other act done by Him. Provided that nothing in this Article shall be construed as restricting any right conferred by law to bring appropriate proceedings against His Majesty's Government or any servant of the Crown. 88. Tenure of Office of the Servants of the Crown. Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the servants of the Crown shall hold office during the pleasure of His Majesty but the conditions of their service shall be determined by law. 89. Oath. The servants of the Crown shall be required to take an oath of allegiance and loyalty to His Majesty in the manner and form prescribed by His Majesty. 90. Residuary Powers of His Majesty. All inherent powers relating to matters not provided in this Constitution or other laws for the time being in force, shall continue to vest in His Majesty. PART 18 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION 91. Definitions and Interpretation. (1) In this Constitution, unless the subject or context otherwise requires: (a) "Article" means an Article of this Constitution; (b) "Bill" means a draft of an Act to be presented to His Majesty for His assent; (c) "Citizen" means a citizen of Nepal; (d) "Nepal" means the Kingdom of Nepal ; (e) "Petition in Writing" means a petition in writing signed by the person making such petition; and (f) "Remuneration" means salary, allowances, pension and also includes any remuneration in kind. (2) Unless the subject or context otherwise requires and subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Nepal Laws (Interpretation) Act, 2010, shall apply in the interpretation of this Constitution as it applies in the interpretation of Nepal laws.

PART 19 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 92. Existing Laws to be in Operation. All laws in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall remain in operation in the form in which they are in force until repealed or amended by or under Act. Provided that laws inconsistent with this Constitution shall, in so far as they are inconsistent, ipso facto cease to operate after one year from the commencement of this Constitution. 93. Making of Laws prior to the First Session of the Rashtriya Panchayat. After the commencement of this Constitution and prior to the sitting of the first session of the Rashtriya Panchayat His Majesty, in exercise of full legislative powers under this Constitution, may make Acts as may be necessary and the authority specified in such Acts may make, according to necessity, rules, orders or bye-laws having the force of law, under such Acts. 94. Provisions relating to Supreme Court, Public Service Commission, etc. The existing Supreme Court and all the Judges appointed therein, the existing Public Service Commission and all the members appointed therein, the Auditor-General and the Attorney General in office before the commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been in existence or in office under this Constitution after its commencement. Provided that the term of office of all such officers shall be as determined before the commencement of this Constitution and notwithstanding anything in this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force His Majesty, if He deems necessary, may transfer or remove any such officer before the constitution of the Rashtriya Panchayat. 95. Provisions relating to Council of Ministers, Ministers and Assistant Ministers. After the commencement of this Constitution and prior to the formation of another Council of Ministers as and when the Rashtriya Panchayat is constituted, the Council of Ministers at the time of the commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to be the Council of Ministers under this Constitution. Provided that His Majesty, if He deems necessary, may change the Ministers and Assistant Ministers in between that period. 96. Power to remove difficulties. If any difficulty arises in bringing this Constitution into force His Majesty may make such order as He deems necessary to remove that difficulty and such order shall be deemed to have been included in this Constitution. Provided that no such order shall be made after the constitution of the Rashtriya Panchayat.

PART 20 SHORT TITLE AND COMMENCEMENT 97. Short Title and Commencement. (1) This Constitution may be called "The Constitution of Nepal." (2) This Constitution shall come into force on Sunday the First of Poush, Two Thousand and Nineteen Years of the Bikram Sambat. SCHEDULES TO THE CONSTITUTION Not reproduced Schedule 1. National Flag. Schedule 2. National Anthem. Schedule 3. The Coat of Arms of Nepal. Schedule 4. Number of Members to be elected by Anchal Sabhas. Schedule 5. Number of Members to be elected by the Class Organizations and Professional Organizations. Schedule 6. Number of Members to be elected from among Graduates.

