Constitution

The Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua

TITLE VI Chapter I Chapter II Chapter III TITLE VII TITLE VIII Chapter I Chapter II

National Economy, Agrarian Reform and Public Finances National Economy Agrarian Reform Public Finances Education and Culture Organization of the State General Principles Legislative Branch Executive Branch Office of the Controller General of the Republic Judicial Branch Electoral Branch Political Administrative Division • Municipalities Communities of the Atlantic Coast Supremacy of the Constitution, Its Reform and Constitutional Laws Political Constitution Constitutional Control Constitutional Amendment Final and Transitional Provisions

Art. 98 - 115 Art. 98 - 105 Art. 106 - 111 Art. 112 - 115 Art. 116 - 128 Art. 129 Art. 129 - 131 Art. 132 - 143 Art. 144 - 153 Art. 154 - 157 Art. 158 - 167 Art. 168 - 174 Art. 175 - 181 Art. 175 - 179 Art. 180 - 181

INDEX
Preamble TITLE I TITLE II TITLE III TITLE IV Chapter I Chapter II Chapter III Chapter IV Chapter V Chapter VI TITLE V - Fundamental Principles - The State - Nicaraguan Nationality - Rights, Duties and Guarantees of the Nicaraguan People - Individual Rights - Political Rights - Social Rights - Family Rights - Labor Rights - Rights of the Communities of the Atlantic Coast - National Defense

Chapter III Chapter IV Chapter V Chapter VI TITLE IX Chapter I Chapter II TITLE X

Art. 182 - 195 Art. 182 - 186 Art. 187 - 190 Art. 191 - 195 Art. 196 - 202

Chapter I Chapter II Chapter III TITLE XI

The President of the Republic
hereby makes known to the people of Nicaragua that the Constituent National Assembly after consulting with the people, has discussed and approved the following Constitution:

Preamble
WE, The Representatives of the People of Nicaragua, united in the Constituent National Assembly, INVOKE The struggles of our indigenous ancestors; The spirit of Central American unity and the heroic tradition of our people who, inspired by the exemplary actions of General JOSE DOLORES ESTRADA, ANDRES CASTRO andEMMANUELMONGALO, destroyed the dominion of the filibusters and the United States intervention in the National War; BENJAMIN ZELEDON'S anti-interventionist deeds; AUGUSTO C. SANDINO, General of Free People and Father of the Popular and Anti-imperialist Revolution; The heroic action of RIGOBERTO LOPEZ PEREZ, who initiated the beginning of the end of the dictatorship; The example of CARLOS FONSECA, the greatest perpetuator of Sandino's legacy, founder of the Sandinista National Liberation F ront and Leader of the Revolution; The generations of Heroes and Martyrs who forged and carried forward the liberation struggle for national independence;

IN THE NAME OF

TITLE I

The Nicaraguan people; the democratic, patriotic and revolutionary political parties and organizations of Nicaragua; the men and women; the workers and peasants; the glorious youth; the heroic mothers; those Christians who moved by their faith in GOD committed and dedicated themselves to the struggle for the liberation of the oppressed; the patriotic intellectuals; and all others who through their productive labor contribute to the defense of the Nation; Those who guarantee the happiness of future generations by offering their lives in the struggle against imperialist aggression; FOR The establishment of the legal framework to protect and preserve the achievements of the Revolution and the building of a new society dedicated to the elimination of all forms of exploitation and to the achievement of economic, political and social equality for all Nicaraguans and absolute respect for human rights.

Fundamental Principles
Art. 1 Independence, sovereignty and self-determination are inalienable rights of the Nicaraguan people and the foundation of the Nicaraguan nation. Any foreign interference in the internal affairs of Nicaragua or any attempt to undermine these rights is an attack upon the life of the people. It is the right of the people and the duty of all citizens to preserve and defend, with arms if necessary, the independence of the Nation, its sovereignty and national self-determination. Art.2 National sovereignty rests with the people, the source of all power and forgers of their own destiny. The people exercise democracy by freely deciding upon and participating in the construction of the economic, political and social system which best serves their interests. The people exercise power both directly and through their representatives elected by universal suffrage; equal, free and direct elections and secret ballot. The struggle for peace and the establishment of a just world order are unrenounceable national commitments of the Nicaraguan nation. We, therefore, oppose all forms of colonialist and imperialist domination and exploitation. The Nicaraguan people are in solidarity with all those who struggle against oppression and discrimination. The Nicaraguan people have created a new state to promote their interests and guarantee their social and political achievements. The state is the principal instrument through which the people eliminate all forms of exploitation and oppression, promote material and spiritual progress of the nation, and ensure that the interests and rights of the majority prevail. The state guarantees the existence of political pluralism, a mixed economy and non-alignment Political pluralism assures the existence and participation of all political organizations in the economic, political and social affairs of the nation, without ideological restrictions, except for those who seek a return to the past or advocate the establishment of a political system similar to it A mixed economy assures the existence of different forms of property: public, private, associative, cooperative and communal; these forms of property must serve the best interests of the nation and contribute to the creation of wealth to satisfy the needs of the country and its inhabitants. Nicaragua's international relations are based on the principle of nonalignment, the search for peace, and respect for the sovereignty of all nations; therefore, Nicaragua opposes all forms of discrimination and is anticolonialist anti-imperialist and anti-racist Nicaragua rejects the subordination of any state by another.

Art.3

F O R THE HOMELAND, F O R THE REVOLUTION, F O R THE UNITY O F THE NATION A N D F O R PEACE. Art 4

Art.5 WE HEREBY PROCLAIM THE FOLLOWING POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA:

II

Art. 16

The State
Art.6 Art. 7 Art.8 Art.9 Nicaragua is an independent, free, sovereign, unitary and indivisible state. Nicaragua is a participatory and representative democratic republic. It has four branches of government Legislative, Executive, Judicial and Electoral. The people ofNicaragua are multi-ethnic and are an integral part of the Central American nation. Nicaragua is a firm defender of Central American unity. It supports and promotes all efforts to achieve political and economic integration and cooperation in Central America. It also supports the efforts to establish and preserve peace in the region. Nicaragua, inspired by the ideals ofBolivar and Sandino, strives for the unity of the people of Latin America and the Caribbean. Consequently, Nicaragua will participate with other Central and Latin American countries in the creation and election of the bodies necessary to achieve such goals. This principle shall be regulated by appropriate legislation and treaties. Art. 10 The national territory is located between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and the republics of Honduras and Costa Rica. It includes the adjacent islands and keys, soil and subsoil, territorial waters, continental platform, continental rise, airspace and stratosphere. The precise boundaries of the national territory are defined by laws and treaties. Art. 11 Art.12 Art.l 3 Art. 14 Spanish is the official language of the state. The languages of the Communities of the Atlantic Coast shall also have official use in the cases established by law. The city ofManagua is the Capital ofthe Republic and the seat of government In exceptional circumstances these can be established elsewhere in the nation. The symbols ofthe nation are the National Anthem, the Flag and the Official Seal, as established by the law that defines their characteristics and use. The state has no official religion. Art. 17

Nationals are: 1. Those born in Nicaraguan territory, excepting children of foreigners in diplomatic service, children of foreign officials serving international organizations or those sent by their government to work in Nicaragua, unless they choose to solicit Nicaraguan nationality. 2. Children of a Nicaraguan father or mother. 3. Children born abroad to fathers or mothers who originally were Nicaraguan, if and when they apply for citizenship after reaching legal age or independence. 4. Infants of unknown parents found in Nicaragua, subject to correction in accordance with the law should their filial identity become known. 5. Children born to foreign parents on board a Nicaraguan aircraft or vessel, if and when they solicit Nicaraguan nationality. Native born Central Americans who reside in Nicaragua have the right to apply for Nicaraguan nationality from the competent authorities without renouncing their previous nationality. The National Assembly may grant nationality to foreigners deserving this merit by virtue of extraordinary service rendered to Nicaragua. Foreigners who have renounced their nationality may be nationalized by applying to the competent authorities when they have fulfilled the requirements and conditions established by law. No national maybe deprived of nationality except upon voluntary acquisition of another, nor shall a national be deprived of Nicaraguan nationality because of having acquired that of another Central American country or any country with which Nicaragua has an agreement of dual nationality. The granting, loss and recuperation of nationality shall be regulated by law. Cases of dual nationality shall be treated in conformity with treaties and the principle of reciprocity.

Art. 18 Art. 19

Art.20

Art.21 Art.22

TITLE IV

Rights, Duties and Guarantees of the Nicaraguan People
CHAPTER I - INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS Art.23 The right to life is inviolable and inherent to all persons. There is no death penalty in Nicaragua. AH persons have duties to their families, the community, the Homeland and humanity. The rights of each person are limited by the rights of others, the collective security and the just requirements of the common good.

TITLE III

Nicaraguan Nationality
Art. 15 Nicaraguans are either nationals or nationalized.

Art.24

Art.25

All persons have the right to: 1. Personal freedom; 2. Security; 3. Seek legal redress. All persons have the right to: 1. Privacy and the privacy of their family; 2. The inviolablity of their home, correspondence and communications; 3. Respect for their honor and reputation. A private home may be searched only with a warrant from a corapetentjudge or expressly authorized official to prevent a crime from being committed or to avoid damage to persons or goods, in accordance with the procedures established by law. The law shall determine the cases and the procedures for an examination of private documents, fiscal records and related documents, when such is indispensable for the investigation of matters before the Courts or for fiscal reasons. Illegally seized letters, documents and other private papers shall be null and void in legal proceedings or elsewhere.

Art. 3 2 Art.3 3

No one is obligated to do what is not required by law, or barred from doing what is not prohibited by law. No one may be arbitrarily detained, imprisoned or be deprived of liberty except in cases established by law and in accordance with legal procedures. Therefore: 1. An individual may be detained only by a warrant issued from a competent Judge or an official expressly authorized by law, except when apprehended in the act of committing a crime. 2. All detained persons have the right to be: 2.1. Informed in detail without delay and in a language they understand, of the reasons for their detention and the charges against them; to have their family informed; and to be treated with respect in accordance with the dignity inherent in human beings. 2.2. Brought before a competent legal authority within 72 hours. 3. • No one shall be detained after a release order has been granted by the appropriate authority or once the sentence imposed has been completed. 4. The responsible authority shall be liable for any illegal detention. 5. The appropriate authorities shall attempt to maintain those awaiting trial apart from those who have been sentenced. All those awaiting trial have equal rights to the following minimum guarantees: 1. To be presumed innocent until proven guilty according to the law. 2. To be tried without undue delay by a competent court established by law. 3. Not to be removed from the jurisdiction of a competent judge except in cases provided for in this Constitution or by law. 4. To be guaranteed the right to a defense, to participate personally from the start of the proceedings and to adequate time and means to prepare their defense. 5. To be represented by a public defender when legal counsel has not been selected by the time of the first hearing, or in the event that no prior call was decreed. The accused shall have the right to communicate freely and in private with his or her legal counsel. 6. To have the assistance of an interpreter free of charge if the detainee does not understand or speak the language of the court. 7. - Not to be obligated to testify against themselves or against a spouse or a partner in a stable de facto union, or a family member within the fourth level of consanguinity or the second of marital relations, or to admit their own guilt. 8. To be found guilty or not guilty within the legal time period, by each of the relevant courts. 9. To have the right to appeal to a superior court upon conviction of any crime and not to be retried for any crime for which a final judgement of conviction or acquittal has been issued. 10. Not to be brought to trial or sentenced for acts or omissions which at the time committed had not been unequivocally established by law as a punishable crime, and not to be given a sentence which has not been previously established by law.

Art.26

Art.34 Art.27 All persons are equal before the law and have the right to equal protection under the law. There shall be no discrimination for reasons of birth, nationality, political belief, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, national origin, economic position or social condition. Foreigners have the same rights and duties asNicaraguans, with the exception of political rights and other rights established by law; foreigners may not intervene in the political affairs of the country. Art. 28 Art.29 Nicaraguans who are temporarily out of the country have the right to enjoy amparo* and protection by the state through its diplomatic representatives. All persons have the right to freedom of conscience and thought and to profess or not to profess a religion. No one shall be the object of coercive measures which diminish these rights, or be obligated to declare his or her creed, ideology or beliefs. Nicaraguans have the right to freely express their beliefs in public or private, individually or collectively, in oral, written or any other form. Nicaraguans have the right to travel and to establish their residence in any part of the nation and to freely enter and exit the country.

Art. 30 Art.31

*In Nicaragua, "amparo" (Article 28) is a legal procedure used to seekreviewof administrative acts, similar to the writs of prohibition, mandamus and habeas corpus in the United States judicial system. It is originally a Mexican constitutional concept.

Criminal proceedings are open to the public, but in some cases the press and the general public may be excluded for moral considerations or for matters of the public order or national security. Art.35 Minors shall not be subjected to nor the object ofjudgement, nor shall they be submitted to any legal proceedings. Minors who violate the law cannot be taken to penal rehabilitation centers. They shall be attended in centers under the responsibility of a specialized institution, as provided by law. All persons shall have the right to respect for their physical, psychological and moral integrity. No one shall be subjected to torture, nor inhumane, cruel or degrading treatment Violation of this right constitutes a crime and shall be punishable by law. The penalty shall not extend beyond the accused. No sentence may

Art.44 Art.45

Nicaraguans have the right to the personal property and necessary goods that are essential for the integral development of each person. Persons whose constitutional rights have been violated or are in danger of violation have the right to present writs of habeas corpus or amparo*, according to the circumstances and the Law of Amparo*. All persons of Nicaragua shall enjoy protection and recognition by the state of the rights inherent to human beings, as well as unrestricted respect, promotion and protection of human rights, and the full benefit of the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man; the International Pact of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Pact of Civil and Political Rights of the United Nations; and the American Convention of Human Rights of the Organization of American States.

Art.46

Art. 3 6

Art. 3 7

independently or consecutively total more than thirty years. CHAPTER II - POLITICAL RIGHTS Art. 3 8 Art. 3 9 The law is not retroactive except in penal matters that favor the accused. Art.47 In Nicaragua the penitentiary system is humane; its fundamental objective is to transform the detainee into a person capable of reintegration into the society. In the progressive stages, the penitentiary system shall promote family unity, health care, educational and cultural advancement and productive occupation with financial compensation. Detention has a reeducational character. Women and men serving prison sentences shall be held in separate penal centers. Women shall be provided guards of the same sex. No one shall be subj scted to involuntary servitude. Slavery and slave trade in any form are prohibited. No one shall be detained for indebtedness. This principle does not limit the powers of competent legal authorities to issue warrants for the non-fulfillment of support or alimony orders. All national and foreign citizens have the duty to pay their debts. Art.49 Art.42 Nicaragua guarantees asylum to those persecuted for their struggle for democracy, peace, justice and human rights. The granting of political asylum shall be determined by law in accordance with international agreements ratified by Nicaragua. If a political refugee or exile is expelled from Nicaragua, that person may not be sent back to the country in which he or she was persecuted. Art.43 Extradition from Nicaragua will not be permitted for political crimes or common crimes committed in conjunction with them, at Nicaragua's own discretion. Extradition for other common crimes is regulated by law and International Treaties. Nicaraguans shall not be extradited from Nicaragua. Art.48 All Nicaraguans who have reached 16 years of age are full citizens. All citizens enjoy the political rights set forth in the Constitution and in other laws, without limitations other than those established for reasons of age. A citizen's rights may be suspended when serious corporal or specific related punishments are applied and when a final judgement of civil injunction is decreed. Unconditional equality amongNicaraguans in the enjoyment of political rights is established. In the exercise of these rights and in the fulfillment of these responsibilities and obligations, there exists absolute equality between men and women. It is the obligation of the state to remove obstacles that impede effective participation of Nicaraguans in the political, economic and social life of the country. InNicaragua workers in the cities and countryside, women, youth, agricultural producers, artisans, professionals, technicians, intellectuals, artists, religious persons, the Communities of the Atlantic Coast and the population in general have the right to form organizations in order to realize their aspirations according to their own interests, without discrimination, and to participate in the construction of a new society. Such organizations may be formed by the voluntary participation and free will of their members. They shall have social function and may have a partisan character, according to their nature and objectives. Art.50 Citizens have the right to participate under equal conditions in public affairs and in state management. Effective participation by the people at local and national levels shall be guaranteed by law.
•See footnote to Article 28.

Art.40 Art.41

Art.51 Art.52

Citizens have the right to elect and be elected in periodic elections, and to vie for public office. Citizens have the right, individually or collectively, to petition, denounce irregularities and make constructive criticisms to the branches of government or to any authority, to obtain a quick resolution or response and to have the result made known within the time period established by law. The right to peaceful assembly is recognized; the exercise of this right does not require prior permission. The right to public assembly, demonstration and mobilization in conformity with the law is recognized. Nicaraguan citizens have the right to organize or affiliate with political parties with the objective of participating in, exercising or vying for power.

Art.6 3

It is the right of all Nicaraguans to be protected against hunger. The state shall promote programs which assure adequate availability and equitable distribution of food. Nicaraguans have the right to decent, comfortable and safe housing that guarantees familial privacy. The state shall promote the fulfillment of this right. Nicaraguans have the right to sports, physical education, relaxation and recreation. As part of their integral development, the state shall promote sports and physical education through the organized and mass participation of the people in specific programs and projects. Nicaraguans have the right to accurate information. This right includes the freedom to seek, receive and disseminate information and ideas, be they spoken or written, in graphic or any other form. Therightto provide information is a social responsibility and shallbe exercised with strict respect for the principles established in the Constitution. This right cannot be subject to censorship, but may be subject to retroactive liability established by law. The mass media is at the service of national interests. The state shall promote the access of the public and its organizations to the means of communication, and shall prevent the media from responding to foreign interests or to any economic power monopoly. The existence and functioning of public, corporate or private means of communication shall not be the object of prior censorship. It shall be subject to the law.

Art.64

Art.5 3 Art.54 Art.55

Art.65

Art.66

Art.67 CHAPTER III - SOCIAL RIGHTS Art.5 6 The state shall grant special attention in all of its programs to those who defend the dignity, honor and sovereignty of the nation, and to their families, as well as to the families of those fallen in defense of the nation, in accordance with the laws. Nicaraguans have the right to work in keeping with human nature. Nicaraguans have the right to education and culture. Every Nicaraguan has an equal right to health care. The state shall establish the basic conditions for the promotion, protection, recuperation and rehabilitation of the health of the people. Art.69 The organization and direction of health care programs, services and activities is the responsibility of the state, which shall also promote popular participation in support of health care. Citizens are obliged to respect stipulated sanitary measures. Art.60 Nicaraguans have the right to live in a healthy environment and it is the obligation of the state to preserve, conserve and reclaim the environment and the natural resources of the country. The state guarantees Nicaraguans the right to social security for protection against the social contingencies of life and work, in the manner and conditions determined by law. The state shall strive to establish programs for the physical, psycho-social and professional rehabilitation of disabled people, and for their job placement

Art.68

Art.5 7 Art.58 Art.59

All persons, either individually or collectively, have the right to practice their religion in public or private, through worship, practice and teaching. No one may disobey the law or prevent others from exercising their rights and fulfilling their duties by invoking religious beliefs or inclination.

CHAPTER IV - FAMILY RIGHTS Art. 70 Art. 71 Art.72 The family is the fundamental nucleus of society and has the right to protection by society and the state. It is the right of Nicaraguans to form a family. The law shall regulate and protect this right. Marriage and stable de facto unions are protected by the state; they rest on the voluntary agreement between a man and a woman, and may be dissolved by mutual consent or by the will of one of the parties, as provided by law.

Art.61

Art.62

Art.73

Family relations rest on respect, solidarity and absolute equality of rights and responsibilities between the man and woman. Parents must work together to maintain the home and provide for the integral development of their children, with equal rights and responsibilities. Furthermore, children are obligated to respect and assist their parents. These duties and rights shall be fulfilled in accordance with the pertinent legislation.

3. 4. 5. 6. 7.

Art.74

The state grants special protection to the process of human reproduction. Women shall have special protection during pregnancy and shall be granted maternity leave with pay and appropriate social security benefits. No one may deny employment to women for reasons of pregnancy, nor dismiss them during pregnancy or the post-natal period, in conformity with the law.

Minimum wage and social security payment shall not be legally attached except for support of the family and only by the terms established by law. Work conditions that guarantee physical safety, health and hygiene and minimize work hazards to insure the worker's occupational health and safety. An eight-hour work day, weekly rest, vacations, remuneration for national holidays and a thirteenth month bonus, in comformity with the law. Work stability in comformity with the law and equal opportunity to be promoted, subject to length of service, capacity, efficiency and responsibility. Social security for protection and subsistence in case of disability, old age, occupational hazards, illness or maternity; and for family members in case of death, according to the conditions established by law.

Art. 75

All children have equal rights. There shall be no discrimination for reasons of filial relations. In ordinary legislation, dispositions or classifications that reduce or deny equality among children shall be null and void. The state shall promote programs and develop special centers for the care of minors; minors have therightto protection and education from their family, the society and the state, according to their needs. The elderly have the right to protective measures from their family, society and the state. The state shall protect responsible paternity and maternity and establish the right to investigate paternity and maternity. The right of adoption is based on the best interests of the integral development of the child, as regulated by law.

Art. 8 3 Art.84

The right to strike is recognized. Child labor that can affect normal childhood development or interfere with the obligatory school year is prohibited. Children and adolescents shall be protected against any form of economic and social exploitation. Workers have the right to cultural, scientific and technical development; the state shall facilitate this through special programs. All Nicaraguans have therightto choose and exercise freely their profession or trade and to choose their place of work with no requirements other than requisite schooling and that the work serve a social purpose. Full labor union freedom exists in Nicaragua. Workers may organize voluntarily in unions, which shall be constituted in conformity with the law. No workers are obligated to belong to a particular union, nor to resign from the one to which they belong. Full union autonomy is recognized and the legal rights of organized labor are respected.

Art. 7 6

Art. 8 5 Art. 86

Art.77 Art.78 Art.79

Art. 8 7

CHAPTER V - LABOR RIGHTS Art. 80 Work is a right and a social responsibility. The labor of Nicaraguans is the fundamental means to satisfy the needs of society and of the individual, and is the source of wealth and prosperity of the nation. The state shall strive for full and productive employment under conditions that guarantee the fundamental rights of the individual. Workers have the right to participate in the management of their enterprise through their organizations and in conformity with the law. Workers have the right to working conditions that guarantee: 1. Equal pay for equal work under identical conditions, suitable to their social responsibility, without discrimination for political, religious, racial, gender or other reasons, which assures a standard of living compatible with human dignity. 2. Payment of legal tender in their work place. Art.88

In defense of their individual or organizational interests, workers are guaranteed the inalienable right to negotiate with their employers, in conformity with the law: 1. ' Individual contracts; 2. Collective bargaining agreements.

Art. 81 Art.82

CHAPTER VI - RIGHTS OF THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC COAST Art.89 The Communities of the Atlantic Coast are indivisible parts of the Nicaraguan people, enjoy the same rights and have the same obligations as all Nicaraguans. The Communities of the Atlantic Coast have the right to preserve and develop their cultural identities within the framework of national unity, to be granted their own forms of social organization, and to administer their local affairs according to their traditions.

The state recognizes the communal forms of land ownership of the Communities of the Atlantic Coast and their enjoyment, use and benefit of the waters and forests of these communal lands. Art.90 The Communities of the Atlantic Coast have the right to the free expression and preservation of their languages, art and culture. The development of their culture and values enriches the national culture. The state shall create special programs to enhance the exercise of these rights. The state is obligated to enact laws promoting and assuring that noNicaraguan shall be the object of discrimination for reasons of language, culture or origin.

TITLE VI

National Economy, Agrarian Reform and Public Finances
CHAPTER I - NATIONAL ECONOMY Art.98 The principal economic function of the state is to promote the country's material development, overcome the inherited backwardness and dependence of the economy, improve the country's standard of living and create a more just distribution of wealth. The state directs and plans the national economy to guarantee the protection of the interests of the majority and the promotion of socio-economic progress. The Central Bank, the National Financial System and the Insurance and Foreign Commerce are instruments of the economic system and irrevocable responsibilities of the state. Art. 100 The state shall promulgate a Foreign Investment Law that contributes to the socio-economic development of country, without damaging national sovereignty. Workers and other productive sectors have the right to participate in the creation, execution and control of economic plans. Natural resources are national patrimony. Preservation of the environment, and conservation, development and rational exploitation of natural resources are responsibilities of the state; the state may formalize contracts for the rational exploitation of these resources when required by the national interest The state guarantees the democratic coexistence of public, private, cooperative, associative and communal property; all these form part of the mixed economy, are subject to the overriding interests of the nation and fulfill a social function. Enterprises organized under any of the forms of ownership established in this Constitution enjoy equality before the law and the economic policies of the state. The economic plans of enterprises must be prepared with the participation of the workers. Free economic initiative exists. The state is obligated to fairly and rationally regulate the supply and distribution of basic consumer goods, both in the countryside and in the cities. Speculation and hoarding are incompatible with the socio-economic system and constitute serious crimes against the people.

Art. 91

TITLE V

National Defense
Art.92 Art.93 It is the duty and right of Nicaraguans to struggle for the defense of life, the Homeland, justice and peace for the full development of the nation. The Nicaraguan people have the right to arm themselves in defense of their sovereignty, independence and revolutionary gains. It is the duty of the state to direct, organize and arm the people to guarantee this right The defense of the Homeland and the Revolution rests on the mobilization and organized participation of all people in the struggle against their aggressors. The state shall promote mass incorporation of the people into the various structures and tasks of the country's defense. The Sandinista Popular Army has a national character and must protect, respect and obey this Political Constitution. The Sandinista Popular Army is the military arm of the people and direct descendant of the Army in Defense of National Sovereignty. The state prepares, organizes and directs popular participation in the armed defense of the Homeland through the Sandinista Popular Army. No armed groups may exist in the national territory other than those established by the law, which shall regulate military organizational structure. Art.96 Nicaraguans have the duty to bear arms to defend the Homeland and the gains of the people against the threats and aggression of a foreign country, or of forces directed or supported by any country. Patriotic Military Service is established in accordance with the terms of the law. The struggle against externally promoted actions to undermine the revolutionary order established by the Nicaraguan people and the confrontation with criminal and anti-social actions are integral to the defense of the Revolution. The state creates the internal security forces, whose functions are determined by law.

Art.99

Art.94

Art. 101 Art. 102

Art.95

Art. 103

Art. 104

Art. 105

Art.97

CHAPTER II - AGRARIAN REFORM Art. 106 Agrarian reform is the fundamental instrument for achieving a just distribution of land and an effective means for revolutionary transformation, national development and the social progress of Nicaragua. The state guarantees the development of the agrarian reform program in order to fulfill the historic demands of the peasants. Agrarian reform shall abolish landed estates, rentism, inefficient production and the exploitation of peasants. It shall promote forms of ownership compatible with the economic and social objectives of the nation, as established in this Constitution. Land ownership is guaranteed to all those who productively and efficiently work their land. The law shall establish specific regulations and exceptions in conformity with the goals and objectives of agrarian reform. The state shall promote the voluntary association of peasants in agricultural cooperatives, without sexual discrimination. Subject to resources it shall provide the material means necessary to raise their technical and productive capacity in order to improve the standard of living of the peasants.

TITLE VII

Education and Culture
Art. 116 Education seeks the full and integral development of Nicaraguans; to stimulate them with a critical, scientific and humanist way of thinking; to develop their personality and sense of dignity and to prepare them to assume the tasks of common interest necessary for the progress of the nation. Therefore, education is fundamental to the transformation and development of the individual and society. Education is a single, democratic, creative and participatory process, which promotes scientific research and links theory with practice and manual with intellectual labor. It is based on our national values; on the knowledge of our history and reality and of national and universal culture; and on scientific and technological advances; it cultivates the values of the new Nicaraguan in accord with the principles established in this Constitution, the study of which must be promoted. The state promotes the participation of the family, community and individuals in education and guarantees the support of the public means of communication for this purpose. Education is an unrenounceable responsibility of the state, including planning, direction and organization. The national educational system functions in an integrated fashion and in accordance with national plans. Its organization and function are determined by law. It is the duty of the state to develop and train the technical and professional personnel at all levels and disciplines necessary for the development and transformation of the country. Art. 120 The creative application of educational plans and policies is a fundamental role of the national teaching profession. Teachers have the right to living and working conditions in accord with their dignity and with the important social function that they perform; they shall be promoted and given incentives in accord with the law. All Nicaraguans have free and equal access to education. Basic education is free of charge and obligatory. The Communities of the Atlantic Coast have access in their region to education in their native language up to the levels set by national plans and programs. Adults shall be offered educational opportunities and training programs. The state shall continue its programs to eradicate illiteracy. Private education centers may function at all levels, subject to the terms established in this Constitution.

Art. 107

Art. 108

Art.117

Art. 109

Art. 118 Art. 110 The state shall promote the voluntary incorporation of small and medium scale agricultural producers, both individually and in associations, into the economic and social development plans of the country. Art. 119 Art.lll The peasants and other productive sectors have the right to participate, through their own organizations, in establishing the policies of agrarian transformation.

CHAPTER III - PUBLIC FINANCES Art. 112 The annual General Budget of the Republic shall regulate public income and expenditure. The Budget must show the distinct sources and recipients of income and expenditure, which mustbalance, and shall determine the spending limits of the state institutions. Extraordinary spending may only be authorized by law and financed through the simultaneous creation and assignment of resources. The B udget shall be prepared by the President of the Republic and approved by the National Assembly in the Annual Budget Law, in conformity with this Constitution and the law. The taxation system must take into consideration the distribution of wealth and income, as well as the needs of the state. Taxes must be created by laws that establish their frequency and type and the rights of taxpayers. The state shall not require payment of taxes that have not been previously established by law. Art. 122 Art. 123

Art. 121 Art. 113

Art. 114 Art. 115

CHAPTER II - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH Art. 124 Education in Nicaragua is secular. The state recognizes the right of private educational centers with a religious orientation to teach religion as an extracurricular subject Higher education enjoys financial, organic and administrative automony in accordance with the law. Academic freedom is recognized. The state promotes free creation, research and dissemination of the sciences, arts and letters. It is the duty of the state to promote the recovery, development and strengthening of national culture, sustained by creative popular participation. The state shall support national culture in all its diversity, whether collective or individual. Art. 127 Artistic and cultural creation is completely unrestricted. Cultural workers have full freedom to choose their forms and styles of expression. The state shall strive to provide them with the means necessary to create and present their works, and to protect their rights of authorship. The state protects the archeological, historical, linguistic, cultural and artistic patrimony of the nation. Art. 134 Art. 133 Art. 132 The National Assembly exercises legislative power through representative popular mandate. The National Assembly is composed of ninety Representatives with their respective Alternates, elected by universal suffrage; equal, free and direct elections; and secret ballot in regional districts by means of a proportional representation system, as regulated by the Electoral Law. The number of Representatives may be increased in accord with the general census of the population in conformity with the law. Unelected Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates who participated in the election also form part of the National Assembly as Representatives and Alternates respectively if they have received a number of votes equal or superior to the average number of votes necessary to win the election in each regional electoral district A Representative in the National Assembly must be: 1. A Nicaraguan national; 2. In full enjoyment of political and civil rights; 3. Over twenty-one years of age. No Representative to the National Assembly may obtain concessions from the state or be the proxy or agent of public, private or foreign enterprises which have contracts with the state. Violation of this provision annuls the concessions or advantages obtained and terminates the person's representative status. Representatives to the National Assembly shall be elected for a period of six years, starting from the date of inauguration, which shall be the ninth of January of the year following the election. Representatives and Alternates elected to the National Assembly shall be sworn in by the President of the Supreme Electoral Council. The National Assembly shall be inaugurated by the Supreme Electoral Council. Art. 138 Art. 130 No office holder may exercise functions other than those conferred upon the office by the Constitution and the laws. All state officials must declare their financial status before assuming and upon leaving public office, as regulated by law. Art. 131 Elected and appointed officials of the four branches of government are publicly accountable for the proper fulfillment of their duties and must inform the public of their work and official activities. They must be receptive to problems presented by the people and strive to resolve them. Official duties must be exercised in the public interest All officials must efficiently and honestly carry out their duties; they shall be responsible for their acts and omissions. Civil service shall be regulated by law. The functions of the National Assembly are to: 1. . Draft and approve laws and decrees, as well as amend or repeal existing " ones; 2. Officially interpret the law; 3. Decree amnesty and pardons, as well as commute or reduce sentences. 4. Solicit reports through the President of the Republic from the Ministers or Vice Ministers of the state, and Presidents or Directors of autonomous and governmental institutions. Request by the same means their personal appearance and explanation or consultation. 5. Grant and cancel legal status to entities of a civil or religious nature. 6. Consider, discuss and approve the General Budget of the Republic in conformity with the procedures established in the Constitution and by law. 7. Elect Judges to the Supreme Court of Justice, and Members and their Alternates to the Supreme Electoral Council, from slates of three candidates proposed by the President of the Republic.

Art. 125

Art. 126

Art. 128

Art. 135

TITLE VIII

Organization of the State
CHAPTER I - GENERAL PRINCIPLES Art. 129 The Legislative, Executive, Judicial and E lectoral branches of government are independent of one another and coordinate harmoniously, subject only to the overriding national interest and to the provisions established in this Constitution.

Art. 136

Art. 137

8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.

17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. Art.l 39 Art. 140

Elect the Controller General of the Republic from a slate of three candidates proposed by the President of the Republic. Consider, acknowledge and decide on the resignations or permanent absences of Representatives to the National Assembly. Consider and acknowledge the resignations or dismissals of Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, of Members of the Supreme Electoral Council or the Controller General of the Republic. Ratify or reject international treaties. Regulate all matters related to the symbols of the nation. Create honorary orders and distinctions of national character. Create and grant its own orders of national character. Receive the President or the Vice President of the Republic in formal session to hear the annual report. Delegate the legislative faculties to the President of the Republic when the National A ssembly is in recess, in accord with the Annual Decree of Delegating Legislative Functions. Matters relating to the codes of the Republic are excepted. Elect the National Assembly's Executive Board. Create permanent, special and investigative committees. Propose grace pensions and grant honors for distinguished service to the Homeland and to humanity. Determine the political and administrative division of the country. Consider the economic and social development plans and policies of the country. Fill permanent vacancies of the Presidency or Vice Presidency of the Republic. Authorize foreign visits of the President of the Republic which last longer than one month. Review and resolve complaints presented against officials who enjoy immunity. Decree the General Statute and Internal Rules of the National Assembly. Fulfill other functions conferred by the Constitution and the laws.

Art. 143

A bill partially or totally vetoed by the President of the Republic must be returned to the National Assembly with the reasons for the veto specified. The National Assembly can reject the veto with a vote of half plus one of its Representatives, in which case the President of the National Assembly shall order the law to be published.

CHAPTER III - EXECUTIVE BRANCH Art. 144 The President of the Republic, who is the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander in Chief of the Defense and Security Forces of the Nation, exercises executive power. The Vice President of the Republic carries out the functions delegated by the President and shall substitute in that position during the President's temporary or permanent absence. The election of the President and Vice President of the Republic is by universal suffrage; equal, free, and direct elections and secret ballot. The Candidates who receive the largest number of votes will be elected. The President and Vice President of the Republic must be: 1. Nicaraguan nationals; 2. In full enjoyment of civil and political rights; 3. Over twenty-five years of age. The President and Vice President shall exercise their functions for a period of six years, starting from their inauguration on January 10 of the year following the election; they shall enjoy immunity during their term of office. In case of the temporary absence of the President of the Republic, the Vice President shall assume the Presidential functions. When the absence is permanent, the Vice President shall assume the position of the President of the Republic for the remainder of the term and the National Assemby must elect a new Vice President. In case of temporary and simultaneous absence of the President and Vice Pre sident, the President of the National A ssembly, or whoever is serving in that position in accord with the law, shall assume the functions of the President. In case of permanent absence of the Vice President of the Republic, the National Assembly shall appoint a substitute. If the President and Vice President of the Republic are permanently absent, the President of the National Assembly or whoever is next in order of succession under law shall assume the functions of the President The National Assembly must appoint substitutes for the President and Vice President within seventytwo hours after their positions have become vacant Those appointed shall exercise their functions for the remainder of the term. Art. 150 The functions of the President of the Republic are to: 1. Comply with and enforce the Political Constitution and the laws.

Art. 145

Art. 146

Art. 147

Art. 148

Art. 149

Representatives shall bear no legal responsibility for their opinions and votes cast in the National Assembly and enjoy immunity in conformity with the law. Representatives to the National Assembly and the President of the Republic may initiate bills, as may the Supreme Court of Justice and the Supreme Electoral Council in matters pertaining to their respective jurisdictions. This right of initiative shall be regulated by the General Statute and Internal Rules of the National Assembly. Quorum for sessions of the National Assembly is half the number of its members plus one. To be approved, bills shall require a favorable vote by a simple majority of the Representatives present Once a bill is approved, it shall be sent to the President of the Republic for authorization, promulgation and publication.

Art. 141

Art. 142

The President of the Republic may partially or totally veto a bill within 15 days after receiving it. If the President does not veto the bill, and fails to authorize, promulgate and publish it, the President of the National Assembly shall order the law to be published.

2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

7. 8. 9.

10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. Art.151

Represent the nation. Initiate legislation and exercise the right to veto, in accordance with this Constitution. Enact executive decrees with the force of law in fiscal and administrative matters. Prepare the General Budget of the Republic and promulgate it upon approval or review by the National Assembly, depending on the case. Appoint and remove Ministers and Vice Ministers of State, Delegate Ministers of the Presidency, Presidents orDirectors of autonomous and governmental institutions and other officials whose appointment or removal is not otherwise determined in the Constitution and the laws. Assume the legislative faculties delegated by the National Assembly during its recess period. Conduct the international relations of the Republic, formalize international treaties, agreements or accords and appoint the heads of diplomatic missions. Decree and put into effect the State of Emergency in circumstances defined by this Political Constitution and forward the decree to the National Assembly for ratification within a period of no more than fortyfive days. Adopt regulations to give effect to the laws. Grant honorary orders and decorations of national character. Organize and conduct the government and preside over Cabinet meetings. Administer the economy of the country and determine socio-economic policies and programs. Propose slates of three candidates to the National Assembly for the election of Judges to the Supreme Court of Justice, Members to the Supreme Electoral Council and the Controller General of the Republic. Present the annual report and other reports and special messages to the National Assembly personally or via the Vice President Fulfill the other functions conferred by this Constitution and the laws.

Art. 155

The Controller General of the Republic has the following responsibilities: 1. The establishment of a system which controls the proper use and prevents abuses of funds. 2. Ongoing supervision of the management of the General Budget of the Republic. 3. Control, examination and evaluation of the administrative and financial management of public institutions, those subsidized by the state and the public or private enterprises which receive investments of public capital. The Office of the ControllerGeneral of the Republic shall enjoy functional and administrative autonomy and shall be directed by the ControllerGeneral of the Republic, who shall give annual reports to the National Assembly and enjoy immunity. The law shall determine the organization and functioning of the Office of the Controller General of the Republic.

Art. 156

Art. 15 7

CHAPTER V - JUDICIAL BRANCH Art. 15 8 Justice emanates from the people and shall be carried out in their name as their proxy by the Judicial Branch, composed of the Courts of Justice established by law. The Courts of Justice form a single system, headed by the Supreme Court of Justice. The exercise ofjudicial powers falls under the authority of the Judicial Branch. Military jurisdiction is established and its exercise is regulated by law. The administration of justice guarantees the principle of legality and protects and promotes human rights through the application of law in the matters within its jurisdiction. A Judge of the Supreme Court of Justice must be: 1. A Nicaraguan national; 2. A lawyer, 3. In full enjoyment of political and civil rights; 4. . Over twenty-five years of age. Judges shall serve for a term of six years and may be dismissed only from their position for reasons determined by law. Judges enjoy immunity. Art. 163 The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of at least seven Judges, selected by the National Assembly, from slates of three candidates proposed by the President of the Republic. The Judges shall take office after being sworn in before the National Assembly. The President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from the Judges selected by the National Assembly.

Art. 159

Art. 160

The President of the Republic determines the number, organization and jurisdiction of government ministries and autonomous and state institutions. The ministers, vice ministers and presidents or directors of autonomous and governmental institutions enjoy immunity. Ministers, vice ministers or presidents of autonomous or governmental institutions must be: 1. A Nicaraguan national; 2. In full enjoyment of political and civil rights; 3. Over twenty-five years of age. Ministers, vice ministers and presidents or directors of autonomous and governmental institutions are responsible for their acts in conformity with this Constitution and the laws.

Art. 161

Art.152

Art. 162

Art. 153

CHAPTERIV - OFFICE OF THE CONTROLLER GENERAL OF THE REPUBLIC Art. 154 The Office of the Controller General of the Republic is the governing body which controls public administration and the "Area of People's Property" (public property).

Art. 164

The functions of the Supreme Court of Justice are to: 1. Organize and direct the administration of justice. 2. Review and decide ordinary and extraordinary appeals presented against the judgments of the Courts of Justice of the Republic, in accord with the proceedings estblished by law. 3. Review and decide on writs of amparo* claiming violations of rights established in the Constitution, according to the Law of Amparo. 4. Review and decide on writs challenging the constitutionality of a law, filed in comformity with the Constitution and the Law of Amparo. 5. Appoint the Judges of the Appeals Courts and the Courts of the Republic, in accord with the procedures established by law. 6. Draft its internal rules and appoint its personnel. 7. Fulfill other functions conferred on it by the Constitution and the laws. In their judicial activity, Supreme Court Judges and other Judges are independent and are subject only to the Constitution and the law; they shall be governed by, among others, the principles of equality, public proceedings and the right to a defense. In Nicaragua justice is free of charge. The administration ofjustice shall be organized and shall function with popular participation as determined by the law. The members of the Courts of Justice, be they lawyers or not, have equal authority in the exercise of their legal functions. State authorities, organizations and legal institutions and individuals must comply with the verdicts and resolutions of the Courts and Judges.

Art. 173

Art. 165

The functions of the Supreme Electoral Council are to: 1. Organize and conduct the elections, plebiscites or referendums convoked in accordance with the Constitution and the law. 2. Appoint the members of the other electoral bodies, in accordance with the Electoral Law. 3. Establish the calendar for elections. 4. Apply the constitutional and legal provisions that refer to the electoral process. 5. Serve as the final arbiter of resolutions enacted by subordinate electoral bodies and of the claims and disputes presented by political parties. 6. Issue relevant measures in accordance with the law to ensure that the electoral process develops under conditions of full legal guarantees. 7. Ensure that the appropriate bodies provide security for the political parties participating in the elections. 8. Make the final check of the votes cast in the elections, plebiscites and referendums, and present the final declaration of the results. 9. Draft its own regulations. 10. Fulfill other functions conferred on it by the Constitution and the laws. The Members and Alternates of the Supreme Electoral Council shall take office after being sworn in by the President of the National Assembly.

Art. 166

Art. 174

Art. 167

TITLE IX

Political Administrative Division
CHAPTER VI - ELECTORAL BRANCH CHAPTER I - MUNICIPALITIES Art. 168 Art. 169 Art. 170 The organization, management and oversight of elections, plebiscites and referendums are the exclusive responsibility of the Electoral Branch. The Electoral Branch is composed of the Supreme Electoral Council and other subordinate electoral bodies. The Supreme Electoral Council is composed of five Members with their respective Alternates, elected by the National Assembly from slates of three candidates for each position proposed by the President of the Republic. The National Assembly shall select the Presidentof the SupremeElectoralCouncil from the elected Members. The Members of the Supreme Electoral Council must be: 1. Nicaraguan nationals; 2. In full enjoyment of the political and civil rights; 3. Over twenty-five years of age. Art.l 78 Art. 172 The President and other Members of the Supreme Electoral Council shall exercise their functions for a term of six years starting from the date on which they take office; during this period they enjoy immunity. Art. 179 Art. 176 Art. 177 Art. 175 The national territory shall be divided for administrative purposes into Regions, Departments and Municipalities. The laws regarding this matter shall determine the size, number, organization, structure and operation of the various districts. The Municipality is the basic unit of political administration in the country. The law shall determine their number and size. The government and administration of municipalities is the responsibility of the municipal authorities, who enjoy autonomy without abrogating the authority of the central government. Municipal governments shall be elected by people, by universal suffrage; equal, free and direct election and secret ballot, in conformity with the law. Municipal authorities shall serve six-year terms, beginning from the day they are sworn in before the Supreme Electoral Council. The state shall promote the integral and harmonious development of the diverse parts of the nation.

Art.171

•See footnote to Article 28.

CHAPTER II - COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC COAST Art. 180 The Communities of the Atlantic Coast have the right to live and develop under the forms of social organization that correspond to their historic and cultural traditions. The state guarantees these communities the benefits of their natural resources, the legitimacy of their forms of communal property and the free election of their authorities and representatives. Furthermore, it guarantees the preservation of their cultures and languages, religion and customs. Art. 181 The state shall implement a law which establishes autonomous governments in the regions inhabited by the Communities of the Atlantic Coast to guarantee the exercise of their rights.

CHAPTER II - CONSTITUTIONAL CONTROL Art. 187 Art. 188 Any citizen has the right to seek judicial review of the constitutionality of any law, decree or regulation that is inconsistent with the Political Constitution. The Writ of Amparo* may be used to challenge any provision, act or resolution and any action or omission of any offi :ial or authority or his or her agent violating or attempting to violate the rights and guarantees affirmed in the Political Constitution. The Writ of Habeas Corpus may be used by anyone whose freedom, physical integrity or security is violated or is in danger of being violated. The Law of Amparo* shall regulate the remedies established in this chapter.

Art. 189 Art. 190

CHAPTER III - CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT

TITLE X
Art. 191

Supremacy of the Constitution, Its Reform, and Constitutional Laws
CHAPTER I - POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Art. 182 The Political Constitution is the fundamental charter of the Republic; all other laws are subordinate to it. Any laws, treaties, orders or provisions that oppose it or alter its provisions shall be null and void. No branch of government, governmental body or official shall have any authority, faculty or jurisdiction other than those conferred by the Political Constitution and the laws of the Republic. Once written, the Electoral Law, Emergency Law and Law of Amparo* will have constitutional status under the Political Constitution of Nicaragua. The President of the Republic may suspend the rights and guarantees consecrated in this Constitution within part or all of the nation in case of war or when demanded by national security, economic conditions or a national catastrophe. The President's decree shall put the State of Emergency into effect for a specified renewable time period. The Law of Emergency shall regulate its forms. During a State of Emergency, the President of the Republic is authorized to approve the General Budget of the Republic and forward it to the National Assembly for its review. Art.186 The President of the Republic cannot suspend the rights and guarantees established in articles 23; 24; 25, no.3; 26, no.3; 27; 29; 33, nos. 2.1 (final part), 3 and 5; 34,exceptnos. 2 and 8; 35; 36; 37; 38; 39; 40; 41; 42; 43; 44; 46; 47; 48; 50; 51; 56; 57; 58; 59; 60; 61; 62; 63; 64; 65; 67, first paragraph; 68, first paragraph; 69; 70; 71; 72; 73; 74; 75; 76; 77; 78; 79; 80; 81; 82; 84; 85; 87; 89; 90 and 91. Art. 193

The National Assembly is empowered to partially amend this Political Constitution and to review and approve its total revision. The President of the Republic or one-third of the Representatives to the National Assembly can initiate a partial reform. Half plus one of the total number of Representatives to the National A ssembly are necessary to initiate a total reform.

Art. 192

Art. 183

A proposal for partial reform must specify the article or articles to be reformed with a statement of the reasons for the modification. The proposal must be sent to a special commission which shall render an opinion within no more than 60 days; the initiative shall then follow the same process as for the creation of a law. A proposal for partial reform must be discussed in two sessions of the National Assembly. A proposal for total reform shall follow the same process as in the previous article, except that upon its approval, the National Assembly shall establish a time period for holding elections for a Constituent National Assembly. The National Assembly shall retain jurisdiction until the installation of the new Constituent National Assembly. Until a new Constitution has been approved by the Constituent National Assembly, this Constitution shall remain in effect.

Art.l 84 Art. 185

Art. 194

Approval of a partial reform shall require a favorable vote by sixty percent of the Representatives. Two-thirds of the total number of Representatives are required to approve a total revision. The President of the Republic must promulgate the partial amendment, which is not subject to veto. The reform of constitutional laws shall follow the procedure established for partial reform of the Constitution, with the exception of the requirement of discussion in two legislative sessions.

Art. 195

*See footnote to Article 28.

*See footnote to Article 28.

TITLE XI

EXECUTIVE BOARD OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
CARLOS NUNEZ TELLEZ PRESIDENT LETICIA HERRERA VICE PRESIDENT RAFAEL SOLIS CERDA SECRETARY MAURICIO DIAZ DA VILA VICE PRESIDENT DOMINGO SANCHEZ SALGADO SECRETARY JUAN TIJERINO FAJARDO SECRETARY CARLOS MEJIA GODOY ORLANDO PINEDA LOPEZ IRELA PRADO BERNHEIM ROSARIO ALTAMIRANO LOPEZ CARLOS CENTENO GARCIA BLAS ESPINOSA CORRALES VICTORINO ESPINALES REYES JULIO GUILLEN RAMOS ALEJANDRO BRAVO SERRANO JOSE LUIS VILLAVICENCIO O. RAMIRO LACAYO MONTEALEGRE HUMBERTO SOLIS BARKER NATHAN SEVILLA GOMEZ MANUEL EUGARRIOS VELASQUEZ JOSE MARIA RUIZ COLLADO ANGELA ROSA ACEVEDO VASQUEZ RAFAEL CHAVEZ ALVAREZ JACINTO CHAVEZ LACAYO L.F. ALVARO GONZALEZ FLORES JULIO MARENCO CALDERA WILFREDO LOPEZ PALMA ALEJANDRO SEQUEIRA HERNANDEZ SERAFIN GARCIA TORRES HERMOGENES RODRIGUEZ BLANDON ALFONSO LOPEZ LOPEZ JAIME O'NEIL PEREZ ALTAMIRANO DOROTEA WILSON THATUM HAZEL LAU BLANCO GABRIEL AGUIRRE MARIN ULISES TERAN NAVAS RAFAEL CORDOVA RIVAS BLANCA BERMUDEZ COREA JOSE DANIEL BRBNES AGUILAR ROGERS C. ARGUELLO RIVAS CONSTANTINO PEREIRA B. JULIO MELENDEZ HERMIDA CARLOS ALONSO GARCIA LUIS HUMBERTO GUZMAN AREAS ALFREDO RODRIGUEZ SALGUERA ALLAN ZAMBRANA SALMERON LUIS SANCHEZ SANCHO HERIBERTO RODRIGUEZ MARIN RAMON SANABRIA CENTENO FILEMON HERNANDEZ MUNOZ FRANCISCO JARQUIN RAMIREZ ELIGIO PALACIOS MARADIAGA EDUARDO ZAPATA ALTAMIRANO Ma. TERESA DELGADO MARTINEZ JUANA SANTOS ROQUE BERVIS ONOFRE GUEVARA LOPEZ JOSE MARIA ORTIZ CERDA LUIS ROCHA URTECHO AUXILIADORA MARTINEZ SUAREZ SIXTO ULLOA DONA DANILO AGUIRRE SOLIS DAMASO VARGAS LOAISIGA GUSTAVO ADOLFO VEGA VARGAS BERTHA ROSA FLORES ZAMBRANA ENRIQUE SANCHEZ ARANA FRANCISCO MENA AGUIRRE ROGELIO RAMIREZ MERCADO YADIRA MENDOZA SARA VIA ADRIAN RAMIREZ TELLEZ MIGUEL GONZALEZ HERNANDEZ ERASMO MONTOYA LEIVA LUIS CHAVARRIA MOREIRA ORLANDO RIZO ESPINOZA BENIGNA MENDIOLA SEQUEIRA RAY HOOKER TAYLOR EDWIN ILLESCAS SALINAS GUSTAVO MENDOZA HERNANDEZ GERARDO ALFARO SILVA JOSE R. QUINTANILLLA RUIZ LUCAS URBINA DIAZ EDUARDO CORONADO PEREZ SANTIAGO VEGA GARCIA MACARIO ESTRADA LOPEZ RAMON LARIOS RUIZ ANTONIO JARQUIN RODRIGUEZ LEONCIO RAYO GONZALEZ ARIEL BRAVO LORIO

Final and Transitional Provisions
Art. 196 This C onstitution shall govern from the time of its publication in La Gaceta, the official daily legal publication, and shall annul the Fundamental Statute of the Republic, the Statute of Rights and Guarantees of Nicaraguans and all other legal provisions inconsistent with it. This Constitution shall be widely disseminated in the official language of the country. It shall also be disseminated in the languages of the Communities of the Atlantic Coast. All aspects of the existing legal order that do not contradict this Constitution shall remain in effect, until such time as they may be modified. The Special Courts shall continue to function until such time as they come under the jurisdiction of the Judicial Branch. The appointment of their members and their procedures shall be determined by the established laws. Furthermore, the Common Courts shall continue to function in their present form until a system with popular representation is established. This principle shall be implemented gradually in accord with the circumstances. Art.200 Art.201 The current political administrative division shall be preserved until the law governing is promulgated. The President and Vice President of the Republic and the Representatives to the National Assembly, elected November 4, 1984, shall exercise their functions during the term that ends January 10 and 9, 1991, respectively. The members of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Supreme Electoral Council and other authorities and officials of the diverse branches of government shall continue to exercise their functions until such time as their successors take office in accordance with the Constitution. Art.202 Four official copies of this Constitution shall be signed by the President and Representatives to the National Assembly and by the President of the Republic. These copies shall be kept in the offices of the Presidency of the National Assembly, the Presidency of the Republic, the Presidency of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Presidency of the Supreme Electoral Council. Each one shall have the force of the authentic text of the Political Constitution of Nicaragua. The President of the Republic shall order it to be published in La Gaceta, the official daily publication.

Art. 197

Art. 198 Art. 199

GIVEN IN THE MEETING HALL OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, IN THE CITY OF MANAGUA, NOVEMBER 19, 1986. "For 25 Years, All Arms Against The Aggression"

THEREFORE, LET BE IT PUBLISHED MANAGUA, JANUARY 9, 1986. DANIEL ORTEGA SAAVEDRA PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

