

CONSTITUTION
of the Republic of Nicaragua. December 10, 1893. TITLE I. Of the Nation.

ART. 1. Nicaragua is a separate section of the Central American Republic. Consequently, it recognizes as a primary necessity a return to the union with the other sections of the dissolved Republic. With that object the Executive Power is invested with the faculty of definitely ratifying Treaties tending to that end with one or more States of the old federation. 2. Nicaragua is a free, sovereign, and independent nation. 3. The sovereignty is inalienable and imprescriptible, and resides essentially in the people. 4. Public functionaries shall have no other faculties than those expressed by law. Any act done beyond the limits of the law is null and void. 5. The boundaries of Nicaragua and its territorial divisions will be determined by law. TITLE II. Of the Nicaraguans. 6. Nicaraguans are natives or naturalized. 7. The following are held to be natives: (1.) Those born in Nicaragua of Nicaraguan fathers or of foreigners domiciled therein; (2.) Children of a Nicaraguan father or mother born abroad when they choose Nicaraguan nationality. This disposition may, however, be modified by Treaties under reciprocity ; (3.) Those belonging to other Republics of Central America who may declare before the proper Departmental authority their desire to become Nicaraguans.

S. Nicaraguans by naturalization are  (1.) Spanish Americans who have resided one year in the country and who declare their desire to be naturalized therein before the proper authority; (2.) Other foreigners with two years' residence who may similarly declare their wishes j (•).) Those who obtain a certificate of naturalization from the authority designated by law. TITLE III, Of Foreigners. 0. The Republic of Nicaragua is a sacred asylum to all persons taking refuge in its territory . 10. Foreigners shall be obliged from their arrival in the territory of the Republic to respect the authorities and to observe the laws. 11. Foreigners enjoy in Nicaragua all the civil rights of Nicaraguans. 12. They may acquire all kinds of property in the country, being subject, however, in respect of such property, to all the ordinary or extraordinary charges to which the nationals are' subject. 13. They shall make no claims, nor demand indemnity of the State except in the cases and in the manner as would apply in the case of Nicaraguans. 14. Foreigners who having made unjust claims have recourse to diplomatic intervention shall lose the right to dwell in the country if such claim3 are not determined in a friendly manner. 15. Extradition shall not be granted for political offences, even though the nature of such be that of a common offence. 16. The cases in which extradition for serious common offences shall take place shall be determined by law and Treaties. 17. The law shall establish the cases and the form in which entry to the national territory may be denied to a foreigner, as also those in which his expulsion may be ordered when his presence may be considered pernicious. 18. The law and Treaties shall regulate the use of these guarantees, but shall not diminish nor alter them. 19. The dispositions of this Title do not modify the Treaties in force between Nicaragua and other countries. TITXB IV. Of the Citizens. 20. The following are citizens : All Nicaraguans over 18 years of age, and those over IG years who may be married or able to read and write. 21. The rights of citizens are as follows : 

Suffrage, eligibility for public office, and to possess and carry arms, all in conformity with the law. 22. The rights of citizenship are suspended  (I.) For sentence of imprisonment or a declaration that there is ground for criminal proceedings; (2.) For vagrancy, legally declared ; (3.) For mental alienation, judicially declared ; (4.) For sentence of deprivation oi the exercise of political rights during the term of such sentence ; (5.) For being declared a fraudulent debtor, unless a judicial discharge be obtained ; (G.) For a punishment which carries with it more than a correctional penalty; (7.) For being admitted to the employment of foreign countries without the permission of the Legislative Power, if the person so employed resides in Nicaragua. The Republics of Central America are not foreign nations. 23. The exercise of voting may not be renounced and is obligatory for all citizens. 24. The ballot is direct and secret. The elections shall be carried out in the form prescribed by law, the latter giving a proportionate representation to minorities. 2. All citizens above the age of 21 years who are in the exorcise of their rights are eligible. TITLE V. Of Bights and Guarantees. 26. The Constitution guarantees to the inhabitants of the nation, whether Nicaraguan or foreigners, personal security, liberty, equality, and property. 27. The death penalty remains abolished in Nicaragua. 28. The Constitution recognizes the guarantee of the habeas corpus. 29. Every inhabita.it has the right of appeal from producing his person even against the military or recruiting authorities when the demand is illegally made. 80. A warrant of arrest not- issued by the competent authority or dictated without legal formalities is contrary to law. 31. Detention for investigation shall not exceed the term of eight days. S2. An offender taken in flagrante delicto may be apprehended by any person with the proviso that he be immediately taken before an authority having the power to order his arrest. 83. No committal to prison may be ordered unless it has been previously proved fully that an offence has been committed punishable

by more than a correctional penalty, and unless there is at least strong presumptive evidence as to who is the author of such offence. 34. Imprisonment or arrest is permitted, as punishment, or for detention, in the cases and for the term prescribed by law. 35. No person may be tried by special commissions, nor before Judges other than those designated by the law which must have existed previously to the committal of the act upon which the proceedings originated. 30. In criminal proceedings the accused is prohibited from taking oath respecting his own acts. 37. No one may be deprived of the right of defence. Perpetual penalties, flogging, and all kinds of torture are prohibited. 3S. Imprisonment for debt is prohibited, oven for agricultural obligations. 3D. Prisoners or persons detained may not be deprived of communication with other persons except by virtue of a written order of the proper authority, for a period which may not exceed three days, and only for grave reasons. 10. No one may be imprisoned or detained in any places except those determined by law. 11. The house of every individual is a sacred asylum, which may not be violated except by authority and in the following cases: . . (1.) For the removal of a criminal caught in flagrante; (2.) For offences committed in the interior of a house, for scandalous disorder requiring prompt remedy, or upon a summons from within a house ; (3.) In case of fire, earthquake, inundations, epidemics, or other analogous events; (4.) For the removal of objects required to be produced by virtue of judicial procedure, partial proof at least being previously forthcoming of the existence of the objects referred to, or for the execution of a judicial warrant legally issued; (5.) To set free a person illegally detained; (U.) For the apprehension of a criminal who has been sentenced to imprisonment or detention, partial proof at least being previously furnished that he is in hiding in the house which it is proposed to enter. In the last three cases the entrance shall not be made without a written order by the competent authority. In the event of the house to be entered not being that of the criminal pursued, the authority or his agents shall previously solicit the permission of the occupier. 12. The forcible entry of a house in the casus which require a written order of the authorities may not be made between the hours of 7 o'clock in the evening and 0 o'clock in the morning. Neither
shall an offender caught in the act, and pursued by the authorities be taken from a house not his own during the hours aforesaid. 43. In no case shall the Executive Power or its agents be able to withhold, open, or detain epistolary or telegraphic correspondence. Such correspondence taken from the post-offices or from any other place may not be used in evidence against any person. 44. Private papers may be seized only by virtue of au order of a competent Court in such civil and criminal matters as may be determined by law. They must be inspected in the presence of the owner, or, in his absence, in the presence of witnesses, and those shall be returned which have no connection with the matter under investigation. 45. No person shall be annoyed or persecuted for his opinions. Private actions which do not disturb public order or morality, or which cause no injury to a third party, shall always be beyond the action of the law. 46. All proscriptive, confiscatory, or retroactive laws are prohibited, as also those which establish infamous punishments. 47. There shall be no power in Nicaragua to legislate for the establishment or protection of any religion, nor shall the free exercise of any religion be prohibited. 48. The civil status of any persons shall not be affected by a definite religious belief. 40. The expression of thought in speech or in writing is free, and may cot be restricted by law. Neither shall the circulation of the press, whether native or foreign, be impeded. The offence of libel or slander committed in the press shall be previously verified by a jury. 50. Freedom of education is guaranteed. That which is defrayed from public funds will be secular; primary instruction will, moreover, be gratuitous and compulsory. A law will regulate education without restricting its freedom or the independence of its professors. 53. The exercise of all industries, callings, or professions is free and exempt from all previous titles and subject to no regulations. 52. Liberty of meeting without arms, aud association for any lawful purpose, religious, moral, or scientific, are guaranteed. The law shall not support associations which constitute a power to compel blind obedience, which are contrary to individual rights, or which impose moral vows to perpetual seclusion (" clausura "). 53. All persons are free to dispose of their property without any kind of restrictions, either by sale, donation, testament, or in any other legal manner. 54. Entails and all institutions favouring mortmain are prohibited. 55. All persons have the right to forward Petitions to the

legally-constituted authorities, who shall decide upon them and shall make known the decision arrived at upon them. 56. All shall have the right to enter the Republic and to leave it, to remain permanently in its territory and to travel through it. 57. No personal service 3hall be exacted from any one without due remuneration. 08. The law will not recognize personal privilege. 59, Proportionality shall be the basis of all taxation. GO. No person may be deprived of his property except by virtue of law or of a sentence founded upon it. Expropriation for public purposes must be authorized by a law or by a decree in execution thereof, and shall not be carried out without previous indemnification. In the event of war it shall not be necessary that the compensation shall be previously settled. 01. Every author or inventor shall enjoy the exclusive property of his work or invention for such time as may be determined by law. 62. The right to claim confiscated property is imprescriptible. 63. No penalty heavier than a correctional one shall be pronounced unless preceded by a judicial declaration as to the responsibility of the presumed offender. Hi. Every monopoly attacking agricultural industry shall be prohibited. 65. The above-mentioned guarantees, except those which relate to the inviolability of human life and the prohibition of confiscatory laws, may be temporarily suspended by the declaration of a state of siege. 66. The laws which regulate the exercise of these guarantees shall be of no effect so far as they diminish, restrict, or falsify them. 67. The functionary who restricts the operation of any of the guarantees contained in this Title shall be liable to pay compensation proportionate with the extent of injury caused ; such compensation shall be regulated by the Courts, and shall never be less than 50 pesos in favour of the injured party.

TITLE

VI. Of the form of Government.

68. The Government of Nicaragua is Republican, democratic, and representative. It is composed of three independent Powers, the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial.

TITLE VII. Of the Legislative Power.

69. The Legislative Power is exercised by an Assembly or Congress of Deputies which shall meet in the capital of the Republic on the 1st January of each year without requiring to be convoked. 70. Its Sessions shall last for sixty days, and may be prorogued for thirty days more if circumstances of special interest require it. 71. The Legislative Power may likewise meet in Extraordinary Session when convoked by the Executive. In that event only audit matters shall be dealt with as formed the subject of the Decree of Convocation. 72. The Assembly installed in the capital may, by agreement, remove itself to any other city. 73. On the 25th December of each year the Deputies shall meet in preliminary Committee (" Juntas preparatorias "), and, with the concurrence of five at the least, shall organize the Directorate (" Directorio ") in order to dictate the requirements necessary for the installation of the Assembly. 74. The presence of an absolute majority of the members composing the Congress shall be sufficient with which to open the Sessions. 75. A body of five Deputies may convoke extraordinarily the Assembly at any place in the Republic when the Executive may have suspended the Sessions or have dissolved the Assembly. 76. The Deputies shall continue in discharge of their functions for four years, and are renewed by moieties every two years. 77. To be a Deputy it is necessary to be a layman and elected by the people. 78. The following may not be Deputies :  (1.) Officials in the enjoyment of salaries, nominated by the Executive; (2.) Magistrates of the Courts of Justice, and inferior Judges in the electoral district of their jurisdiction ; (3.) The kindred of the President of the Republic within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity ; (4.) Those who have administered or collected public funds, unless they shall have closed their accounts. 79. Deputies from the date of their election shall enjoy the following prerogatives:  (1.) Personal immunity from accusation or prosecution, unless the Assembly shall have previously declared the grounds upon which the charge is based ; (2.) Freedom from any civil summons during a period extending from thirty days before to fifteen days after the ordinary or extraordinary Sessions of the Assembly;

(3.) Freedom from military service, unless by consent, from the date of election to the end of the electoral period; (4.) Not to be banished from the Republic nor confined during the period for which they have been elected. 80. Deputies may not be employed under the Executive Power during the time for which they have been elected, except as Secretaries of State, Diplomatic Representatives, and University and Collegiate Professors. In accepting any of these offices they resign their seats as Deputies. 81. For the election of Deputies to Congress the territory of the Republic shall be divided into electoral districts, which shall contain 10,000 inhabitants or a fraction thereof not less than 5,000.

TITUS A7III. Of the Attributes of the Legislative Power: 82. The following are the attributes of Congress :  (1.) To open and close its Sessions, to certify the election of its members, to approve or reject their credentials, and to receive from them the oath of affirmation prescribed by law ; (2.) To summon the proper substitute members in the event of absolute default or of lawful inability on the part of any member to take his seat, and to order such vacancies as may occur to be tilled ; (3.) To accept by a vote of two-thirds the resignation of a member for lawful reasons, duly proved ; (4.) To formulate its internal regulations; (5.) To decree, interpret, reform, and abrogate laws; (6.) To create and suppress offices, to award pensions, to decree honours and to grant amnesties ; (7.) To make all necessary dispositions for the internal security and defence of the Republic; (8.) To scrutinize the votes for the election of President, Vice-President, and Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and to declare elected those citizens who obtain an absolute majority of votes; (9.) In the event of an absolute majority not being obtained, to declare elected as President, Vice-President, or Magistrates, those citizens who have obtained the greatest number of votes. If there should be equality the Assembly shall decide who are to be held elected; (10.) When one individual has been elected concurrently for different offices the preference shall be determined in the following order:  (11.) President;

(ii.) Vice-President; (iii.) Deputy ; (iv.) Magistrate; (v.) Officer of Exchequer ("Tribunal de Cuentas " ) ; The election of a full member has the preference over that of a substitute; (11.) To appoint the Officers of Exchequer, and to accept or refuse their resignations : (12.) To appoint a Treasurer (" Fiscal de Hacienda ") to represent the interests of the Treasury Department before the Auditor-General and before the Courts. His period of office shall be two years, and he shall hold such other attributes as may be designated by law ; (13.) To receive the Constitutional oath from such officials as are elected or may be declared elected, and to accept or refuse their resignations; (14.) To designate annually three of its members to exorcise, in the order of election, the Executive Power in the event of disability on the part of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, as provided by the Constitution; (13.) To declare, when there is ground for such, the prosecution of the President, Vice-President, Deputies, Magistrates of the Court of Justice, Secretaries of State, Diplomatic Agents, Officers of the Exchequer, and Treasurer; (16.) To change the residence of the Supreme Powers for gravy causes; (17.) To grant patents and to allow temporary privileges to authors and inventors, and to those who have introduced or brought to perfection new industries of general utility; (18.) To decree subsidies for the promotion of new industries or for the development of those already existing; (19.) To grant or refuse permission to Nicaraguans to accept employment under any other nation; (20.) To approve or disapprove the conduct of the Executive: (21.) To provide for the external security and defence of the country; (2-2.) To approve, modify, or reject Treaties concluded with foreign countries; (23.) To regulate maritime and internal commerce ; (24,) To approve or disapprove of the account of public expenditure : (25.) To fix the annual Budget; (2(3.) To levy taxes; (27.) To decree the alienation of national property and its application to public uses;

 (28.) To decree loans and to regulate the payment of the national debt; (29) To establish ports, to create and abolish custom-houses ; (30.) To decree the weight, alloy and design of the national currency; (31.) To declare war and to make peace; (32.) To fix at each ordinary Session the number of the forces to be maintained on a footing; (33.) To permit or refuse the transit of troops of another country through the territory of the Republic ; (34.) To declare in a state of siege the Republic or a part thereof, in conformity with law ; (35.) To confer the ranks of General of Brigade and of Division; (36.) To decree the coat of arms and flag of the Republic; (37.) To grant letters of naturalization to foreigners in conformity with the laws. 83. The Legislative Power may not supply or declare a civil status to individuals, or grant academical and literary degrees. 84. The faculties of the Legislative Power may not be delegated except such as are referred to as pertaining to the high officials.

TITLE IX. Of the Formation, Sanction, and Promulgation of the Laws. 85. The initiation of laws belongs exclusively to the Deputies, the President of the Republic through the Secretaries of State, and the Supremo Courts of Justice in matters within their competency. 86. No Bill may be definitively voted except after two readings taken on two different days. Cases of urgency are however excepted, but such require that the measure be carried by a two-thirds majority. S7. Every Bill once approved by the Assembly shall be passed on to the Executive at the latest within three days from its approval in order that it may be sanctioned and promulgated as law. 88. If the President, in agreement with the Council of Ministers, is unable to sanction the Bill it shall be returned to Congress within a period of ten days, the reasons for disagreement being explained. If during the aforesaid term no objection be raised the measure shall be held to be sanctioned and shall be promulgated as law. When the Executive returns the Bill the Assembly shall again debate it) and if it be then continued by two-thirds of the votes, it shall be again passed to the Executive with the following formula: " Confirmed constitutionally," and it shall thereupon be published without delay. 139. When the Assembly vote a measure towards the termination of its Sessions, and the Executive considers it unadvisable in sanction it, immediate notice is to be given to Congress so that it may remain in Session for ten days counting from the date of such notice. If such proceeding is not observed the measures will be held to be sanctioned. 00. When a Bill is rejected it may not be again brought in until the following Legislature. 91. The sanction of the Executive is not required-to the following Acts and Resolutions : (1.) The elections carried out or declared by Congress, or the resignations accepted or refused ; (2.) The declarations of grounds for prosecutions ; (3.) The Appropriation Bill; (4.) Decrees referring to the conduct of the Executive ; (5.) Regulations issued for its internal regimen ; (6.) Agreements for the transfer of its Sessions to another place temporarily, for the suspension of its Sessions, or for their prorogation. 92. "When a Bill, having for its object the reform or abrogation of any of the dispositions contained in the Code of the Republic, is not initiated by the Supreme Court of Justice, it may not be discussed without hearing the opinion of that Tribunal. Such opinion shall be expressed during the same Session or in that of the following year according to the importance, urgency, or extent of the measure. This stipulation does not affect the laws which relate to political, economical, or administrative order. TITLE X. Of the Executive Power. 93. The Executive Power shall be exercised by a- citizen who shall he styled President of the Republic, in his default by a Vice-President, and in default of the latter by one of those persona designated thereto according to the order of his election. 91. The President, the Vice-President, and the persons designated referred to in the preceding Article shall be citizens in exercise of their rights, laymen, more than 25 years of age, and natives of .Nicaragua or of any of the other Republics of Central America. 95. The President and the Vice-President of the Republic shall be popularly and directly elected, and their election shall be declared by the Assembly in the prescribed manner. 90. The Presidential period shall be four years, and shall commence on the 1st February. The citizen who has just recently exercised the Presidency may not be re-elected or elected as Vice-President for the period following. 97. Nevertheless the citizen who may have filled the office for the last six months only of the period may be elected President. 98. In the event of the permanent absence of the President of the Republic the Executive Power shall fall to the charge of the Vice-President, and, in his default, to the person designated thereto in the order of his election. He shall terminate the Presidential period. 99. In the interval which may elapse before the Presidency is assumed by the individual called thereto by the law, the Executive Power will be exercised by a Minister of Government, who shall give over possession to the new functionary if the Assembly shall not be in Session. TITLE XL Of the Duties and Attributes of the Executive Power. 100. The President of the Republic is the Supreme Chief of the nation, and Commander-in-chief of the land and sea forces; he is charged with the general administration of the country, and has the following attributes:  (1.) To defend the independence and honour of the nation, and the integrity of its territory; (2.) To execute the laws and to cause them to be fulfilled, issuing with that object such Decrees and Ordinances as may be necessary without altering the spirit of the law; (3.) To appoint the Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of State, as well as other officials of the Executive Department, in conformity with law; (4.) To preserve the pence and internal order of the Republic, and to repel all external attack or invasion ; (5.) To watch carefully the prompt and efficacious administration of justice, to give to the officers of the Judicial Power the assistance and force necessary to carry their measures into effect, and to watch over the official conduct of the functionaries of that and the other branches of the Administration ; (0.) To remove the functionaries appointed by him; (7.) To grant amnesties during the recess of the Assembly when public convenience requires it j (8.) To grant pardons or commutation of sentences to offenders conformably with the law, the favourable opinion of the Supremo Court of Justice having been previously ascertained. But in no


case shall such be extended to criminals convicted of parricide or assassination, or of robbery or arson when accompanied by serious injury to the person; (9.) To convoke the Assembly in Extraordinary Session, and to propose to it the prorogation of the same; (10.) To present through the respective Secretaries of State, and within the first eight days of the meeting of the Assembly, a Report or Memorandum on the proceedings of all the branches of the Administration ; (11.) To conclude Treaties and any other diplomatic negotiations, submitting them to the legislature for ratification during the following Session ; (12.) To direct foreign relations; to appoint Diplomatic and Consular Agents of the Republic; to receive the Ministers, and to admit the Consular officers of foreign countries; (13.) To cause the revenue of the Republic to be collected, and to regulate the application of the same; (14.) To decree, in the event of invasion or rebellion, if the State funds may be insufficient, a general contribution, voluntary or forced, the application of which he shall account for to the Assembly in its next Session ; (15.) To confer military rank from Sub-Lieutenant to Colonel; (16.) To command the military forces ; to organize and distribute them in conformity with law, and according to the requirements of the Republic; (17.) To grant letters of marque and of reprisal ; (18.) To declare the Republic or part of it in a state of siege in the event of external aggression or internal rebellion during the recess of the Assembly, and in conformity with law ; (19.) To grant letters of naturalization ; (20.) To develop public instruction and the diffusion of popular knowledge; (21.) To sanction the laws, to make use of the veto in the eases provided for, and to promulgate without delay those legislative enactments winch do not require the sanction of the Executive; (22.) To order to be filled the vacancies amongst the Deputies in the recess of the Legislature in conformity with law, and within, at the latest, one month of their occurrence ; (23.) To publish monthly an account of receipts and expenditure of public money; (24.) To watch over the legal accuracy of the currency, to control the weights and measures, and to exercise the supreme direction of the police. 101. The measures of the Executive, unless issued by the proper Department, need not be complied with. The President and his

Ministers will be responsible for the dispositions they may dictate in contravention of the Constitution and the laws. 102. Whenever the President wishes to place himself at the head of the army, he will hand over charge of his functions as Supreme Chief of the nation to his Constitutional substitute, and shall remain invested only with the character of General-in-chief, with the attributes belonging to his post of Commander-in-chief. TITLE XII.  Of the Secretaries of State. 103, The Secretaries of State must be Nicaraguans, native or naturalized, above 21 years of age, and laymen. 101. The following may not be Secretaries of State:  Contractors for public works or services on account of the nation ; those persons who, on account of such contracts, have claims in their own behalf; debtors to the Public Treasury; and those persons who have accounts pending in favour of the Treasury for the administration of funds. 105. The Secretaries of State may assist, without voting, at the deliberations of the Legislative Power. They must also present themselves when called upon, and reply to the interpellations made to them by any Deputy with reference to the affairs of the Administration, with the exception of such as relate to the War and Foreign Departments when reserve may be deemed necessary, unless the Assembly shall order a reply to be given. TITLE XIII  Of the Judicial Power. 100. The Judicial Power of the Republic shall be exorcised by a Supreme Court of Justice, which shall reside at Leon, composed of live Magistrates, and by the inferior Tribunals and Courts established by law. 107. To be a Magistrate it is necessary to be above 25 years of age, a lawyer, and a layman. 10S. The Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be popularly and directly elected, in the manner determined by law. 109. Five substitute Magistrates shall also be elected to temporarily take the place of the others under similar conditions. In the event of a permanent vacancy occurring, the Executive Power shall order elections to be held so that the posts may be filled. 110. The Supreme Court of Justice shall appoint the Magistrates of the Courts of Appeal and the inferior District Courts, in conformity with the law. 111. Persons connected by ties of consanguinity within the

fourth degree, or of affinity within the second, may be neither Magistrates nor Judges in the same Tribunal. If two or more relations within the said degrees should be elected, he shall be preferred who shall have obtained the largest number of votes, and, in the event of equality, the lawyer of the longest standing. The election of the others will be proceeded with afresh. 112. The period of service of the Magistrates shall be four years, and they shall take possession of their office on the 1st February. 113. The Supreme Court of Justice shall accept or refuse the resignation of the officials of its election, and shall grant them privileges equal to those of its own members. 111. The law shall regulate the attributes of the Courts of Justice. Ll2. The facility of trying cases and passing judgments belongs to the Courts and other Tribunals of Justice. No other public power may interfere with cases pending before the competent authority, or reopen cases which have been terminated. 116. The Supreme Court shall also exercise the following attributes:  (1.) To make regulations for its internal conduct; (2.) To take cognizance of official and common offences committed by the high functionaries when Congress shall have declared the grounds for prosecution; (3.) To apply the laws in the concrete cases submitted to its examination, and to negative their fulfilment when they may be contrary to the Constitution ; (4.) To admit the lawyers and notaries, qualified within or out of the Republic, to the exercise of their profession, to suspend them, and to withdraw from them their right to practise in conformity with the law ; (5.) To take cognizance of appeals admitted by the Exchequer Courts; (G.) To settle the claims which may be made against the laws issued by Municipalities or Departmental Councils when they may be contrary to the Constitution or the laws; (7.) To take cognizance of maritime prize cases and other matters submitted to it by law. 117. Recourse may also be had directly to the Supreme Court of Justice in the question of the constitutional validity of a law which may refer to matters that may not be brought before- the Tribunals of Justice, by any person to whom the same may have been applied in a concrete case, and who may have been prejudiced in his legal rights. The law shall regulate the use of this procedure. 118. The administration of justice in the Republic shall be free.

1105

119. The members of the Courts of Justice during their period of office may not hold any other employment. 120. The Tribunals of Justice may demand the assistance of the armed forces for the fulfilment of their decisions; if the same be denied or are not available, assistance may be required of the citizens. The functionary who unduly refuses to afford such assistance shall be held responsible. 121. No case shall be tried in more than three instances, and any one Judge may not t n the same in more than one instance 122. In civil matters the points raised shall be submitted, to a jury whenever the parties request the intervention of the same; the Judge shall only apply the law. 123. Nu person who is in the free administration of his property shall be deprived of the right to terminate his civil sails by arrangement or arbitration. TITLE XIV. Of the Budget. 121. The Budget shall be voted by Congress upon the proposals presented by the Executive and Judicial Powers in their respective branches. 125.The Budget proposal shall be presented by the respective Ministers and by the Secretary of the Supreme Court, at the latest within fifteen days of the meeting of Congress. 120. Any expenditure incurred outside the Estimates is illegal, and the President, the Minister of Finance, and the official making the payment shall be collectively responsible for the amount disbursed, without prejudice to the penalties to which they may be subject under the law. 127. The estimate of ordinary expenses of the Public Administration shall not exceed the estimated revenue calculated by the Minister of Finance of the Republic.

TITLE XV. Of the Public Treasury. 128. The Public Treasury of the notion is made up of  (1.) All its property, movable and immovable: (2.) All its realizable credits; (3.) All the duties, taxes, and contributions payable by the inhabitants of the Republic. 129. For the administration of public funds there shall be a General Treasury and such officials as may be necessary. 130. The Treasurer-General shall be appointed by the Executive? Power. For the exercise of this office it is necessary to be above 

21 years of age, to be neither creditor of nor debtor to the Public Treasury, and to hold no accounts pending with, the same. 131. The Executive Power may not conclude contracts which involve national funds without previous publication of the project in the Official Gazette. The following are excepted from the above disposition.:  Contracts with the object of providing the necessaries of war, and those which from their nature cannot be concluded except with a particular individual. 132. For the control of the administration of the National Treasury there shall be an Exchequer and Audit Department (" Contaduria Mayor d Tribunal de Cuentas "), the duties of which shall be to examine and close the accounts of those who administer the public moneys, 133. The members of this Department shall be subject to the same conditions as those of the General Treasury. Their number, organization, and attributes shall be determined by law. TITLE XVI.  Of the Army. 134. The public force is established in order to secure the rights of the nation, the fulfilment of the law, and the maintenance of public order. 135. Military discipline shall be regulated by the military laws and ordinances; but no armed body shall be able to deliberate. 136. Military service is obligatory. Every Nicaraguan between IS and 45 years of age is a soldier in the army; the law shall provide for the organization of the same, and shall lay down the rules for exemption from service. 137. There shall be no special Judicial Tribunal for the army ; soldiers will be subject to the Military Courts when on active service for purely military offences. TITXE XYII. Of the Departmental Government.

138. For political administration the territory of the Republic shall be divided into two departments, the number and extent to which shall be fixed by law. In each of these there shall be such political functionaries as the law may determine. TITLE XVIII.  Of the Municipal Government. 130. District local government shall be in charge of municipalities, popularly and directly elected by the inhabitant of the respective districts.

140. The number of the members of the municipalities will be determined by law upon the basis of population. 141. The municipalities shall be free to decree local contributions, and shall administer the funds of the community to the benefit of the same, rendering accounts of such administration to the Tribunal established by law. A detailed report of the receipt and expenditure of funds shall be published annually. 142. They shall likewise be free to appoint the subordinate officials. 143. The attributes of the municipalities shall be purely economical and administrative. These shall be determined by law, as also the conditions which shall attend the election of the members. 144. In the exercise of its particular functions the municipality shall be absolutely independent of the other Powers, the general laws of the country being in no case opposed thereto, and shall be responsible for the abuses which may be committed collectively or individually before the Court3 of Justice. 145. The appointment of police agents for maintaining security and order shall appertain to the municipalities. The municipalities shall also have the right to legislate upon police matters, the public health" and public instruction, the Constitution and the general laws not being opposed thereto. 146. No member of a municipality shall be compelled to accept any other appointment. 147. There shall be in the chief city a Departmental Council popularly and directly elected by the respective citizens. 148. In the exclusive competence of such Council shall be  (1.) The approval, reform, or repeal of the Resolutions of the municipalities within its sphere which have the character of local laws; (2.) The conduct, government, and direction of the particular interests of the Departments, in so far as, under the Constitution, the same do not belong to the municipalities. (3.) The law shall regulate the organization and attributes of these Councils. 149. Local contributions shall go directly to the revenue. TITLE XIX. Of the Responsibility of the Public Officials. 150. Every public functionary is responsible for his actions. 151. The President of the Republic, the Deputies, Magistrates of the Courts, Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of Suite, Diplomatic Ministers, and Treasury and Exchequer Officers are responsible to the Assembly for offences committed in the exercise
of their functions. Congress after previously consulting the proceedings determined by its Rules shall declare whether there is ground for prosecution in order to place the offender at the disposal of the competent Tribunal. A similar Declaration will be necessary to proceed against specified individuals for ordinary offences. 152. Notwithstanding the approval signified by Congress of the conduct of the Executive, the President and the Secretaries of State may be impeached for official delinquencies within a period of five years from the date on which their functions terminated. 153. A sentence of responsibility for official delinquencies having been pronounced, the offender may not be granted a pardon. 154. When a public functionary against whom a prosecution has been formulated shall be acquitted, he shall return to the exercise of his functions.
TITLE XX.  Constitutive laws.

155. The following are constitutive laws: That of the press, martial law, law of asylum, and the electoral law. TITLE XXI. Reform of the Constitution and Constitutive Laws. 156. The absolute reform of this Constitution may only be decreed after a period of ten years of its coming into force. 157. Every reform shall be decreed by two-thirds of the votes of the Representatives of Congress in its ordinary Sessions, and shall be sanctioned by a Constituent Assembly which shall be convoked for that purpose. 158. The Constituent Assembly shall be elected in the same manner as the Representatives of Congress, and of an equal number. 159. In no case shall the reform decreed affect the Constitutional Articles which prohibit the re-election of the President and of his substitute, and which establish the Presidential period, in such manner as to be applicable to the current or following period. 1G0. The ordinary Assembly, as soon as the reform of the Constitution is declared, shall close its Sessions, being thereby dissolved. 1G1. The present Constitution shall come into force on the 19th July, 1894. 102. The Constitution of the 19th August, 1858, is abrogated. Given at the Sessions Hall of the National Constituent

Assembly in Managua, the 10th December, l893, the 72nd of the Independence. FRANCISCO MONTENEGRO, President, Deputy for the Department of Esteli. 
Secretaries: AGUSTIN DUARTE, Deputy for the Department of Leon. 
J. ALBERTO GANEZ, Deputy for the Department of Rivas, District of Potosi. Let it be published. National Palace, Managua, December 10, 139o. J. SANTOS ZELAYA. 
JOSE MADBIZ, Minister of Foreign Relations and Public Instruction.
JOSE D. GAMEZ, Minister of Public Works.

LEONARDO LACAYO, Minister of Finance. R. MAYOUGA RIVAS, Under-Secretary for Foreign Relations, 
T. G. BONILLA, Under-Secretary for War and Marine.