CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Nicaragua. -Managua,
August 19, 1858.

CHAPTER I.- Concerning the Republic 
1. The Republic of Nicaragua is that which was of old called the Province, and, since the Independence, the State, of Nicaragua. Its territory is bounded on the east and north-east by the Sea of the Antilles, on the north and north-west by the State of Honduras, on the east and south by the Pacific Ocean, and on the south-east
by the Republic of Costa Rica. The special Boundary Laws form part of the Constitution.
2. The Republic is sovereign, free, and independent.
3. The territory will be divided, for the various purposes of the public administration, into the departments, districts, and subdivisions which the Constitution and the laws indicate.

CHAPTER II.-Concerning the Form of Government.
4. The government of the Republic is by popular representation; its object is the preservation of the liberty, equality, security, and rights of property of its members. It is divided, for purposes of administration, into three distinct Powers : the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial. Their faculties are limited to the attributes which the Constitution and the laws confer. Every act executed beyond the lawful limits of such attributes is null and void.
5. The legislative authority is vested in a Congress composed of two Chambers-that of Deputies, and that of Senators. The executive power is vested in a citizen with the title of President, and the judicial authority in a Court of Justice.

CHAPTER III.-Concerning Religion.
6. The religion of the Republic is Catholic, Apostolic, Roman; the Government protects its worship.

CHARTER IV.- Concerning Nicaraguans,

7. The following are Nicaraguans:— Natives of the Republic, those who have acquired that qualification in conformity with the laws, and the children of both these classes born in foreign lands if their parents have not lost their naturalization as Nicaraguans. Also those who may obtain letters of naturalization, Central Americans, other Spanish-Americans, and all foreigners who may reside in the Republic for the time determined by law, and who possess the qualifications which the law requires.

CHAPTER V.-Concerning Citizens.
8. The following are citizens:—Nicaraguans who have attained the age of 21 years, or of 18 years when they possess any scientific degree or are fathers of families, being of good conduct, and the possessors of property worth not less than 100 dollars, or an occupation or profession which produces an annual income of equal
amount.
9. The rights of citizens are-
(1.) To elect the authorities;
(2.) To be eligible for appointments, if, professing the religion of the Republic, they are possessed of the other qualities required by the Constitution and the law;
(3.) To possess and carry arms, with the additional privileges
referred to in the 4th section of § 13;
(4.) To enjoy the exemption accorded them by § 89.
10. The rights of citizenship are suspended-
(1.) For being a debtor to the public funds, payment having been formally demanded;
(2.) For sentence of imprisonment
(3.) On a declaration that there is cause for a criminal prosecution;
(4.) On account of voluntary abandonment of office, occupation, or profession.
11. The rights of citizenship are lost—-
(1.) On account of a sentence imposing a punishment heavier than correctional
(2.) For being declared a fraudulent debtor;
(3.) For traffic in slaves;
(4.) For conduct notoriously vicious;
(5.) On naturalization in a foreign country;
(6.) For ingratitude to parents, or unjust abandonment of wife or legitimate children. The law will determine the cases in which rehabilitation may be conceded.

CHAPTER VI.-Public Law of Nicaragua.
12. All Nicaraguans, without exception, are obliged to respect the law; to obey the authorities constituted by it; to defend the country by arms; to serve in public positions according to the dispositions of the laws; and to contribute, in proportion to their possessions, to the expenses legally decreed.
13. The Constitution secures to every Nicaraguan-
(1.) The liberty to remain in any par1 of' the Republic, and to leave the Republic, being free from liability;
(2.) Liberty to express his thoughts by word, writing, or in print, without previous censorship ; and that of judgment by juries as to the abuse of the last of these rights: no one may be molested, or persecuted, for his opinions, of whatever nature they may be, so long as, by a positive and direct action, they do not infringe the law;
(3.)Liberty to meet together in order to treat of honourable matters, subject to liability for abuse of this right. The law may not take cognizance of private actions which do not offend order and morality, and which are not prejudicial to a third party;
(4.) Liberty to possess and carry arms. The law will regulate the enjoyment of this right, and the amplification which should be made in favour of citizens; and only in case of attempt to disturb the public peace may they be deprived of arm,;
(5.) Liberty to make use of the right of petition and impeachment for public crimes; and that of adjusting differences by arbitration in the form prescribed by law.
11. In Nicaragua there is no privileged class, neither are there titles, entails, nor saleable or hereditary offices.
15. No Nicaraguan can be a slave, and traffic in slave is prohibited in the Republic.
1018 N ICAI{ASW A.
CHAPTER VII.-Concerning the Election of the Supreme Authorities.
16. For the purposes of elections the territory of the Republic will be divided into departments, which will not number less than seven; into districts comprising at least 20,000 Nicaraguans; and into cantons of from 330 to 3,300 inhabitants.
17. For the election of the President of the Republic and of Deputies there will be popular and District Councils, and Departmental Councils for that of Senators.
18. The popular Councils are composed of the citizens in a canton. These Councils will elect amongst the citizens of the district an elector for each 330 Nicaraguans in their canton, and yet another if there remain a fraction of over half this number.
19. The citizens elected in the cantons form the District Councils, and elect an Acting Deputy and a Substitute.
20. When, in the formation of a district, there remains over a number of inhabitants which exceeds 10,000, the Council will elect two Acting Deputies and two Substitutes.
21. On the occasion of the change of President of the Republic, the District Councils will elect, separately, for this position, two individuals, of whom one must be domiciled in another department than that in which he is elected ; each vote will be separately registered.
22. The Departmental Councils are composed of 12 electors, nominated by the District Councils as prescribed by law.
23. At a meeting of electors in the capital of the province, at which at least nine must be present, they shall elect an Acting Senator and a Substitute, or two Acting and two Substitute Senators in the departments in which the law prescribes two.
24. The law will so regulate the elections that order and liberty of suffrage may be assured, and that the necessary provisions may be established against compulsion, bribery, or any other act which could invalidate them.
25. When one individual is elected to different offices, the preference will be determined in the following order
(1.) President;
(2.) Senator;
(3.) Deputy;
(I.) Magistrate.
The holder of one of these offices is disqualified for election to another, except that of President. Election as acting official is preferred to that as substitute.

CHAPTER VII.-Concerning the computation of the Votes, and method of electing the President.
26. The voting papers for the election of a President being collected within the period prescribed by law, Congress will open them, will certify the elections and candidates, and will compute the voting by the number of electors who have exercised the suffrage. If there is a majority of votes in favour of one individual, there is "popular election ;" if two have a majority, the one having the larger number of votes is preferred; and if they are equal, Congress will elect one. If in two votings of Congress there should be an even number for each, it shall be decided by lot.
27. In case there is not popular election, Congress will elect from those who have at least the third, fourth, or fifth part of the votes in the order given. When there is only one candidate in a superior scale, he will be united with those in the next scale iu
which there is a candidate; and in case there is only one candidate in one of these scales, the election will rest between him and those holding any number of votes; or only amongst these last in case there is no candidate in any of the scales.

CHAPTER IX.- Concerning the Qualifications necessary for Election to
the High Offices, and concerning the Duration of Office.
28 The President must be native and inhabitant of the Republic, a layman, a householder, not less than 30 years of age, must not have lost his rights of citizenship within the five years previous to his election, and must possess property in real estate of at least 4,000 dollars. Natives of the other divisions of Central America who have resided in the country for 15 years, and are in possession of the other qualifications mentioned, are also eligible.
29. A Senator must be native and inhabitant of the Republic, a layman, a householder, not less than 30 years of age, must not have lost his rights of citizenship within the five years previous to his election, and must possess property in real estate of not less than 2,000 dollars. Natives of the other divisions of Central America who have resided in the country for 10 years, and are possessed of the other requisite qualifications, are also eligible.
30. To be Deputy, it is necessary to be native and inhabitant of the Republic, a layman, at least 25 years of age, and not to have lost the rights of citizenship within the five years previous to election. Natives of the other divisions of Central America who have resided in the country for five years, and possess the other requisite qualifications, are eligible.
31. The Magistrates must be natives of the Republic, barristers, or of well-known learning in jurisprudence, of acknowledged probity, laymen, not less than 30 years of age, and must not have lost their rights of citizenship within the five years previous to their appointment. In the same way, the natives of the other divisions of Central
America who are possessed of the aforesaid qualifications, in addition to a residence of five years in the Republic, are eligible.
32. The tenure of office of the President of the Republic is for four years; it begins and ends on the 1st March. The retiring President is not eligible for re-election for the succeeding term.
83. The tenure of office of the Deputies is for four years, they being eligible for re-election, although not obliged to accept it their renewal will be one-half every two years, and the first half to retire will be chosen by lot.
34. Senators will hold office six years, will be renewed by thirds, and the first biennial renewals will be decided by lot.
35. Magistrates will hold office for four years, always being eligible for re-election, but not compelled to accept office except on being re-elected for the first time; their renewal will take place, one-half every two years, the first half to be decided by lot. Their term of office commences and concludes on the 1st March.

CHAPTER X.-Concerning the Organization of the Legislative Power.
36. Congress meets on the 1st January in every other year, without necessity for its convocation; its sessions will last 90 days, with power to extend them for 30 days.
37. At least three individuals of each Chamber being met together in the place designated for the purpose, they will organise themselves into preparatory Committees to certify the credentials of the elected members, and to settle the measures to be taken for the attendance of the rest. Two-thirds of the Deputies, and two thirds of the Senators, are sufficient to sit in Congress, and their resolutions will be decided by an absolute majority of votes, except in cases iii which a larger number is prescribed by the Constitution.
38. The Chambers will open and close their sessions at the same time; neither of the Chambers can suspend or prorogue its sessions for more than three days without the consent of the other.

CHAPTER XI.-Concerning the ordinary Attributes of the Chambers.
39. Each of the Chambers, without the intervention of the other, exercises the right-
(1.) To arrange the order of its sessions, and all which concerns its interior management;
(2.) To certify the election and credentials of its respective members;
(3.) To summon them to attend;
(4.) To accept by majority of two-thirds the resignations which may be sent in by its members (these must be founded on grave and sufficient grounds);
(5.) To order elections to replace any seats vacant through death, resignation, or disqualification;
(6.) To extend the customary term allowed to the Executive to sanction or to veto a law;
(7.) To demand from the Government a statement of the income and outgoings of all or any of the public funds, and information on any branch of administration;
(8.) To summon the other Chamber to deliberate in Congress.
40. It is the peculiar attribute of the Senate to be the adviser of the Government, and to declare when there is ground for prosecution of the Prefects, Governors, Auditor of Accounts, Treasurer and Accountant-General, for official crimes.

CHAPTER XII-Concerning the Attributes of Congress in united Chambers.
41. Congress exercises the right-
(1.) To arrange the order of its sessions;
(2.) To count the votes at, to certify and declare, the election of
the President of the Republic, and to elect a President in the
circumstances specified in § 27;
(3.) To nominate the Senator who shall exercise the executive
power, as provided in §§ 51 and 54 ;
(4.) To elect by scrutiny five Acting or Supplementary Senators,
whose names, contained separately in folded sheets, shall be put in a ballot box, from which three shall be taken, which, marked with successive numbers, may be summoned to the exercise of the executive power in case of need. The numbered sheets will be given to the Government, and the others unopened will be burned
during the same sitting;
(5.) To elect the Magistrates of the Supreme Court;
(6.) To take cognizance of the resignation of the President of the Republic and Magistrates, with power to accept such resignations by a majority of two-thirds of the votes ;
(7.) To declare also by a majority of two-thirds when there is ground for the prosecution of the President, Senators, Deputies, Magistrates, Ministers, and Diplomatic Agents of the Republic;
(8.) To grant permission to Nicaraguans to obtain titles, pensions, employment, or decorations from a foreign Government;
(9.) To grant letters of naturalization ;
(10.) To restore the right of citizenship to any who may have forfeited them ;
(11.) To assign the income of the Bishop and Ecclesiastical Chapter, and dispose of the tithes in objects of worship and other pious ways, in the presence of the representatives which the ecclesiastical authority will send, in accordance with the Concordat to be celebrated with the Holy See ;
(12.) To prolong the term of 15 days allowed to the Executive by § 49 for the publication of the laws and other dispositions.

CHAPTER XII.-Attributes of Congress in separate Chambers.
42. Congress has the right-
(1.) To decree general laws, interpret them, alter them, and
annul them;
(2.) To make Decrees, Statutes, and special Laws, in accordance with the condition of the persons, customs, and peculiarities of the districts ;
(3.) To establish jurisdictions, and in them to appoint Tribunals and Judges to try, judge, and to pass sentence on every class of crimes, delinquencies, transgressions, suits, actions, and business, of whatever nature they may be;
(4.) To designate the functions and jurisdiction of the officials of the Republic ;
(5.) To create and abolish every class of officials; to assign and vary their salaries ;
(6.) To fix in each period the cost of administration in view of the Budget presented by the Executive;
(7.) To create the public forces, and to decree what strength is necessary in time of peace
(8.) To examine the administrative conduct of the President and Ministers;
(9.) To take into consideration the account of the investment of the public funds presented to it by the Executive ;
(10.) To decree every kind of tax, and, in grave cases, general forced loans; apportioning them in proportion to the wealth of the elective departments ;
(11.) To contract debts on the credit of the nation, to certified and acknowledge those already contracted, and to devote funds towards their liquidation ;
(12.) To declare war and to make peace;
(13.) To grant permission to the troops of other States to enter the Republic, and to the troops of the Republic to leave its territory;
(14.) To make regulations for the administration and transfer of the national property ;
(15.) To decree, when the public funds are insufficient, personal services and local taxes for the construction of churches, prisons, public buildings, establishments for public beneficence, and generally for the opening up and construction of roads ;
(16.) To fit out sea-ports and to establish custom-houses;
(17.) To design the flag of the Republic, its arms, shields, and seals ;
(18.) To make regulations for the nationalization and registration of ships;
(19.) To fix the alloy, weight, design, and value of the money; to permit the introduction of foreign money, and to regulate the system of weights and measures;
(20.) To promote public education by laws conducive to the advancement of morality, of sciences and arts ;
(21.) To concede, on the initiative of the Government, and when the public good requires it, amnesties and pardons; these to be granted by two-thirds of the votes ;
(22.) To grant patents, for a stated time, to the inventors and undertakers of works of utility;
(23.) To decree rewards to any who have done great services to the nation, and public honours to their memory;
(24.) To settle with two-thirds of the votes on the following matters:-
(i.) The designation or change of the place of residence of the Supreme Powers
(ii.) The declaration of urgency for the publication of a law;
(iii.) The laws as to the boundary lines between this and the other Republics ;
(iv.) The ratification of the laws returned by the Executive; and
(v.) The ratification of the Treaties, Agreements, and Contracts of canalization, main roads, and loans which the Government may enter into.
(25.) To delegate to the Executive Power the following powers
(i.) That of raising forces when necessity demands;
(ii.) To legislate concerning the Departments of Police, the Treasury, War, and the Admiralty ;
(iii.) To approve and decree Statutes and Ordinances for corporations and establishments which ought to possess them, and the projects for raising funds which they may present;
(iv.) To concede the right of entry into the Republic of auxiliary troops, and to grant leave to the national troops to leave the Republic;
(v.) To create establishments of instruction, charity, and public beneficence;
(vi.) To fit out ports and to establish custom-houses;
(vii.) To make regulations for the nationalization and registration of ships ;
(viii.) To decree personal services and local taxation;
(ix.) To make peace subject to the bases which the Legislative
Power indicates;
(x.) To regulate the system of weights and measures.
The Executive may only exercise these powers during the time
the Legislative Power is not in session.
43. The Chambers will occupy themselves by preference with
the subjects which are included in the programme of the Government.
44. In extraordinary sessions they will apply themselves exclusively to the consideration of the matters for which they are convoked, of those initiated by the Government to which they may vote urgency, to impeachments, and to matters appertaining to their interior regulations.
CHAPTER XIV.- Concerning the Making and Publication of the Laws.
45. Only Deputies, Senators, and Ministers may initiate laws: Deputies and Senators in their respective Chambers, Ministers in either Chamber.
46. Every Bill passed by one Chamber will be presented in the other. In case of its being amended, it will be returned to the initiating Chamber ; if approved, it will be presented to the Executive for sanction; if thrown out, it will be returned to the Chamber in which it was passed, with an explanation of the reasons for which
it has been thrown out.
47. The Executive may return the Bill within 15 days to the initiating Chamber, or within such further time as that Chamber may have allowed; such time having passed without the veto being pronounced, the Act is sanctioned. This period is limited to six
days in resolutions which may be remitted to him as urgent. The Bill vetoed by the Executive may be ratified by the Chambers in accordance with Clause 42, section 24. In this event it will be sent to the Government for publication with this formula: “Ratified constitutionally."
48. Bills or laws vetoed may not be again considered in the same session; but clauses or resolutions which have not been specially vetoed may be proposed anew.
49. The Executive must publish the laws and further dispositions of Congress within 15 days, or such further time as may be allowed by Congress for the purpose.
50. The formula which is to be used for the publication of the laws and dispositions of the Chambers is the following: "The President of the Republic to the inhabitants. Know: That Congress has decreed the following [here follow the text and signatures].
Therefore: Let it be executed,”

CHAPTER XV.-Concerning the Executive Power.
51. The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic; in his default, by the Senator appointed by him, or designated by Congress if it is in session. If the absence of the President is permanent, and occurs before the middle of his term of
office, the election of a President to hold office for the completion of the term will devolve upon the people. If it occur after the half term, Congress will elect a Senator to hold office until the future President takes possession. And if such Senator should leave office before the end of the term, Congress will elect another to replace
him.
52. In case of a sudden vacancy taking place during the recess of the Legislative Power, recourse will be had to the folded sheets mentioned in § 41, par. 4, and the executive power will fall to the Senator whose name is contained in No. 1, or in Nos. 2 or 3 if on account of absence from the Republic, or of physical impediment,
the first (or second) in order should be unable to undertake it. The functions of the latter are limited to the time during which the inability of the former respectively to act may continue.
53. The Minister for Home Affairs, in presence of the other Ministers, if there are others, will open the papers and declare the person designated thereon : until the latter takes possession, such Minister will preserve public order.
54. In cases of Presidential vacancy unprovided for, Congress will provide for the filling of the vacancy.

CHAPTER XVI.-Attributes of the Executive Power.
55. The duty of the Executive Power is-
(1.) To maintain intact the sovereignty and independence of the Republic, and the integrity of its territory;
(2.) To preserve order and tranquillity by the means established by law;
(3.) To initiate, and to apply the exequatur to, the resolutions of Congress, and to promulgate them, with power to veto those passed by Congress in separate Chambers;
(4.) To make regulations and ordinances for the execution of the laws;
(5.) To watch over the administration of the public funds and their legal application;
(6.) To present to the Legislative Power, within 15 days of its assembling, a circumstantial statement concerning the branches of administration, a detailed account of the amount and application of the income, and the Budget of expenses for the forthcoming term of two years, indicating the improvements which may be effected by legislation;
(7.) To publish annually the state of the income and outgoings of the public funds;
(8.) To furnish the Chambers and Congress with the information they may demand, with power to withhold documents concerning matters which require the exercise of reserve, except in case the information is necessary on account of his responsibility being called in question: during a war he is not compelled to publish the plans of campaign;
(9.) To appoint and to remove the Ministers and other officials of the Executive branch, to accept their resignations, and grant retirement to the officers of the army and navy, in accordance with the laws;
(10.) To appoint the Judges of First Instance, according to law, on the recommendation of the Court of Justice, and the other officials whose appointment is not reserved to some other authority ;
(11.) To watch over the administration of justice, and to take care, in the form provided by law, that the sentences of the Tribunals and Judges are complied with;
(12.) To watch over the legal accuracy of the money, and to compute the value of foreign money the circulation of which is permitted;
(13.) To provide for the uniformity of the weights and measures;
(14.) To direct foreign affairs;
(15.) To appoint Diplomatic Ministers, Agents, and Consuls to other Governments, and to receive those appointed by them;
(16.) To celebrate Concordats and every kind of Treaty and Contract, subject to the ratification of the Legislative Power;
(17.) To unite, organize, and direct the armed forces, and raise those necessary in case of invasion or internal disorder, with power, in case the ordinary resources are insufficient, to provide such as may be necessary, whether by forced or private loans, which must be indemnified by the products of a general loan which he will at once
decree;
(18.) To take command of the army when he considers such a course desirable, handing over the Executive to the proper individual ;
(19.) To exercise patronage in accordance with the law;
(20.) To confirm, if he approves, the titles conferring ecclesiastical dignity, and the nominations of vicars, curates, and coadjutors, without which confirmation the nominees cannot enter into possession. In the same way to confirm or refuse confirmation to Pontifical letters and conciliar dispositions: from this formality
alone are excepted those concerning dispensations, orders, or matrimony,
and those issued by the Penitentiary;
(21.) To convoke the Chambers for their ordinary sessions, and to extraordinary sessions when he considers it necessary, summoning, whilst the preparatory Committees are assembling, the Substitutes to replace any Members who may have died;
(22.) To indicate provisionally the place of assembly of Congress, when the customary locality is subject to serious epidemic;
(23.) To propose to the Chambers, when the public welfare requires it, pardons and amnesties, and to grant these when the Chambers are not sitting;
(24.) To grant letters of marque and licences to cruize in time of war;
(25.) To restore rights of citizenship during the recess of the
Chambers to any who have lost those rights;
(26.) To exercise supreme jurisdiction over the public establishments, and over matters of police;
(27.) To forbid the entry into the Republic, or formally to expel from it, persons from other parts who are of a suspicious character.
56. When the public tranquillity is threatened, the Government may decree orders of detention or imprisonment against those who are presumed to be guilty, and may examine them; placing them within 15 days either at liberty or at the disposal of their respective Judges. But if, in the opinion of the President, it is necessary to
confine in the interior, or expel from the Republic, the authors of conspiracy or treason, he will associate with himself two Acting or Supplementary Senators of another department, whom he will summon for the purpose, the majority to settle upon the course to be taken. Those who have voted the procedure, and the Minister
who authorizes it, will be responsible for it. In case of order being subverted, the Executive Power may by himself use this Power.

CHAPTER XVII.-Concerning the Secretaries of State.
57. The Executive Power will have the number of Ministers which the law determines.
58. To be Minister, the following qualifications are requisite:-
(1.) Birth and domicile in the Republic;
(2.) To be fully 25 years of age;
(3.) To have been in exercise of rights of citizenship without
interruption for five years before nomination. Natives of the other States of Central America are also eligible if they add to these qualifications that of five years domicile.
59. The orders of the Executive Power must be issued by their respective Minister; otherwise there is no obligation to obey them.
60. Ministers are responsible for any orders they may sign in opposition to the Constitution or the law.
61. Ministers may assist without voting in the legislative deliberations of Congress.

CHAPTER XVIII.-Concerning the Judicial Power.
62. The judicial power is exercised by a Supreme Court, divided into two sections, and the other Tribunals and Judges which may be established.
63. The sections will reside in distinct departments, and the law will mark out the limit of their jurisdiction.
64. Each section will be composed of at least four Acting Judges and two supplementary.

CHAPTER XIX.-Concernig the Attributes of the Court of Justice.
65. Each section exercises the right-
(1.) Of forming the regulations for its internal conduct;
(2.) To try, in the second instance, civil and criminal causes, in the cases and manner determined by law; and to try, finally, the Memorials and other appeals admitted by the other section: in this case the Bench will be augmented by two individuals;
(3.) To annul the proceedings of the Tribunals and Judges in its jurisdiction, of whatever jurisdiction or nature they may be;
(4.) To decide on the matters removed to the Tribunals and Judges of its jurisdiction from the other section, its Tribunals, or Judges. The law will determine the method of procedure in matters which come before both sections;
( 5.) To take cognizance of the accusations against the inferior Judges, and of the functionaries of their departments against whom Congress may declare there is cause of accusation;
(6.) To try judicial appeals, and others to which the law authorises them;
(7.) To watch over the conduct of the inferior Judges, taking care that they administer prompt and full justice;
(8.) To admit advocates and lawyers, to suspend them for grave causes, and even to withdraw from them altogether the right to practise, for venality, bribery, or fraud, on proof after trial;
(9.) To visit, by means of a Magistrate, the places in its jurisdiction, in order to correct any abuses which may be discovered in the administration of justice. The powers of the Magistrate, the duration of his visit, and the other circumstances conducing to it object, will be determined by law;
(10.) To manifest to Congress any unsuitability in the laws, or difficulties in their application; indicating the reforms of which they are susceptible ;
(11.) To make use of the other powers conferred by the law.

CHAPTER XX.-Concerning the Responsibility of the Public Officials.
66. Every public functionary, on taking possession of his post, will take oath to comply with, and cause to be complied with, the Constitution and the laws; he will be responsible in case of transgressing them, and must render an account of his actions.
67. The individuals in whom the supreme powers are vested, Secretaries of State, and Diplomatic Agents of the Republic may not be tried for official delinquencies, nor for ordinary crimes punishable by heavier than correctional punishment, unless their
prosecution is preceded by a formal declaration that there is cause for proceeding against them. But any civil authority will be permitted to take action against them for ordinary offences, rendering to Congress information thereof.
68. The President of the Republic may be tried during his term of office for treason, venality, and usurpation of power; for infringement of guarantees, for preventing the elections or meeting of Congress, and for ordinary offences punishable by more than
correctional punishment. For other official offences he may only be proceeded against after the termination of his term of office.
69. Deputies and Senators may be impeached for treason, venality, serious default in the conduct of their official duties, and for ordinary offences punishable by more than correctional punishment.
The Judges, and Secretaries of State, and Diplomatic Agents of the Republic may be impeached for these crimes and for those of perversion and breach of the law.
70. The declaration that there is ground for prosecution for ordinary offences causes the suspension of the official, and enables him to be tried by the competent Magistrates. The same is to be understood in the case of the official crimes treated of in § 40.
71. Congress will appoint a Public Prosecutor, who will prosecute, and will select by lot nine of its members, who will examine and pass sentence by the votes of two-thirds of their number, in the actions which, for official offences, have to be brought against the individuals holding supreme power, Secretaries of State, and Diplomatic Agents of the Republic. The Judges who compose this Tribunal cannot be called into question, and from their decision there will be no appeal; this decision will be confined to declaring the official disqualified to obtain honorary, lucrative, or confidential appointments. In case the action discloses ground for further proceedings, the accused will remain subject to the ordinary proceedings before the competent Tribunals or Judges.
72. The right of impeachment of the individuals holding supreme power for official offences terminates with the ordinary or extra ordinary sessions of the Chambers which meet immediately after the conclusion of the term of office of such holders of supreme power.
73. The opinions of Deputies and Senators, in relation to their position as such, may at no time and from no motive be interpreted criminally, nor may they be sued or seized for debts from the time of their summons to sessions till 15 days after the sessions are concluded,

CHAPTER XXI.-Concerning the interior government of the Towns.
74. The departments will be ruled by Prefects, Chief Agents of the Administration; their nomination rests with the Government, and their qualifications, attributes, and the duration of their term of office is prescribed by law.
75. The interior government of the towns is intrusted to Municipalities elected by the people at the time and in the number of members prescribed by law, and they will hold an ordinary session each month.
70. The duty of the Municipalities is-
(1.) To watch over morality, primary education, and the police;
(2.) To formulate their Statutes and projects for the creation of
funds; submitting both the former and the latter for approbation to
the authorities responsible for each respectively ;
(3.) To apply their funds to the purposes for which they were
created, in accordance with the regulations prescribed by law ;
(4.) To carry out their decisions by means of permanent Committees;
(5.) To exercise the other functions conferred on them.

CHAPTER XXII.--Concerning Personal Guarantees.
77. Proscriptive, confiscatory, or retrospective laws may not be made, nor laws contrary to the Constitution.
78. Capital punishment may only be administered for the crimes of assassination premeditated or assured, homicide, incendiarism, accompanied by grave circumstances specified by law, an assault in an inhabited district if death ensues, or in an uninhabited district if the victim is wounded or robbed ; nevertheless, the law will not be free with the use of capital punishment, but will limit it to occasions
where it is indispensable, and to the time when the needs of society require its use. In the case of crimes against discipline, the law will determine when capital punishment is to be inflicted.
79. The Constitution assures the inviolability of property, so that no one may be deprived of it except by virtue of a judicial sentence, or in case the needs of the Republic, as specified by law, require its use or alienation, after previous indemnity.
80. No Power has authority to annul in substance, or in their effects, private or public acts executed in conformity with the law existing at the time of their confirmation, or which are not prohibited by a pre-existing law.
81. No one may be banished from house or domicile, nor detained in custody, except in cases determined by the Constitution and the laws.
82. The house of every inhabitant is a sanctuary which may Only be violated by the authorities under the following circumstances:—
(1.) That of any inhabitant in the actual pursuit of an offender;
(2.) That of a convict who has been condemned to a term of imprisonment;
(3.) In case of a summons from within the house, or for scandalous disorder requiring prompt remedy;
Also a house may be broken into in which an offender has taken refuge, or in which are concealed stolen or prohibited goods or goods the subject of Government monopoly, after production of at least semi-proof of these facts. The law will determine the manner  and occasions on which they may be broken into for transgressions against the police.
83. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable; such correspondence taken from the post-offices or from any other place cannot be used as evidence against any one. Only in case of treason, invasion, or disturbance of the public peace, and in the circumstances which the law may designate, may the papers of individuals be seized; in such case they must be inspected in the presence of the owner, and any which have no relation to the subject-matter of the investigation must be returned to him at the time.
81. No one may be deprived of life, property, honour, or liberty without previous trial in accordance with the established regulations; nor may any one be judged by Special Commissions or Tribunals, nor by other Judges than those whom the law designates;
the law must exist previous to the action tried, and the judgment must be given in accordance with the formula laid down by such law.
85. The Tribunals and Judges may not exercise functions other than those of administering justice and causing their judgments to be carried into effect; they may neither reopen causes which are concluded, nor act as advocates for causes which are pending, nor form regulations for the application of the laws.
86. The same individual Judges may not try different hearings of the same case, and the maximum hearings will not exceed three.
87. Imprisonment for the purpose of investigation will not exceed 10 days, and the minimum term will be fixed by law. An offender who has committed an offence may be arrested by any person who has authority to effect an arrest; an offender found in
the act may be arrested by any one, a report being made to the authorities.
88. Sentence of imprisonment may not be passed unless full proof has been previously adduced that an act has been committed punishable by more than correctional punishment, and unless there is at least strong presumptive evidence who the culprit is; nevertheless, imprisonment or arrest, for punishment or correction, are
permissible in the cases and for the term which the law prescribes.
89. No one may be imprisoned or detained except in the public places provided for this purpose ; nevertheless, citizens and women may be detained in other places by their own wish and with the permission of the law.
90. Every person who, not being authorized by law, facilitates, authorizes, effects, or causes to be effected the imprisonment, detention, or arrest of any individual; and every person encharged with the custody of prisoners who receives any individual without an order from an authorized person, or who retains any one for more than 18 hours in prison, detention, or under arrest, without giving notice to the proper authority, or without transcribing in his book the written order, is guilty of a crime.
91. Within 72 hours of a decree of imprisonment the examination of the prisoner will be proceeded with, when he will be informed of the witnesses, declarations, and documents which are brought against him; lie may not be compelled to answer if he refuses to do so; but his silence is presumptive evidence against him.
92. After this examination the prisoner may not be prevented from holding communication with any one, and the trial takes place in public.
93. In criminal matters a person is forbidden to take oath as to his own action.
91. No authority may restrain, alter, or vary any of the guarantees contained in this Chapter.

CHAPTER XXIII.-General Dispositions.
95. Sovereignty is vested originally in the nation; its functions may not be arrogated by any portion of the nation, or by any individual; and those functions will only be exercised by the public officials to whom the authority is intrusted, in the manner and form prescribed by the Constitution.
96. Power may only be attained by Constitutional means ; the violation of this clause constitutes the crime of usurpation, and renders those guilty of it liable in their persons and effects; and the actions of usurping authorities, and those of the Constitutional authorities which are the result of compulsion, are void of
legality.
97. Officers of the army who are actually serving, and officials who exercise command or jurisdiction in any part of the electoral district or department, are not eligible for election as Senators or Representatives. Neither Senators nor Representatives may obtain offices of profit from the Government; but, in the recess of the Legislative Power, they may be appointed Ministers of State, Commissioners of the Interior, and Prefects, with liability to be compelled to accept the office in the two former cases. Sitting Members will vacate such appointments at the time of the meeting of the preparatory Committees (see § 37), and Substitutes when they are summoned by these Committees or by Chambers.
98. The President of the Republic is Supreme Chief of the Forces, and will in his own person alone exercise the functions attached to this office.
99. The public forces are essentially obedient, they are instituted for the common safety, and, when on active service, they are forbidden to deliberate.
100. No armed force may make requisitions, nor exact any kind of assistance, except on the express order of the civil authorities.
101. The police force may only be intrusted to the civil authorities in the manner prescribed by law.
302. The Ecclesiastical and Military Charter remains at present held in abeyance for the laws which may be passed on the question.
CHAPTER XXIV.- Concerning the Reform of the Constitution.
103. When the partial reform of the Constitution is considered
advisable, it may be effected in accordance with the following
rules:-
(1.) The proposal will be presented by two or more Members of
either of the Chambers, and will be read twice, with au interval of four days between each reading ;
(2.) Its discussion being voted, it will be submitted to a Committee, which will present its decision after six days;
(3.) The decision of the Committee will be read twice, on separate days ;
(4.) The reform, being approved by the majority of the Legislative Power, will be published by the press;
(5.) The reform will not receive legal force until it is sanctioned by the next Legislature. The sanction will be accorded by an absolute majority of votes, the ordinary procedure having been complied with.
104. An absolute reform of the Constitution may take place within eight years from the date of this ; and the necessity for such reform having been declared in accordance with the rules in the preceding clause, a Constituent Assembly will be summoned.
105. This present Constitution does not prevent Nicaragua joining in the formation of a National Government with the other sections of Central America; or in the formation of a federative compact, if such National Government cannot be carried into effect.
The adoption of the new system or compact which is celebrated will be ratified by two-thirds of the votes of Congress ; and by that fact the Constitution will be considered reformed, notwithstanding what is provided in this Chapter.
The Constitution of the 12th November, 1838, is hereby annulled,
and the laws which are not in opposition to the present Constitution
are retained in force.
Given in the Sessions Hall of the Constituent Assembly,
Managua, on the 19th day of August, of the year of Our Lord 1858,
the 37th of the Independence.
