CONSTITUTIONS S

of
NATIONS
SECOND EDITION The first compilation in the English language of the texts of the constitutions of the various nations of the world, together with summaries, annotations, bibliographies, and comparative tables

VOLUME III NICARAGUA to YUGOSLAVIA

by

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Formerly Ambassador of the United States of America to Australia, Secretary General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the San Francisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author of INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONSTHEIR CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS (Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague; and Justice House, New York, 1956), A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams, 1942), UNITED NATIONS GOVERNMENT (Putnams, 1945), and co-author of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

Copyright 1956 by Martinus Nijhoff , The Hague, Netherlands All rights reserved, including the right to translate or to reproduce this book or parts thereof in any form

PRINTED . IN THE NETHERLANDS

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA
November 1, 1950 Under the protection of God, We, the Representatives of the People of Nicaragua Meeting in Constituent Assembly Decree and Sanction the following POLITICAL CONSTITUTION
PRELIMINARY TITLE

Section I

The State
Art. 1. Nicaragua is a unitary, free, sovereign and independent State. Art. 2. The people are the source of all political power, and they exercise this power through the Government of the State. Art. 3. No person or meeting of persons can assume the representation of the people or their rights, or make petitions in their name. Violation constitutes a crime. Art. 4. The basis of the national territory is the uti possidetis juris of 1821. Art. 5. The national territory extends from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean and from the Republic of Honduras to the Republic of Costa Rica. It includes, in addition: the adjacent islands, the subsoil, the territorial waters, the continental shelf, the submerged lands, the air space and the stratosphere. Boundaries that are not yet determined shall be fixed by treaty and law. Art. 6. Sovereignty and the territory are indivisible and inalienable. Nevertheless, treaties may be concluded that tend toward union with one or several republics of Central America, or that have for their object the construction, improvement, operation and defense of an interoceanic canal through the national territory. Agreements may also be entered into that permit an American power to use temporarily a part of the national territory, exclusively for continental defense. In any case, such use is restricted to the time absolutely necessary. Art. 7. Spanish is the official language of the State. Art. 8. The State has no official religion. Art. 9. Nicaragua proscribes war of aggression and intervention in the affairs of other States. It accepts the principles of the Atlantic Charter, the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, and

the principles of the Inter-American Charter of Social Guarantees, approved by the Ninth International Conference of American States at Bogota. It recognizes the right of self-determination of peoples, arbitration as a method of solving international conflicts, and the other principles that constitute American International Law for the Organization of Peace. Section 2 The Government Art. 10. The Government of the State is republican and democraticrepresentative. Art. 11. The branches of the Government are the Legislative Power, the Executive Power, and the Judicial Power. Art. 12. In the organization of the Powers of the State, the principle of minority representation is established. Art. The branches of the Government collaborate harmoniously in the realization of the aims of the State. In the exercise of their particular functions, they are limited and independent. Art. 14. The branches of the Government and public officials do not have, even under the pretext of extraordinary circumstances, greater authority or power than is expressly granted to them by law. Every act to the contrary is void. Art. 15. For purposes of political organization the territory is divided into Departments, and these into Municipalities. There is also a National District. Art. 16. The city of Managua is the capital of the Republic. TITLE I
NATIONALITY

Art. 17. Nicaraguans are either native or naturalized. Art. 18. Natives are:
(1) Those born in the territory of Nicaragua. Children of aliens in the service of their Government are excepted ; (2) Children of a Nicaraguan father or mother, born abroad, when they have Nicaraguan nationality by the law of the place of birth, or having the right to choose they elect to be Nicaraguan ; or from the time they reside in Nicaragua. Such persons are Nicaraguan even for the purposes for which the Constitution or the laws require birth in national territory. (3) Infants of unknown parentage found in Nicaragua; (4) Natives of the other Republics of Central America, resident in Nicaragua, who personally declare to a competent authority their desire to be Nicaraguans, provided reciprocity exists in their country of origin and to the extent of such reciprocity.

Art. 19. Naturalized citizens are:
(1) Natives of Spain or of countries of America who reside more than two years in Nicaragua and who renounce their nationality. These conditions may be modified on the basis of reciprocity. (2) Other aliens married to Nicaraguans who having five years' residence in the country obtain a certificate of naturalization, renouncing

their nationality; and those with ten years' residence who make such renunciation. (3) An alien woman who marries a Nicaraguan if she resides in Nicaragua and states her desire to acquire Nicaraguan nationality ; (4) Immigrants who are a part of selected groups brought by the Government for agricultural or industrial purposes, after one year of residence. The law shall regulate this provision.

Art. 20. Neither marriage nor its dissolution shall affect the nationality of the spouses or of their children. Art. 21. Nicaraguan nationality is lost :
(1) By voluntary naturalization in a foreign country outside of Central America. A native Nicaraguan who loses it in this way shall recover his status of Nicaraguan if at any time he returns to Nicaragua; (2) By cancellation of the certificate of naturalization ; (3) By the voluntary absence of a naturalized Nicaraguan for more than five consecutive years, unless he shows that he has remained bound to the country;

Naturalized citizens lose their Nicaraguan nationality, and cannot recover it, when they propagate political doctrines that deny the concept of Patria, affect national sovereignty or tend to destroy the republican form of the Government. Art. 22. The law shall regulate matters pertaining to naturalization and to the manner of acquiring, losing and recovering it. Art. 23. Nicaraguans are bound to obey the laws, to defend the Patria, to contribute to its spiritual, moral and material support and aggrandizement, to render military service and by every other provision of law. They cannot seek to be indemnified by the State for injuries to their person or property caused by acts that were not performed by legitimate officials in the exercise of their functions. TITLE II
ALIENS

Art. 24. Aliens enjoy in Nicaragua all the civil rights and guarantees that are granted to Nicaraguans, with the restrictions established by law. They are bound to obey the laws, to respect the authorties, and to pay all the ordinary and extraordinary taxes to which Nicaraguans are subject. Art. 25. Aliens are prohibited from intervening, directly or indirectly, in the political activities of the country. For violating this provision, without prejudice to any liability there may be, they may be expelled without trial by the President of the Republic in Council of Ministers, unless the alien has a Nicaraguan spouse or legitimate or illegitimate children of a Nicaraguan mother, recognized prior to the act whose punishment is being considered. Art. 26. Aliens may not make claims or demand indemnification of any kind from the State except in the cases and in the manner in which Nicaraguans may do so. Art. 27. The rules and conditions for the expulsion of aliens from national territory shall be determined by law. Art. 28. Aliens may not resort to diplomatic channels except in case

of denial of justice. The fact that a decision is unfavorable to the claimant is not to be understood as a denial of justice. Those who violate this provision shall lose the right to reside in the country. Art. 29. Aliens may hold public office in the branches of Social Welfare and Artistic Planning (Asistencia Social y Ornato), or in those that require special technical knowledge, provided such offices do not involve authority or jurisdiction. Art. 30. Aliens may not be extradited for political crimes or for common crimes related thereto. The characteristics of each type are determined by law and treaties. TITLE III
CITIZENSHIP

Art. 31. The following are citizens: Nicaraguans of either sex over twenty-one years of age; those over eighteen who know how to read and write and are married; and those under eighteen who have an academic degree. Art. 32. The following are rights of the citizen: to take public office, to assemble, to associate and make petitions, all in accordance with the law. Women may be elected or appointed to public office, save in those cases expressly excepted by the Constitution. Art. 33. The following are obligations of the citizen:
(1) To register in the Electoral Registers ; (2) To vote in popular elections. Women shall exercise active suffrage in accordance with a law to be enacted on the subject, with the vote of two thirds of the total membership of each Chamber. (3) To perform council offices, unless lawfully excused.

These obligations and the penalties for their violation shall be determined by law. Art. 34. The rights of citizenship shall be suspended:
(1) For mental incapacity;, (2) For arrest or indictment for a serious crime : (3) For sentence for a serious crime 1 (4) For being a fraudulent debtor ; (5) For habitual vagrancy or drunkenness ; (6) For performing in Nicaragua, without due permission, employment of a foreign nation ; (7) For committing violence, coercion, corruption or fraud in elections, or for advocating or openly approving abstention from voting; (8) For ingratitude to parents or unjustified abandonment of legitimate or illegitimate recognized minor children ; (9) For giving aid against Nicaragua to another country or to an alien in any diplomatic claim, or before an international tribunal; (10) In other cases in which the suspension is imposed by law.

For suspension based on ground Nos. 1, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 10, a final judicial decision shall be required. Except for those who advocate or openly approve abstention from voting, in all the cases of this article the right of a citizen to vote is also suspended. The manner of recovering the exercise of citizenship shall be established by law. Art. 35. The popular vote is personal and undelegable, equal and direct TITLE IV
RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES

Art. 36. All Nicaraguans are equal before the law. In Nicaragua privilege by reason of birth, social condition or race, or for any other reason than capacity or virtue, is not recognized. Art. 37. The death penalty shall be applied only for the crime of high treason committed during a foreign war, for serious crimes of a purely military character and for atrocious crimes of murder, parricide, arson or robbery followed by death, and accompanied by the serious circumstances determined by law. Art. 38. The State guarantees individual liberty. It may not be restricted except in conformity with the laws. Art. 39. No one may be detained except upon the written order of a competent official. In case of flagrante delicto, the perpetrator may be arrested even by a private individual for delivery to the authority having the power to arrest. Any order of detention that does not emanate from a competent authority or that is issued without the legal formalities, is punishable. Art. 40. Every detained person shall be set free or delivered to the competent judge within twenty-four hours after his detention, not counting the time needed for travel. Art. 41. Any person who is detained or threatened with detention, or any other inhabitant of the Republic in his behalf, may petition a competent court, orally or in writing, to issue a writ of habeas corpus. Art. 42. Actions or omissions shall be punished only when they are declared punishable prior to their commission. Art. 43. Trial shall be public. The defendant, either personally or by attorney, shall have the right to intervene even in the summary proceedings (sumario) [preliminary investigation preparatory to trial]. Art. 44. Trial by jury is established for criminal cases involving more than correctional punishment. Art. 45. Any detention for investigation shall be either revoked or converted into imprisonment within ten days after the person detained has been placed at the disposal of the competent judicial authority, not counting the time needed for travel. Art. 46. No warrant of arrest shall issue except upon clear proof of the commission of a crime and upon at least a serious presumption of the identity of the perpetrator. Art. 47. Any restriction of personal liberty for purely civil obligations is prohibited, except for compulsion provided by law.

Art. 48. No one may be removed from his lawful judge, or taken to an exceptional jurisdiction, except as provided by a prior law. Art. 49. No one may be deprived of the right of defense. Art. 50. Punishment does not extend beyond the person guilty. Art. 51. Prisons are establishments for security, social defense, deterrence of crime, reeducation of the convict and of training for work. Every act of cruelty or torture against persons detained, under trial or being punished is prohibited. The violation of this guarantee constitutes a crime. Art. 52. No one may be forced to testify against himself in a criminal, correctional or police matter, or against his spouse or relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity. Art. 53. The State may not deliver up its nationals; but if extradition is requested they shall be tried for the common crime committed. Art. 54. The territory of Nicaragua shall be an asylum for every person persecuted for political reasons. If it is legally imperative to decree his expulsion, he may never be sent to the country where he is persecuted. Art. 55. There are no exceptional courts (No hay fuero atractivo). Art. 56. It is prohibited to enact laws of banishment, or that establish infamous punishment or punishment of more than thirty years' duration. Art. 57. In the event that a constitutional precept is violated to the detriment of any person, the order of a superior does not exempt from liability the agent who carries it out. Those in active military service are excepted from this provision, and with respect to them liability falls upon the superior who gave the order. Art. 58. The State guarantees the inviolability of the home. A person's dwelling may be entered only by authorized officials, in the following cases:
(1) In the actual pursuit of an offender; (2) To remove a criminal surprised in flagrante delicto; (3) Upon request made from within the dwelling, because of a crime being committed therein, or because of scandalous disorder requiring prompt action; (4) In case of fire, earthquake, flood, epidemic or analogous disaster; (5) For any statistical visit or inspection or for sanitary or hygienic work ; (6) To liberate a person being unlawfully held (secuestrada); (7) To obtain objects sought under writ when there is at least prima facie proof of the existence of said objects in the house to be entered ; (8) To enforce a decision, mandate or order legally issued ; (9) To apprehend a criminal for whose detention or arrest a warrant has been issued, when there is at least prima facie proof that he is concealed in the house to be entered.

In the last four cases entry may not be made except pursuant to a written order stating the grounds therefor, issued by a competent authority; and the consent of the head of the house shall be necessary if it is to be carried out between 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. Art. 59. Every person may circulate freely throughout the national territory and choose his residence and domicile therein without being compelled to change it, except by virtue of a final sentence or in those cases of infectious and contagious diseases that because of their extreme

gravity, defined and regulated by law, require the isolation of the patient to prevent contagion. Art. 60. The right to emigrate and immigrate is recognized, with the limitations established by law. Art. 61. No person is obliged to do what the law does not order, or prevented from doing what it does not prohibit. Art. 62. No international agreements may be concluded providing for the application to Nicaraguans of repressive laws such as the so-called black lists or proclaimed lists, issued in time of war by foreign countries. Neither may such laws affecting Nicaraguans be enacted in Nicaragua. Art. 63. Property is inviolable. No one may be deprived of his property except by judicial judgment, a general tax, or for public use or social interest according to law and upon prior payment in cash of just compensation. In the event of national war, of internal disturbance, or public calamity, the competent authorities may use private property to the extent required by the public good, leaving intact the right to subsequent compensation. Art. 64. The State guarantees and protects intellectual property, the rights of authors, inventors, and artists. The law shall regulate their exercise and duration. Art. 65. Property, by virtue of its social function, imposes obligations. The law shall determine their amount, nature, and extent. Art. 66. The right of property, as far as its exercise is concerned, is subject to the limitations imposed by the maintenance and progress of the social order. The law may impose obligations or easements of public use and may regulate questions of rent. Art. 67. Property, regardless of who may be its owner, is governed exclusively by the laws of the Republic, and is subject to public charges, in accordance with the Constitution and the laws. Art. 68. For reasons of public or social interest, the law may establish restrictions or prohibitions on the acquisition and transfer of certain kinds of property because of its nature, condition, or location in the territory. Art. 69. To guarantee the security and health of workers, the State may supervise industrial and mining enterprises. Art. 70. For purposes of general interest, the State may take part in the development and management of public-service enterprises, and may even nationalize them, in the latter case paying prior compensation. Art. 71. The State shall encourage the proper division of uncultivated large landholdings (latifundios), and will favor the preservation and spread of medium and small rural holdings. Art. 72. There is no confiscation of property, except against enemy nationals. When the latter have a Nicaraguan spouse or children, at least fifty percent of the property confiscated shall be applied to the benefit of the spouse and children. The proceeds from the property confiscated or the remaining amount, as the case may be, shall be applied in the first place to compensate for confiscations and other damages suffered by Nicaraguans at the hands of the enemy country.

The right to reclaim property that has been illegally confiscated is imprescriptible. Art. 73. In no case shall property be attached or taken over for reasons or crimes of a political character, except against enemy nationals; but when the latter have a Nicaraguan spouse or children, fifty percent of the income of the property attached or taken over shall be applied\ to the benefit of the spouse and children. In the cases contemplated by this and the previous article, offending officials shall be liable at all times, with their person and property, for the resulting damage. Art. 74. Any person may freely dispose of his property by any legal title. With respect to wills he will be bound by the provisions of law relating to the conjugal portion and allowance for support. Any entailment of property or endowment in favor of mortmain is prohibited, excepting only those established in order to constitute a family estate or in favor of social welfare establishments and official centers of instruction and culture. Art. 75. The family estate (patrimonio familiar) is established on the basis that it shall be inalienable, unattachable, and exempt from every public charge. This principle shall be regulated by law. Art. 76. Marriage, the family, and motherhood are under the protection and defence of the State. Art. 77. The education of children is a primary duty of parents. Art. 78. Parents without economic resources will be assisted by the right to claim help from the State to educate their offspring. Art. 79. The State shall procure the grant of special subsidies for families with numerous offspring. Art. 80. Parents have the same obligations toward children born out of wedlock as they do toward those born in wedlock. Art. 81. The right is established to investigate paternity according to the laws. Art. 82. The application of appropriations of any kind made according to law for purposes of social interest may not be varied or modified either by the law or by act of any official. The State shall control the management and investment of such appropriations. Art. 83. The cultural treasure of the Nation is under the protection and care of the State. Archeological, artistic, or historical wealth, regardless of its ownership, is part of that treasure, and the State, by law, may regulate its alienation and prohibit its exportation. Art. 84. Church buildings and their dependencies, devoted exclusively to the use of a religious faith, are exempt from taxation. The State may not order churches or objects of a religious nature to be used for other purposes. Churches, creeds, and religious institutions of any faith, that enjoy juridical personality, shall have the same rights as individuals with relation to their property. Art. 85. The State recognizes unrestricted freedom of trade, as well as of contract and industry.

The law shall set forth the requirements for their exercise and the corresponding guarantees. Art. 86. A State of Economic Emergency may be declared when required by the condition of the monetary economy, the protection of the external financial position, or the social stability and well-being of the Nation. Art. 87. Private monopolies and industrial or commercial corners of every kind are prohibited. Only in the exclusively national interest may the law establish State monopolies. Also prohibited is the granting of concessions amounting to the establishment of monopolies over the natural resources of the State. Art. 88. A law of general character shall lay down the basic conditions on which the State may grant concessions for the exploitation of natural resources. Art. 89. Every service should be fairly remunerated, unless it is one that is to be performed gratuitously by virtue of a law or of a sentence based on law. Art. 90. Usury is prohibited. The law fixing maximum interest rates for money is of a public order. The same law shall determine the penalty to be applied to offenders. Art. 91. Unions or associations may be established for any lawful purpose; but it is the function of the State to authorize corporate, moral, cultural, and economic organizations. Art. 92. The State guarantees freedom of labor in order that everyone may freely devote himself to the profession, trade, or calling that he believes best, provided it is not opposed to morality, health, or public security. Art. 93. Work is a social duty. Every inhabitant of the Republic has the obligation to apply his physical and intellectual energies in a way that will redound to the benefit of the community. Art. 94. The State shall make available to all inhabitants, with preference to nationals, the possibility of productive work. Art. 95. Workers are guaranteed;
(1) Moral and civic independence ; (2) Obligatory weekly rest ; (3) A maximum work day, fixed and regulated by law according to the nature of the work. Exempted from this limitation are managers, administrators, agents, and all those who work without the relationship of juridical subordination ; (4) An equal salary or wage for equal work performed with equal efficiency; (5) A minimum salary or wage which will assure them a minimum of well-being compatible with human dignity. This salary or wage shall be fixed in accordance with the conditions and needs of the various regions; (G) The payment of the salary or wage in legal tender, on a workday, at the place where the service is rendered, at intervals and in amounts provided in the contract or presumed from the work relationship, the said interval not to be greater than a week for laborers or greater than fifteen days for employees. In no case may payment be made in merchandise, scrip, tokens, or other symbols pretending to take the place of money;

(7) Compensation for accidents and occupational hazards in the cases and manner determined by law; (8) Special regulation of the work of women and minors ; (9) Medical assistance furnished by the social institutions that may be established for that purpose ; (10) For pregnant women, a rest of twenty days before and forty days after the birth. This rest shall be paid for by her employer, provided she has worked for him six consecutive months ; (11) Double pay for overtime and night work, except for night work that is performed periodically in shifts and with the limitations provided by law; (12) Prohibition of attachments, set-offs, or discounts with respect to the minimum salary, except those cases of attachment pursuant to a judgment for alimony or support; (13) Fifteen days' vacation, paid for in advance, after six months' continuous work for the same employer. Of this vacation, one week must be spent in rest, and the remaining time the worker or employee may continue working ; (14) Not to be discharged, when the contract is for an indefinite time, without one month's notice, unless the worker or employee has given some legal reason for his discharge. With respect to servants of the State and of its Agencies, they shall be governed by the provisions of the relevant Title of the Constitution and by special laws. As long as special laws do not regulate the applicability, nature, and extent of the guarantees set forth in paragraphs 7, 10, 13, and 14, such guarantees shall be fully applicable to day laborers and other farm workers ; (15) With respect to small industrial enterprises and domestic services the law shall regulate the applicability, nature, and extent of the guarantees set forth in paragraphs 7, 10, 13, and 14.

Art. 96. In labor matters, the following conditions shall be void and not binding on the contracting parties :
(1) Those that abridge or change the guarantees and rights that the Constitution and the laws of public order recognize for persons and for citizens ; (2) Those that involve a direct or indirect obligation to acquire consumer goods in particular shops or places ; (3) Those that provide that the contract is to last more than two years, provided this term is against the interest of the worker.

Art. 97. The State shall establish the National Institute of Social Security, for the benefit of workers to cover the risks of common diseases, disability, old age, and unemployment, by means of equitable contributions of the State, the beneficiary, and the employer. The appropriate regulations shall be adopted by law. Art. 98. Public education is the preferential duty of the State. Art. 99. The system of elementary, intermediate, and professional education remains under the technical inspection of the State. Art. 100. Elementary education is compulsory, and education paid for by the State and public corporations is gratuitous and secular. Art. 101. The State shall promote secondary and higher education as well as technical education of workers, and schools giving agricultural and industrial instruction. Art. 102. In all scholastic centers attention shall be given to the moral education of the child, and efforts shall be made to develop civic sentiments and personal and professional values.

Art. 103. The granting of academic and professional degrees is the exclusive prerogative of the State, which shall determine which professions require a degree for their practice, and the tests and requisites necessary for obtaining it. Degrees for professional practice may not be granted unless justified by academic approval of the appropriate courses. Art. 104. Nationals who have obtained academic degrees abroad shall be admitted and authorized to practice their profession by merely proving the authenticity of their degrees, and that such degrees have been obtained in universities recognized in the State where they function. Foreign professionals graduated abroad shall be admitted on the basis of possible reciprocity. The law shall regulate this provision. Art. 105. Degrees that do not correspond to a function, profession, or university grade shall not be granted or recognized. Art. 106. Academic freedom is guaranteed, provided it does not contravene public order or good customs. Art. 107. Teaching is a public career, and a teacher for the State is entitled to the following benefits:
(1) Permanent tenure of post; (2) Advancement and promotion in his career; (3) A minimum basic salary, in accordance with the dignity of his profession and the cost of living in the place where he is assigned ; (4) A proportional pension ; (5) Paid vacations; (6) Cultural and professional improvement at the cost of the State.

The rights and benefits pledged by this article shall be established and regulated by law, and shall include teachers of non-state schools, as far as numbers 3, 5, and 6 are concerned. These teachers shall have permanent tenure in their posts. The years of service of private-school teachers who enter the service of the State shall be taken into account for the purposes of numbers 2 and 4, as provided by law. Art. 108. The function of teaching is unrelated to any political tendency, and shall be governed by a democratic, patriotic and national spirit. Art. 109. Agricultural or industrial enterprises situated outside the radius of national schools, where there are more than thirty children of school age, shall be required to maintain a mixed elementary school. Art. 110. Freedom of conscience, the profession of any belief, and the practice of any faith not opposed to morality, good customs, or public order, are guaranteed. Exception is made of religious acts incompatible with the life or physical integrity of the human person. Acts that are contrary to public order or to morality carried out in connection with or under the pretext of the practice of religion are punishable by law. It is prohibited to pass any law protecting or restricting particular faiths. Art. 111. No one may be compelled to declare officially his religious beliefs, unless questioned for statistical purposes by order of law.

Art. 112. Public cemetries are secular. The ministers of any faith may perform their respective rites therein. Art. 113. No one may be molested or persecuted for his opinions. The State guarantees the free utterance and dissemination of thought, without prejudice to any liability that might arise for crimes and abuses committed in the exercise of such freedom, in the manner and in the cases determined by law. Art. 114. The importation of books, pamphlets, magazines, or periodicals, and their circulation and sale, shall be exempt from any kind of national or local taxes. Art. 115. The right to meet in the open and the right of public demonstration shall be regulated by the police laws. If the meeting is indoors, peaceful and without arms, no prior permit is required. Art. 116. The State prohibits the formation and activity of political parties organized on an international basis. Individuals who belong to them may not hold any public office. The only exceptions are parties devoted exclusively to the union of Central America. Art. 117. Every person has the right to address petitions or claims in writing to the Public Powers and the authorities. The latter are obligated to act on such petitions or claims and to make known the result. Art. 118. Only for reasons of general interest or public service and by virtue of a law may taxes be created, increased or their payment exempted wholly or in part. Art. 119. There are no personal privileges in the matter of taxes and other public charges. Taxes shall be imposed in proportion to the tax payers' capacity to pay, in a proportional or progressive form, and shall be collected in a manner determined by law. The tax system should be directed toward direct taxation. Art. 120. No public power or official may take action on cases pending before a competent authority. Art. 121. The opening of closed trials or cases is prohibited. In criminal cases, the defendant may be granted a review of a closed case when more than a correctional penalty has been imposed. Art. 122. The registry of civil status is in the exclusive jurisdiction of the State. Art. 123. No law has retroactive effect, except in criminal matters in favor of the defendant. Art. 124. The inviolability of correspondence in all its forms and of private papers and documents is guaranteed. They may never be opened, searched or intercepted, except by virtue of a previous law and by order of a competent authority. Art. 125. The correspondence, documents, and papers removed from post offices or from any other place, in violation of the law, shall have no legal effect whatever in a trial or elsewhere. Art. 126. The enumeration of rights, duties and guarantees, made in the Constitution, does not exclude others which are inherent in the human personality or which are derived from the established form of Government.

TITLE V
LEGISLATIVE POWER CHAPTER I

Its Organization and Powers

Art. 127. The Legislative Power is exercised by a Congress composed of two Chambers: the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. The former shall consist of forty-two members and the latter of sixteen, all elected, with their respective alternates, directly by the people in a single national election district. In the Chamber of Deputies twenty-eight Representatives shall belong to the majority party and fourteen to the minority; in the Senate twelve Senators shall belong to the majority and four to the minority. With respect to the Senate, the law may change the ratio of the minority in order that this shall always be, as nearly as possible, one third of the total membership. The Senate shall consist of the sixteen Senators elected directly by the people and the presidential candidate of the political party that attained second place in the popular vote. The ex-Presidents of the Republic who held office by direct popular vote shall also be members of the Senate as Life Senators. Art. 128. By its own right Congress shall meet regularly in the capital of the Republic on April 15 each year, and shall hold sixty sessions. This number of sessions may be prolonged by thirty more by resolution of both Chambers enacted mote proprio or at the request of the Executive Power. Art. 129. By convocation by the Executive Power and on the date indicated by him, the Congress shall meet in extraordinary sessions to deal solely with matters that the Executive Power submits to it, and shall close on the day indicated by him. Congress shall also meet in extraordinary session when so decided by absolute majority of its proprietary members, who shall make the convocation directly through the President of the Congress. Art. 130. If for any reason Congress is unable to meet on the dates indicated, it shall do so as soon as possible. Art. 131. The Chambers shall open and close their sessions simultaneously; and shall hold their sessions in such a way that the number held by either one shall not exceed the sessions held by the other by more than three, unless otherwise agreed upon by both. Any action taken in either Chamber, in contravention of this provision, is void. Art. 132. The President of the Republic in person or represented by the Minister of Government shall attend the opening of the regular sessions of Congress in United Chambers and shall present a Message concerning the acts of his administration. This formality is not essential for Congress to exercise its functions legitimately. Art. 133. The quorum for each Chamber to hold its meetings shall be the absolute majority of its full membership, and for Congress in United

Chambers, this shall be the sum of the quorums of each of the. Chambers. In fixing the quorum for the Senate, a Life Senator shall not be counted, but his presence may complete a quorum if necessary. Art. 134. A decision in either Chamber or in Congress in United Chambers requires the vote of an absolute majority of the members present. When some other majority is required, and the Constitution does not provide otherwise, this majority is determined by taking as a basis the full membership of each Chamber or of Congress in United Chambers, excluding a Life Senator. Art. 135. Five days in advance of the date fixed for an ordinary session, the Chambers shall follow a preparatory procedure in accordance with formalities specified in their respective regulations. Art. 136. If Congress is not installed on the day indicated due to lack of a quorum in either Chamber or in both, the representatives present, as a Preparatory Board, shall compel the absentees to attend, under the penalties established in their respective regulations. Art. 137. In the event of a temporary or permanent absence of a member of Congress, he shall be replaced by the respective alternate. If the latter is absent, the President of the Chamber shall call upon any other alternate of the same political party as the absentee, in accordance with the formalities specified in the respective regulations. Art. 138. Any meeting of members of Congress for the purpose of exercising the Legislative Power, held otherwise than in accordance with constitutional provisions, shall be illegal. Any action taken shall be void; and the representatives who take part in such deliberations commit a crime. Art. 139. The following may not be elected as members of the Legislative Power:
(1) Those having employment by Executive appointment within sixty days prior to the election ; (2) Officials in the judiciary; (3) Relatives of the President of the Republic within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity; (4) Those who administer or have administered or collected public funds, until their accounts have been settled ; (5) Those whose citizenship rights are suspended.

Art. 140. Deputies and Senators, from the time of their election, enjoy the following prerogatives :
(1) Personal immunity against indictment or trial for official or common offenses, except as provided by the Constitution ; (2) Not to be called into military service without their consent ; (3) Not to be subject to civil process for a period beginning thirty days prior to the regular sessions of Congress or from the decree convoking an extraordinary session, until fifteen days after either. Pending cases remain in suspense during the sessions ; (4) Not to be confined or deprived of liberty for any reason, even during a suspension of constitutional guarantees, unless prosecution for cause is declared in order; (5) Immunity from liability for opinions expressed or votes cast in (lie exercise of their duties.

Art. 141. The monthly remuneration to the Deputies and Senators may not be renounced, withheld, or attached. The State guarantees the financial protection of Deputies and Senators, both proprietary and alternates, during their term of office. In the event of death, protection by the State extends to the heirs. The law shall regulate this provision. Art. 142. The armed forces may not enter the premises of either Chamber or of Congress in United Chambers, except at the request of the presiding officials (mesa directiva). All armed forces are at the orders of the respective President. Art. 143. The sessions of the Chambers and of the Congress in United Chambers shall be public, except in those cases provided in their respective regulations. Art. 144. No proprietary Deputy or Senator from the time of his election, or Alternate holding office; may be appointed or elected to public office or employment paid from government or municipal funds, and the appointment shall have no legal effect, unless he first resigns as Representative. The following positions are excepted from the incompatibility covered by this article: Representatives of Nicaragua abroad in diplomatic, consular or other capacity, International Arbitration Courts, teaching positions, members of the boards of directors of university schools (Escuelas Facultativas), of Social Welfare Boards, members of technical or scientific commissions, hospital directors or physicians, lawyers or counselors in any Executive agency or in State Institutions. This provision likewise does not apply to the positions of President of the Republic, Ministers or Vice-Ministers of State, and members of theNational District. A Deputy or Senator, other than a Life Senator, elected or appointed to any such position is merely suspended from his functions as Representative, while holding office. Art. 145. A Deputy or Senator who is absent from the country for more than one year without giving notice in writing to the Chamber to which he belongs shall cease to hold office, unless occupying a position outside the Republic compatible with his legislative functions, in accordance with the preceding article. Art. 146. Deputies or Senators may not obtain personally, or through an intermediary, any concession from the Government, nor act as attorneys or agents against the State. Those who have powers of attorney from national or foreign individuals or companies shall have no voice or vote in debates relating to the interests they represent. Art. 147. Each of the Chambers has the following powers, without intervention by the other:
(1) To regulate the order of its meetings and all matters concerning its internal organization ; (2) To organize the offices under its authority in accordance with appropriate regulations ; (3) .To enforce attendance by its members ; (4) To request from the Executive a statement of the revenues and expenditures of any or all accounts and to report on any branch of the administration ; (5) To invite the other Chamber to take part in joint debate ;

(6) To appoint, according to regulations, committees to represent it in official acts ; (7) To act on the resignation submitted by any member.

Art. 148. The Congress in separate Chambers has the following powers:
(1) To enact, amend, interpret, and repeal the laws; (2) To create and suppress positions and fix salaries ; (3) To adopt any necessary measures to maintain the independence and security of the Republic; (4) To change, under extraordinary circumstances on serious grounds of public necessity, the seat of any or all government organs ; (5) To declare, and specify the duration of, a General State of Economic Emergency, whenever abnormal circumstances of the country so demand. Such a declaration of emergency shall suspend, if so ordered, any or all guarantees contained in Articles 85 and 123. The laws enacted by the Legislative Power on the basis of this declaration, or during its recess by the Executive Power, may not be in force to the detriment of stated constitutional guarantees longer than the time fixed for the Economic Emergency; (6) To take cognizance of the decree-laws issued by the Executive Power in the event of emergency or public necessity ; , (7) To enact temporarily for a period of not more than one year, rent control laws that alter freedom of contract, and such laws may be extended in case of necessity; (8) To approve or reject treaties entered into with foreign nations. The treaties referred to in Articles 5 and 6 require a two-thirds vote for approval; (9) To establish the national revenues and fix the expenditures of the Administration. Each legislative session shall vote the general budget of both. (10) To specify the functions of employees of the Republic and indicate the territorial jurisdictions in which they are to be exercised ; (11) To impose taxes; (12) To recognize the National Debt and arrange for service thereon; (13) To fix the monetary unit and specifications of the national currency, according to recommendations of the respective technical agency ; (14) To fix the system of weights and measures ; (15) To declare war or authorize the Executive so to do ; (16) To authorize the departure of troops outside Nicaragua and to permit or refuse the transit of foreign troops through territory of the Republic ; In the event of war or as an international courtesy, when Congress is not in session, the Executive Power shall have this authority ; (17) To approve, modify or disapprove contracts made by the Executive relative to loans, land settlement, navigation and other works of general utility which involve temporary privileges permitted by the Constitution or which engage or dispose of property of the Nation, or whenever they involve funds not voted in the Budget ; (18) To grant or refuse permission to Nicaraguans to accept positions with foreign countries if they are to exercise them in Nicaragua. Such permission is not necessary in the case of countries of Central America; (19) To authorize the organization of Banks of Issue and the establishment of government pawnshops (montepios); (20) To establish by a three-fourths vote the Coat of Arms, the Flag of the Republic and the National Hymn ; (21) To legalize the extraordinary or supplementary credits authorized by the President of the Republic in Council of Ministers ; (22) To grant amnesties and pardons for political offenses.

In no case may pardons include civil liabilities toward private individuals ; (23) To commute the death penalty to the immediately lesser punishment; (24) To decree a prolongation of its sessions in accordance with Article 128.

Art. 149. At the initiative of the Executive Power, the Congress in separate Chambers also has the following powers:
(1) To authorize awards, indemnities, pensions, prizes and honors, without prejudice to the authority that the President of the Republic holds directly as Chief of the armed forces ; (2) To grant awards and extend temporary privileges permitted by the Constitution to authors and inventors of works of general utility and to persons who have introduced new industries or improved existing ones ; (3) To grant subsidies or premiums for objects of public utility that are intended to establish new industries or stimulate agriculture ; (4) To decree the alienation or lease of national property and its application to public uses, or to authorize the Executive to do so on a suitable basis ; (5) To confer the rank of General of Division ; (6) To grant pardons, reductions or commutations of penalties for common offenses, on the basis of favorable recommendation by the Supreme Court of Justice ; (7) To grant permission to the President of the Republic to leave the country; (8) To authorize loans ; (9) To open and close ports and establish maritime and inland custom houses, or to enact the rules by which the Executive may do so.

Art. 150. The powers of the Legislative Power may not be delegated, excepting legislation in the fields of Development, Police, Social Welfare Public Health, War, Public Education, Agriculture and Labor, Finances and Economy which may be delegated to the Executive Power to be exercised during the adjournment of Congress. The power delegated to legislate on Finances does not include the imposition of taxes nor of changing items in the General Budget of Expenditures; however, the President of the Republic, in Council of Ministers, may impose general taxes or contributions whenever a civil war or international war in which the Republic is participating breaks out, the matter being reported to Congress at its next meeting.
CHAPTER II

Chamber of Deputies
Art. 151. To be elected Deputy a person must be a native-born Nicaraguan layman, a citizen in the exercise of his rights and over twentyfive years of age. Art. 152. The term of office of the Deputies is six years. Art. 153. It is an exclusive power of the Chamber of Deputies to examine the impeachments presented by its own members, or by private individuals, against the President of the Republic, Deputies, Senators, Magistrates of the Courts of Justice, Ministers and Vice-Ministers of State, Diplomatic Agents and the President of the Tribunal of Accounts; and if

the charge appears well-founded, to submit the corresponding impeachment to the Senate. Impeachment of the aforementioned officials by the Chamber of Deputies requires an affirmative vote of two thirds of its members. Impeachment of the officials mentioned for either official or common offenses committed during their term of office must still be submitted to the Chamber of Deputies even if the accused has ceased to hold office. With respect to official offenses the right to action terminates, one year after the official has ceased to hold office.
CHAPTER III

The Senate

Art. 154. To be elected Senator a person must be a native-born Nicaraguan layman, a citizen in the exercise of his rights, and over thirty-five years of age. Art. 155. The term of office of Senators chosen by popular election is six years. The same period applies to the presidential candidate of the minority party. Art. 156. The Senate has the exclusive power to try impeachments submitted by the Chamber of Deputies against the officials referred to in Article 153, by a hearing of the accused. If the latter does not appear he shall be tried in absentia. Art. 157. When the Senate tries the officials impeached by the Deputies, the following rules shall be observed :
(1) If the impeachment refers to offenses committed while holding office, and the Senate acting as a jury finds the party guilty, the penalty imposed shall be removal from office and disqualification from holding public office for the time specified by law, without prejudice to a criminal trial of the guilty party before the Supreme Court of Justice, if his acts show liability meriting other punishment ; (2) If the impeachment refers to common offenses, the Senate shall limit itself to a statement of whether or not there are grounds for prosecution, and if its finding is affirmative, it shall place the accused at the disposition of the Supreme Court of Justice. If the Senate declares that there are no grounds for prosecution, the official shall be restored to office.

Art. 158. The incompatibilities mentioned in Article 144 shall not apply to Life Senators. The holding of any public office declared incompatible, shall merely suspend the right to serve as a Life Senator during the time he occupies the other position.
CHAPTER IV

Congress in United Chambers

Art. 159. Congress in United Chambers shall be presided over alternately by the Presidents of the two Chambers. Art. 160. Congress in United Chambers has the following powers :
(1) To regulate the order of business of its meetings and all matters concerning its internal' organization ; (2) To proclaim the election of the President of the Republic in ac-

cordance with the decision of the Council on National Elections, and receive from him the constitutional oath ; (3) To elect from its membership, at its last regular or special session, three Designates to replace the President of the Republic in the event of his permanent or temporary inability to serve ; The presiding officials shall transmit to the President of the Republic the list of Designates to be signed and sealed by him and retained in his possession ; (4) To elect one of its members who is to serve as President of the Republic if the permanent or temporary disability of the President occurs while Congress is meeting in regular or special session or in the cases mentioned in the second paragraph of Article 188 and Article 189 ; (5) To elect the Magistrates of the Courts of Justice, as well as the President and lawyer members of the Superior Tribunal of Labor with their respective alternates ; (6) To accept the resignations of the President or President-elect of the Republic, the Designates, the Magistrates of the Courts of Justice and the members whom its elects to the Superior Tribunal of Labor; (7) To receive the constitutional oath from the official it elects, or to delegate this power; (8) To take cognizance of a veto by the Executive Power ; (9) To act on partial amendments to the Constitution and to constitutional laws ; (10) To act on the report submitted by the Executive Power concerning measures taken during the suspension of constitutional guarantees.

CHAPTER V

Enactment of Laws Art. 161. The Deputies and the Executive Power have the right of initiative in the enactment of laws and resolutions or legislative declarations. In matters within their province, the Judicial Power represented by the Supreme Court of Justice, and the National Council on Elections, also have such initiative. Art. 162. Every proposed bill shall be submitted to the Chamber of Deputies. If the latter decides to consider it, it shall be sent to a Reporting Committee (Comision Dictaminadora) and submitted to first and second readings at different sessions. Art. 163. The procedure of second reading may be dispensed with for any bill if so determined by a majority of two thirds of the members present in the Chamber. Art. 164. A bill, as approved by the Chamber of Deputies, shall be sent to the Senate. The latter shall refer it to a Reporting Committee (Comision Dictaminadora) and shall discuss it in first and second readings at different sessions. If approved, the bill shall be sent to the Executive. Art. 165. If the Senate adds to or amends the bill, it shall be returned to the Deputies which shall pass upon the additions or amendments in a single discussion; and if the latter are approved, it shall return the bill to the Senate to be sent to the Executive Power. Art. 166. If the additions or amendments are not approved by the Chamber of Deputies, the bill is to be returned to the Senate. If the latter insists on retaining them by a two-thirds majority vote, the bill

is considered rejected. If the additions or amendments do not receive this majority, the bill is to be returned to the Chamber of Deputies. If the latter confirms its bill by a two-thirds vote it shall be considered approved; if that majority is not obtained, it shall be considered rejected. For the decisions mentioned in this article there shall be a single discussion. Art. 167. Drafts of Codes may be considered and approved as a whole by decision of a Special Committee of five members in each Chamber. Art. 168. If one Chamber desires to explain to the other its views on any legislative matter, it shall do so through a committee that shall have the right to participate in the discussions on the subject. In the event of a discrepancy in the views of the two Chambers, they may designate joint committees, composed of three Deputies and two Senators appointed by their respective Chambers to decide on the manner of settling the differences. Art. 169. Whenever the Executive Power submits a proposal to the Congress as an urgent matter, each Chamber must act thereon within a period of ten days. Art. 170. In the measures approved by Congress the following form shall be used : "The National Congress of the Republic of Nicaragua in United Chambers, Decrees, Resolves or Declares" : (Here follows the matter decreed, resolved or declared). Done in the Hall of Sessions of the Congress in United Chambers". (Place and date, followed by the signatures of the President and Secretaries of the Congress in United Chambers). When issued by separate Chambers: "The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate of the Republic of Nicaragua, Decree, Resolve or Declare" : (here follows the matter decreed, resolved or declard). "Done in the Hall of Sessions of the Chamber of Deputies". (Place and date, followed by the signatures of the President and Secretaries of the Chamber of Deputies.) "To the Executive Power, Senate Chamber". (Place and date, followed by the signatures of the President and Secretaries of the Senate.) Art. 171. Every measure shall be sent to the Executive Power from the Senate within three days after approval, so that it may be sanctioned and ordered published within ten days after receipt, or that it may be ordered published immediately in the cases provided in Article 176. Art. 172. If the President of the Republic, in Council of Ministers, makes use of the veto power, he must return the bill to the Congress through the Senate within ten days after receipt, explaining the grounds on which his veto is based. If he offers no objection within the stated period, the bill is considered as approved and must be published as law. Art. 173. If the Senate receives the veto of a bill, it shall immediately propose a meeting of Congress in United Chambers to consider it. If the Congress ratifies the bill by a two-thirds vote, it shall be sent again to the Executive with these words: "Constitutionally ratified"; and the Executive Power shall order it published without delay. Art. 174. When the Executive Power receives a passed bill within ten days prior to the adjournment of Congress or after adjournment, there is

reserved to him the power to veto it within the first ten days of the next regular sessions. Art. 175. The President of the Congress shall order publication in any newspaper of the capital, any laws or other acts of Congress that have not been published by the Executive Power within ten days following their receipt. Art. 176. The following do not require approval by the Executive Power :
(1) The Budget law; (2) The decrees, resolutions or declarations passed by Congress in United Chambers ; (3) The resolutions issued by the Chambers in accordance with Articles 153 and 157; (4) The regulations enacted by the Chambers for their internal organization ; (5) Provision for installation or adjournment, transfer of its seat to another place and the suspension or prolongation of its sessions.

Art. 177. Bills rejected in one legislative session may be resubmitted only in the regular sessions of the following year. Art. 178. Matters left pending in one legislative session shall be continued in the following session if they were approved in the first discussion by the Chamber of Deputies or if there was an opinion pending from the Supreme Court of Justice and the period had not expired at the time of adjournment. Art. 179. Whenever a bill not initiated by the Supreme Court of Justice is for the purpose of enacting, amending or repealing provisions relating to the Civil, Penal, Commercial, Mining, Civil Procedure or Penal Procedure Codes, these may not be discussed without an opinion from that Court which must be rendered within the period indicated by the Chamber of Deputies, taking into account the extent, importance or urgency of the bill, but this period may not be less than fifteen days. When this period has expired, it may proceed with discussion of the bill even without an opinion from the Supreme Court. TITLE VI
EXECUTIVE POWER CHAPTER

I

Organization Art. 180.. The Executive Power shall be exercised by a citizen with the title of President of the Republic, who shall act with his Ministers, separately or in Council, except in those cases in which he may act alone. Art. 181. The President of the Republic shall be elected by direct popular vote. A vacancy shall be filled by Congress. Art. 182. The President of the Republic shall enjoy the immunities and prerogatives that are granted by the Constitution and shall be responsible for his acts to the National Congress. Art. 183. The qualifications to be elected President of the Republic are the following: to be a native Nicaraguan and child of a father or mother

born in Nicaragua, a citizen in the exercise of his rights, over twentyfive years of age, a layman, having resided more than five years in the country and never having renounced his citizenship at any time. Art. 184. The term of the President of the Republic is six years and shall begin and end on the first of May; when the term ends on that date the outgoing President shall transfer the office to the President of the Congress for the sole purpose that the latter shall give possession to the incoming President or the person called upon to replace him. If for any reason the outgoing President does not attend, the President of the Congres shall give possession to the President-elect or the person who is to replace him. In any event, the person exercising the Presidency of the Republic shall cease to hold office on the day his term ends. Art. 185. The President-elect shall take possession before Congress in United Chambers, in a formal session, and shall take the oath in these words: "I solemnly promise on my honor faithfully to hold the office of President of the Republic that the people have entrusted to me, to defend the integrity and independence of the Nation and to comply with and enforce the Constitution and laws of the Republic". Art. 186. The person who has exercised the Presidency of the Republic in the preceding term may not be elected President for the following term. Likewise the following may not be elected President of the Republic:
(1) A person who has exercised the Presidency of the Republic temporarily during any portion of the last six months of the term ; (2) Relatives of the President of the Republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity ; (3) A military person who has been in active service within six months prior to the election (4) Ministers of State who do not leave office within six months prior to the election; (5) Persons who have held the position of Magistrate of the Courts during any portion of the six months prior to the date of the election; (6) The leader and chiefs of a coup d'tat revolution or other armed movement, or their relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity, for the period in which the constitutional regime was interrupted and the following term ; (7) Anyone who has been a Minister of State or held high military rank in a de facto government which interrupted the constitutional regime, or their relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity, for the same periods indicated in the preceding paragraph.

Art. 187. The President of the Republic may leave the country while holding office only with the permission of Congress and for a period not to exceed three months. He may also leave the country for such period without the permission of Congress, provided he transfers the exercise of the Presidency to the person called upon to replace him; but if his absence lasts more than three months, he shall thereby lose his office. In no case may a President of the Republic against whom an impeachment is pending before the Senate leave the country. Ex-presidents who are in similar circumstances likewise may not leave the country. Art. 188. In the event the President of the Republic is unable to serve, functions shall be exercised by the appointed Designate. If the Presi-

dent has not appointed a Designate or the latter is also unable to serve, the Presidency of the Republic shall be assumed by the President of the Congress, who shall immediately convoke an extraordinary session of Congress for the purpose of electing a successor from among its membership. If at the time of a vacancy in the Presidency of the Republic, Congress is meeting in regular or extraordinary session, the President of the Congress shall assume the Presidency of the Republic in order to turn over the office to the member whom Congress elects. If the inability of the President to serve is permanent, the person called upon to replace him shall complete the presidential term. Art. 189. In the event of a temporary or permanent inability to serve or an indefinite impediment of the President-elect, the new Congress shall elect among its members the person who shall hold the office, temporarily or permanently as the case may be.
CHAPTER II

Powers and Duties of the Executive Power

Art. 190. The government and administration of the State and the supreme command of all armed forces of the Nation are entrusted to the President of the Republic. His authority extends over all matters which have for their purpose the preservation of internal order and the external security of the Republic. Art. 191. The President of the Republic has the following duties in relation to the Legislative Power:
(1) To attend the opening of regular sessions of Congress and present to it a message concerning the acts of his administration ; (2) To attend the Chambers whenever he deems it desirable to explain matters relating to the public administration and to participate in meetings with a voice but without a vote ; (3) To convoke the Legislative Power in extraordinary sessions ; (4) To send to the Chamber of Deputies, not later than June first of each year, the draft General Budget of Revenues and Expenditures ; (5) To present to the Chamber of Deputies, through the intermediary of the respective Ministries, within one month after Congress is installed the annual record or report of each branch of the Administration ; (6) To present, through the Ministers of State, proposals for laws and to submit such treaties and contracts as require legislative approval ; (7) To sanction and publish the legislative acts, or use his veto power in accordance with the Constitution ; (8) To publish immediately those legislative measures that do not require the sanction of the Executive ; (9) To enact laws during adjournment of Congress, by use of his delegated legislative power ; (10) To enact decree-laws, during adjournment of Congress, and in Council of Ministers, in cases of public emergency or necessity, and submit these to Congress during the first fifteen days of its next regular sessions ; (11) To propose pardons and reductions or commutations of punishments ; (12) To grant, during adjournment of Congress, amnesties and pardons for political offenses. In no case may such pardons include civil liabilities of the beneficiaries toward private individuals.

This power may not be exercised with respect to his Ministers or ViceMinisters of State. Art. 192. The form to be used in publishing the laws is as follows: "The President of the Republic, to its inhabitants, Be it known: That the Congress has ordered the following: (here follow the text and signatures). Therefore: Let it be executed". In the case of legislative acts that do not require the sanction of the Executive, the form to be used for publication is as follows: "The President of the Republic, to its inhabitants, Be it known: That the Congress has ordered the following: (here follow the text and signatures). Therefore: Let it be published". Art. 193. The President of the Republic has the following duties in relation to the Judicial Power:
(1) To oversee the official conduct of the members of the Judicial Power and order the Supreme Court of Justice, when appropriate and according to law, to repress acts that are contrary to the proper exercise of judicial duties ; or the Public Ministry, when there is sufficient evidence, to initiate appropriate prosecution or disciplinary measures in a competent court ; (2) To render such assistance as may be necessary to judicial officials to carry out their decisions and rulings ; (3) To suspend, if deemed appropriate, execution of the death penalty on the petition of the guilty party or his representative, provided it is accompanied by a copy of the petition for commutation of sentence made before the Congress ; (4) To supervise the proper disbursement of the budget of the Judicial Power ;

Art. 194. The President of the Republic has the following powers and duties as Supreme Chief of the armed forces:
(1) To command the armed forces of all classes, organize them, distribute them and utilize them in conformity with the law; (2) To direct wartime operations as Supreme Chief ; (3) To levy the forces necessary to repel invasions or put down rebellions ; (4) To discharge and demobilize any special army when an emergency has passed ; (5) To grant pensions to which military personnel are entitled if disabled in service ; (6) To grant retirement to military personnel according to law; (7) To grant honors and rewards to military persons who have distinguished themselves in service ; (8) To confer military ranks in time of peace up to that of Brigadier General inclusive, and in warfare, to that of General of Division, giving notice of the latter to Congress; (9) In time of peace to propose for the rank of General of Division the military officer who in his opinion merits this rank.

Art. 195. The President of the Republic has the following powers and duties as the supreme administrative authority:
(1) To protect the independence and honor of the Nation and the integrity of its territory; (2) To comply with and enforce the Constitution and the laws ; (3) To regulate the laws without transgressing or perverting them ; ed with this same restriction, to issue pertinent decrees, resolutions and i instructions ; (4) To appoint and remove freely the Ministers and Vice-Ministers of StaendohrmplysfteExcuivPowr,asltmke oretqhuidapfmnbylws;

(5) To conduct foreign relations, appoint Diplomatic and Consular Agents of the Republic, receive Diplomatic Agents and admit Consuls of other Nations ; (6) To declare war with the authorization of Congress, or without it if it is immediately necessary to repel a foreign aggression ; (7) To make treaties of peace, giving due notice to Congress at its next sessions ; (8) To sign treaties and any other diplomatic negotiations and to ratify them after approval by the Legislative Power ; (9) To permit or refuse, during adjournment of Congress, the passage of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic ; (10) To see that the revenues of the State are collected and disbursed according to law; (11) To grant naturalization certificates, and cancel them for justifiable reasons ; (12) To exercise, according to law, due supervision and inspection of the credit institutions and other institutions or organizations that operate with money or other property of the public ; (13) To direct, regulate and inspect public education, encourage education of the people and combat illiteracy; (14) To supervise the national currency; (15) To ensure the uniformity of weights and measures ; (16) To sign contracts, in accordance with the Constitution and the laws, for the rendering of services and the execution of public works and for the general interest; (17) To grant patents to protect literary property and useful inventions or discoveries, according to law; (18) To indicate, during adjournment of Congress, the place to which the organs of Government shall be temporarily transferred, whenever . there are serious reasons for this step ; (19) To requalify, according to law, citizens whose rights have been suspended ; (20) To open or close ports, create, transfer, or suppress custom houses, in accordance with rules enacted by Congress ; (21) To nationalize and register vessels ; (22) To issue regulations governing his powers ; (23) To exercise the right of inspection and supervision of institutions of public use so that their property and income may be conserved and properly applied and that the desires of the founders may be substantially carried out; (24) To grant, for outstanding merit, the decorations, medals, diplomas and prizes that are established by law; (25) To promote immigration ; (26) To grant leaves and retirements according to law; (27) To exercise the other functions of government and administration that the laws entrust to him.

Art. 196. The President of the Republic, whenever in his opinion the public tranquillity is threatened, may order the detention of persons presumed responsible, interrogate them and hold them in custody for ten days, within which time they must be freed or turned over to a competent court; but if in the opinion of the Chief of State it is necessary to confine such persons, he may order their confinement, in Council of Ministers. The persons so detained may not be held in barracks or mingled with common criminals. Art. 197. The President of the Republic, in Council of Ministers, may suspend or restrict, in all or a part of the national territory, the exercise of constitutional guarantees, in any of the following cases:

(a) When the Republic becomes involved in an international or civil war ; (b) When there is danger that either of these may occur; (c) In case of epidemic, earthquake or other public disaster; (d) Whenever due to any other circumstance it is required for the protection, peace, or security of the Nation or of its institutions or form of government.

The President of the Republic and the Ministers of State shall be held responsible whenever the suspension or restriction of the constitutional guarantees is declared when none of the above-mentioned cases have occurred; and they shall be held responsible, together with all other officials, for any abuse committed during a period of suspension or restriction. The decree of suspension or restriction shall contain:
(a) The grounds on which it is based ; (b) Specification of the guarantee or guarantees that are restricted or suspended ; (c) The territory affected by the suspension or restriction.

Neither suspension nor restriction of guarantees shall in any way affect the functioning of the organs of Government, and their members shall always retain the prerogatives granted by law. In the event of foreign war, the Executive shall convoke Congress in the same decree in which the exercise of constitutional guarantees is suspended or restricted, to meet within the next thirty days; and if he fails to convoke it, Congress may meet in its own right. In no case may the decree of suspension or restriction affect the following guarantees :
(a) The inviolability of human life ; (b) The prohibition against trials by judges other than those designated by law; (c) The prohibition against acts of cruelty or torture and infamous punishments ; (d) The prohibition against retroactive or confiscatory laws ; (e) The prohibition against imposing taxes.

If an international or civil war breaks out, the President in Council of Ministers may impose taxes of a general nature. The decree of suspension of guarantees shall be repealed upon the cessation of the causes for which it was invoked and the Executive Power must render to Congress in United Chamber, without delay, an account of the measures taken.
CHAPTER III

Ministers of State Art. 198. For the conduct of business corresponding to the Execu Power there shall be Ministers of State. The law shall specify their number, their titles and the departments of the Administration corresponding to each. I n the branches of Foreign Affairs, Economy, and Finances and Public Credit there shall be Advisory Agencies (Organismos Asesores) in which Ilia minority shall participate. The organization and powers of these Agshalebendtcrmiinsyw.

Art. 199. The Ministers of State must have the following qualifications: be citizens in the exercise of their rights, native Nicaraguans, over twentyfive years of age and never have been sentenced to serious punishment (pena grave). They shall be in charge, under the authority of the President of the Republic, of the direction and management of the public services assigned to the respective administrative department. Art. 200. The decrees, orders and rulings of the President of the Republic must be countersigned by the Ministers of State of the respective departments, with the exception of those orders that refer to the appointment or removal of his Ministers or Vice-Ministers of State. Art. 201. Each Minister of State shall be personally responsible for the acts that he signs or authorizes, and jointly and severally for those signed or agreed to with the President of the Republic or with the other Ministers of State. Art. 202. The Ministers of State, within one month after Congress is installed in regular session, shall render an account in printed reports of action they have taken and believe desirable to be taken in their respective departments. They shall also submit an accounting of the funds they have handled. Art. 203. The Ministers of State shall give to Congress any information requested relative to the business of their respective departments, in either written or oral form. They may also be interpellated if so resolved by an absolute majority of the corresponding Chamber. In the latter case, as well as for oral reports, the Ministers may demand a secret session whenever in their opinion the confidential nature of the matter to be discussed should be maintained. Art. 204. The Ministers of State have the right to speak in the Chambers and to participate in discussions relating to their departments, with a voice but no vote. Art. 205. The Ministers of State, in a meeting presided over by the Chief of the Executive Power, form the Council of Ministers. Its organization and powers are determined by the Constitution and the laws. Art. 206. The following may not be Ministers of State: (1) Contractors for public works or services;
(2) Persons who as a result of such contracts have claims in their own interest pending against the Public Treasury; (3) Persons who have collected or administered public funds, until their accounts have been audited ; (4) Debtors to the Government ; (5) Relatives of the President of the Republic, within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity.

Art. 207. There shall be as many Vice-Ministers of State as the law may determine. Art. 208. The Vice-Ministers of State must meet the same qualifications and conditions as the Ministers. They shall collaborate in their respective departments, subordinate to the Ministers of State, and shall act for them when the latter are unable to serve.

TITLE VII
JUDICIAL POWER SOLE CHAPTER

Organization and Powers

Art. 209. Justice is administered in the name of the Republic by the Judicial Power. This power shall be exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice, the Courts of Appeals, the Superior Labor Court, and the judges and other officials that the Constitution and the laws may specify. Art. 210. The Supreme Court of Justice and the Superior Labor Court shall sit in the capital of the Republic. Art. 211. There shall be Courts of Appeals (Cortes de Apelaciones) sitting in the cities of Bluefields, Granada Leon, Masaya and Matagalpa. At the initiative of the Supreme Court of Justice Congress may, by a two-thirds majority of votes, establish other Courts of Appeals or abolish any of those in existence. New Courts of Appeals shall have representation of the minority party as provided for those now existing. Art. 212. There shall be a Superior Labor Court (Tribunal Superior del Trabajo) which shall consist of a President, two lawyer members who meet the same qualifications as required to be a District Judge, one representative of employers and one for workers, all of whom shall have their respective alternates in case of impediment, absence or other reason. There shall also be a Labor Judge (Juez de Trabajo) and an alternate in those places specified by law. Art. 213. There shall be District Courts (Juzgados de Distrito) in the capital cities of the Departments and in those cities where they are already established by law; and Local Courts (Juzgados Locales) in those towns organized as a Municipality. At the initiative of the Supreme Court of Justice, Congress may establish or abolish District Courts in cities that are not Department capitals and Local Courts in towns that are not Municipalities. Art. 214. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of seven Magistrates, five of whom are Proprietary and two Alternates. Two Proprietary Magistrates and one Alternate shall belong to the minority party. Art. 215. The Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice must be males not less than thirty-five years of age nor more than seventy on the day of their election, native Nicaraguans, laymen, citizens in the exercise of their rights and lawyers of well-known education and integrity, which tpheryoafvscidnwetormhanysve held the position of judge (Magistrado). Art, 216. To be elected a Magistrate of the Courts of Appeals or President of the Superior Labor Court it is required to be not less than ay years of age nor more than seventy on the day of election, to have practiced the profession of lawyer with credit for more than five years, and to meet the other requirements to be a Magistrate of the Supreme
Court..

ART. 217. The Courts of Appeals of Leon, Masaya, and Granada

shall consist of six Magistrates, three for the Civil Section and three for the Criminal Section; and those of Matagalpa and Bluefields shall have five Magistrates, two for each Section and a common President. In each Section of the Courts of Appeals there shall be one Magistrate belonging to the minority party; but in these Courts at Bluefields and Matagalpa, the President of the Court shall always belong to the majority party. Art. 218. Congress, at the initiative of the Supreme Court of Justice, may increase the number of Magistrates of the Courts, endeavoring to maintain, as nearly as possible, a one-third representation for the minority party. Art. 219. On the Superior Labor Court one member, and his alternate, shall belong to the minority. Art. 220. The Representative of employers and the Representative of workers on the Superior Labor Court, the District Judges, the Local Judges and the Labor Judges, shall be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 221. The District Judges must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, over twenty-five years of age and lawyers of well-known integrity who have practiced their profession or held the position of Judge (Juez) or Secretary of a Court (Secretario de Juzgado) for one year. Art. 222. The Local Judges must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, of adult age, preferentially lawyers or students of the career of law, who have passed their second year or have a knowledge of law. Where there is a School of Law, they must necessarily be students of this career who have passed their second year. The law shall regulate the exercise of these positions when they are held by lawyers. Art. 223. The term of office of officials of the Judicial Power shall begin on May first and shall be six years for Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice; four years for those on the Courts of Appeals; two years for District Judges and members of the Superior Labor Court; and one year for Local Judges and Labor Judges. All members of the Judicial Power may be reelected or newly appointed for successive periods. Art. 224. The Secretaries of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the Superior Labor Court, and of the Courts of Appeals shall have the same qualifications as are required of a District Judge or shall have held the position of secretary in the aforementioned courts for more than two years. Art. 225. The Magistrates of the Courts of Justice and the President of the Superior Labor Court shall enjoy the same immunities and prerogatives as members of Congress, excepting those enumerated in sections 3) and 5) of article 140. Art. 226. Persons related within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity may not be Magistrates of the same Court nor both be members of the Superior Labor Court. If two or more persons related within those degrees are elected, the one receiving the lower number of votes shall be replaced, and in case of a tie vote, the one who received his law degree most recently. -

Art. 227. Officials of the Judicial Power may not hold any position by popular election, or by appointment of the Executive Power or by any other administrative authority or corporate body. Excepted from this provision are teaching positions, members of Commissions to Codify or Amend the Laws and members of International Arbitration Tribunals. Acceptance of an appointment prohibited by this article shall mean loss of the judicial office. Art. 228. The President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be the President of the Judicial Power. His annual appointment is a duty of the Supreme Court. Art. 229. The Supreme Court of Justice has the following powers, in addition to those already stated:
(1) To enact its Internal Regulations and approve those of the Courts of Appeals ; (2) To appoint and remove freely employees immediately subordinate to it ; (3) To exercise directive, correctional and financial supervision of the other Tribunals and Courts of the Nation ; (4) To appoint the Public Registrars, Court Physicians, and other officials or employees specified by law; (5) To install, on its own or delegated authority, all officials and employees that it appoints ; (6) To accept the resignation of officials and employees appointed by it, and even remove them, by unanimous vote ; or by a majority, if there are justifiable grounds ; (7) To grant annual leave to Magistrates, Judges, Public Registrars, and Court Physicians, up to one month, with salary. Such leave may be extended to three months with salary, for justifiable reasons. The Supreme Court may also grant leaves without salary up to a period specified by law; (8) To prepare annually in advance the draft Budget of the Judicial Power ; (9) To commission, suspend and requalify, according to law, Lawyers, Notaries and Procuradores Judiciales 1 (10) To try, as a jury, with sole jurisdiction, the official or common offenses of officials having immunity, when the Senate acts on the impeachment of the accused or finds that prosecution is in order. If the verdict is for conviction the corresponding punishment shall be applied ; if it is for acquital, the accused shall be restored to office, as the case may be ; (11) To hear appeals in cassation, amparo, review and others indicated by law; (12) To hear appeals against decisions of the Tribunal of Accounts, and rule on disputes between that Tribunal and other agencies of the State ; (13) To try prize cases and others relating to maritime navigation or navigable rivers that flow through national territory, in those cases provided for in international law; (14) To try all legal disputes of Diplomatic Agents accredited to the Government of the Nation, in those cases provided for in international law; (15) To act on cases of extradition of criminals requested by other nations and on the execution of foreign judgments ; (16) To hear appeals made against measures adopted by those in charge of the administration of the National District, the Mayors, Municipal

Councils or administrative Local Corporations on the grounds that they are contrary to the Constitution or the laws ; (17) To decide definitively, after hearing the Public Ministry, on the legality of legislative acts to which the Executive vetoes as contrary to the Constitution or which he submits to the Supreme Court to obtain an opinion as to its constitutionality; (18) To attend Congress, through its President or some other Magistrate to participate in discussion of bills presented by it, or which are for the purpose of enacting, amending or repealing the Civil, Penal, Commercial, Mining, or Civil or Penal Procedure Codes, or any other bill relating to judicial matters ; (19) To issue rulings or reports in cases specified in the Constitution or the laws ; (20) To exercise any other powers and functions indicated by law.

Art. 230. The power to render and execute judgments belongs exclusively to the Courts of Justice. Art. 231. The administration of justice in the Republic is gratuitous. Art. 232. There shall not be more than two instances in any trial. A judge who has exercised jurisdiction in one instance may not do so in the other, nor in cassation. Art. 233. The Courts and Judges of the Republic shall base their decisions preferentially on the following:
(1) The Constitution and organic laws ; (2) The laws and decree-laws ; (3) Executive decrees and rulings (acuerdos).

In no case may they give cognizance to amendments made or to rulings or provisions issued by written order (por medio de oficio). Art. 234. The members of the Judicial Power shall be granted retirement according to law. Art. 235. The hearings of the higher and lower Courts (Tribunales y Juzgados) are public, except in special cases indicated by law or when their publicity would be contrary to public order or good morals. Art. 236. The members of the Judicial Power are independent in the exercise of their functions. They shall be subject only to the Constitution and the laws. Art. 237. The organization, powers, jurisdiction and competence of the Courts of the Republic shall be fixed by law. Art. 238. Magistrates of Courts of Justice may not intervene in partisan political affairs. Art. 239. Salaries of the Judicial Power may not be abolished or reduced in a manner that would prejudice any member thereof, nor may the payment of such salaries be delayed. TITLE VIII
PUBLIC FINANCE CHAPTER I

National Property Art. 240. The treasure of the Nation consists of the following:
(a) Its real and personal property ; (b) Its accounts receivable ;

(c) Taxes, fees and other contributions or public charges paid into the Treasury by the inhabitants of the Republic; (d) Revenues received by the State in any other manner.

Art. 241. Lands, woods, waters, and in general all property of public use belong to the State, except for legally acquired rights. The law shall prescribe the conditions for their use by the State, or for granting them to individuals, in fee or by any other title. Art. 242. The riches of the subsoil belong to the State. Their exploitation by individuals may be authorized only on the basis of participation by the State in the profits. Excepted from this provision are stones for building or ornamental purposes, puzzolana, sand, slate, clay, lime, and other substances generally used in construction. Art. 243. Real property of the State is impreseriptible. Art. 244. Taxes, fees, and other contributions or public charges and income, may not be alienated. Art. 245. The administration of State property, as well as the conduct and decision of all matters relating to contracts or operations involving such property, is the function of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit unless, otherwise provided by law. Art. 246. The Executive Power must be authorized by law to dispose of real property of the State and to borrow on the credit of the Nation. Any act in violation of this rule is absolutely void. Art. 247. Contracts for public works involving large amounts shall be awarded by public auction. This provision shall be regulated by law. Art. 248. The State guarantees the payment of the public debt contracted in conformity with the Constitution and the laws. The appropriations necessary for the payment of principal and interest shall always be understood to be included in the table of expenditures of the Budget, and they shall not be the object of discussion as long as they are in strict conformity with the laws that authorized the loan. Art. 249. Borrowing shall not be resorted to except for an authorized use or need, amortization of another loan, consolidation of debts, or for productive purposes or purposes related to national defense. The conditions of such loans and their application shall be determined by law. Art. 250. For the immediate administration of public revenues there shall be a General Treasury of collections and payments, in addition to other offices that may be necessary. Its organization and functions shall be determined by law. Art. 251. To be eligible for the position of General Treasurer it is necessary to be a citizen in exercise of one's rights, over twenty-five years of age, of good reputation, and not to be either a creditor or a debtor of the Government, or to have pending accounts with the Governtm. I I is appointment shall be made by the Executive.
CHAP TER II

The Budget
A

a 252. The Executive shall each year draw up the draft General

Budget of Revenues and Expenditures of the Republic and submit it to Congress, through the Minister of Finance, not later than June 1. Art. 253, The General Budget of Revenues and Expenditures shall contain, in addition, for the information of Congress, the budgets of the state units of autonomous administration, individually detailed, although such budgets, in accordance with the Constitution and the organic laws, may not be altered by the Legislative Power. Art. 254. All revenues and expenditures of the State must be provided for and approved in the Budget, and they shall be effective only during the year for which they have been approved. Art. 255. In the General Budget of Revenues no account may be taken of the income from loans not previously authorized by Congress. Art. 256. In considering the draft Budget, Congress may not alter fixed charges, such as those for the payment of interest and amortization of loans, payment of international quotas and expenditures decreed by law, which shall be understood to be included in the Budget. It may, however, modify the variable expenses; but the initiative for increasing them, as well as for changing the estimate of revenues, is the exclusive function of the Executive. Art. 257. No provision shall be included in the Budget to be effective beyond the fiscal year, or that does not refer exclusively to its interpretation and execution. Art. 258. Once voted by Congress, the Budget shall enter into force without the necessity of approval by the Executive Power. Art. 259. If Congress does not approve the Budget before the first day of the fiscal year to which it applies, the draft presented by the Executive Power shall be considered as such, by quarters. Art. 260. Any surplus remaining at the end of a fiscal year shall be designated as revenue in the Budget for the following year. When the fiscal year closes with a deficit, such deficit shall be included as an expenditure in the Budget for the following year. Art. 261. Every expenditure not provided for by the Budget is unlawful, and the official who orders the payment and the paying employee shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount paid, without prejudice to any penalty otherwise applicable under the law. Art. 262. Congress may not approve any new expenditure as a charge on the funds of the Nation, without at the same time providing or specifying the resources necessary to meet it. Any legislative ,provision that contravenes the foregoing rule is void. Art. 263. For each fiscal year there may be only a single Budget. In case of urgent necessity, Congress may authorize a supplementary or special Budget. Art. 264. The appropriations provided in the Budget of Expenditures are established as maximum amounts for each service, and may not be transferred by the Executive Power without prior authorization from Congress. Art. 265. The Executive Power may, during a recess of Congress and when in his judgment an emergency exists requiring an increase in budgeted

expenditures or the creation of others, open, by resolution of the President of the Republic in Council of Ministers, a supplementary or special appropriation. In this case one or more items may also be transferred. The appropriation thus voted or transferred must be legalized by Congress. Art. 266. The Ministry of Finance shall give a final accounting of the Budget within thirty days after it expires, and shall submit it to Congress for definitive approval, before the last five sessions. The report to accompany the accounting shall contain, in addition, by way of information, the financial result of the state units of autonomous administration for the past fiscal year.
CHAPTER III

The Tribunal of Accounts Art. 267. The Tribunal of Accounts is the agency for controlling the administration of the national Treasury. It shall have responsibility for supervising the execution of the Budget, and the function of controlling all matters relating to Public Finance, with power to oversee the management of the revenues and to examine and settle the accounts of the Administrators of government funds. The control of local funds and the auditing of the accounts may be assigned to special comptrollers; but the Tribunal of Accounts shall have the final decision, on appeal or by consultation, and must approve the settlement of accounts. Art. 268. The Tribunal of Accounts shall enjoy functional autonomy. Its members may not be removed except for just cause and by virtue of a resolution stating the grounds therefor. The President of the Tribunal of Accounts shall have the same qualifications, immunities and prerogatives as Ministers of State. Art. 269. Conflicts between the Tribunal of Accounts and other State agencies shall be submitted for decision to the Supreme Court of Justice Art. 270. The organization, jurisdiction, and powers of the Tribunal of Accounts, as well as the appointment and term of office of its members and the requirements for holding the position, shall be determined by law..
CHAPTER IV

Autonomous Entities or Decentralized Services Art. 271. The services that constitute the industrial and commercial activity of the State may be administered by autonomous Councils or Boards, when so provided by law for the greater efficiency of the service concerned and for the public interest. Art. 272. The creation of this class of autonomous entity shall require an absolute majority vote in each Legislative Chamber. To abolish exist-ing ones, a two-thirds vote of the members of each Chamber shall be required. Art. 273. The act creating or constituting such agencies may not deviate from the fol owing rules: (I) The autonomous Councils or Boards shall be composed of at

least three members, who shall be designated by the Executive Power in Council of Ministers. The act shall specify the groups to be represented in such agencies, and the manner of their selection by the Executive ; (2) These Entities may not engage in any activities outside of the sphere expressly assigned to them by law, nor may they use their resources for purposes other than their normal activities ; (3) The autonomous administrations shall publish periodic statements in the Official Journal which clearly reflect their financial situation; (4) The Councils or Boards shall render an annual report of their activities to the Executive Power, which shall approve or disapprove it after receiving the advice of the Tribunal of Accounts ; (5) The members of the Councils or Boards may not be appointed to posts that directly or indirectly relate to the institute to which they belong.

Art. 274. One member of the Council or Board of each Autonomous Entity or Decentralized Service shall be a member of the minority party. Art. 275. Private capital may be used in the construction and development of the property of the Autonomous Entities or Decentralized Services, provided it is authorized by Congress by law, specifying and regulating the participation of the respective shareholders in the Councils or Boards, and the manner of auditing the accounts. The contribution of private capital and the representation thereof in the Councils or Boards shall never exceed those of the State. TITLE IX SOLE CHAPTER Departmental Administration, National District, Municipalities, and Local Boards Art. 276. The political administration of each Department shall be in charge of a Jefe Politico appointed by the President of the Republic. In each Department there shall be a Police Judge, likewise appointed by the President of the Republic. The qualifications of these officials, and their powers and duties, shall be determined by law. Art. 277. The government of the National District shall be in charge of the President of the Republic, who shall exercise it as determined by law. Art. 278. The local administration of cities, towns, and villages shall be in charge of Municipalities (Municipalidades) appointed by the Executive Power every two years, as long as a law does not establish some other form of organization, adopted by a two-thirds vote of each Chamber. Art. 279. To be a member of a Municipality it is necessary to be over twenty-one years of age, a citizen in the exercise of one's rights, to know how to read and write, and to have resided in the respective town for more than five years. Art. 280. The Municipality of the capital city of each department shall be composed of a Mayor, a Syndic, and an Alderman (Regidor). The Syndic must be a lawyer, but where there is no lawyer he may be one who understands the law. The Alderman shall be the Municipal Treasurer.

Art. 281. The organization of the other Municipalities shall be determined by law. Art. 282. The Municipalities shall enjoy economic and administrative autonomy subject to the supervision of the Executive Power. The National District as well as the Municipalities are authorized to issue local laws and impose local taxes (arbitrios). The tax schedules of both the National District and the Municipalities require the approval of the Executive Power. Art. 283. The property and revenue of the National District, of the Municipalities (Municipios), and of the Local Boards, belong to them exclusively, and enjoy the same guarantees as property and income of private individuals. No power of the State may encumber such property or income, or grant exemptions from taxes payable to the National District, the Municipality, or Local Boards. Art. 284. Funds of the National District, Municipalities, and Local Boards shall be devoted exclusively to the services of the administration of the respective community. Art. 285. Real property of the National District, the Municipalities, and the Local Boards is imprescriptible. Art. 286. Members of the National District, the Municipalities, and the Local Boards shall freely appoint the employees dependent upon them. Art. 287. It is prohibited to establish barriers or limitations to traffic between Municipalities, including the National District, as well as to decree intermunicipal transit or transport taxes under any name, that burden or interfere with the free circulation of goods, persons, or vehicles. Art. 288. Members of the National District, the Municipalities, and the Local Boards shall be collectively and individually responsible for any abuses they commit in the performance of their offices. Art. 289. One member of the Municipalities and of the Local Boards shall belong to the minority party. TITLE X
SOLE CHAPTER

Social Welfare Art. 290. Social Welfare shall be in charge of the Executive Power, which shall administer it through the medium of a National Board of Social Welfare and Local Boards of Social Welfare, the organization, functioning and powers of which shall be determined by law. Art. 291. The National Board of Social Welfare shall have the resources assigned to it by law. Art. 292. The provisions of the foregoing chapter relative to property, revenue and taxes of the National District and Municipalities are applicable to the Boards of Social Welfare . Art. 293. Local Boards of Social Welfare may decree schedules of taxes (arbitrios), subject to the approval of the Executive Power. Art. 294. One member of these Boards shall belong to the minority party.

TITLE XI
SOLE CHAPTER

Public Servants
Art. 295. Public servants are at the service of the community and not that of any party or organization of private interest. Art. 296. There shall be no employee in Nicaragua not having functions determined by law or regulation. Art. 297. Public servants are personally liable for violation of the Constitution, for lack of administrative integrity, and for any other offense or misdeed committed in the performance of their functions, all pursuant to law. Art. 298. Public servants are personally liable for damages caused by their negligence, default, or abuse in the exercise of their office. Art. 299. There shall be an organized Civil Service, with public servants having no political character. The law shall determine the duties of public servants, as well as the conditions of appointment; the rules for promotions, pensions, and retirement; the guarantees of permanent tenure, termination, suspension or transfer; vacations and the applicable guarantees of Article 95. Art. 300. The concerted stoppage of work in a public service, or a service having a collective interest, shall result in the automatic dismissal of the participants, in addition to any other liability imposed by law. Also subject to this rule are employees of Autonomous Entities and employees of private enterprises that perform services of public interest. Art. 301. All persons who manage public funds, or funds of Municipalities or Autonomous Entities, must provide an adequate prior guarantee. This principle shall be regulated by law. TITLE XII
SOLE CHAPTER

Electoral Matters
Art. 302. Electoral matters shall be in charge of a National Council of Elections situated in the capital of the Republic, of Departmental Councils of Elections in each capital city, and of Electoral Boards, one for each voting place. Art. 303. The National Council of Elections shall be composed of a Chairman and two Political Members representing each of the two Principal Parties of the Nation. The Chairman of the National Council of Elections shall be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice, by majority vote; and the Political Members, by the National and Legal Governing Board of the respective Parties. Art. 304. The personality and rights of the political parties and the definition of the two principal parties shall be determined by law. Art. 305. The Chairman and the Political Members of the National Council of Elections shall have the same qualifications and shall enjoy the same immunities as the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice.

Art. 306. The positions of Chairman and Political Member of the National Council of Elections are incompatible with the holding of any other office for which compensation is paid from government or municipal funds. Art. 307. The term of office of members of the National Council of Elections shall be six years, and shall commence on the date set by the Electoral Law. Art. 308. The National Council of Elections is autonomous and permanent. It shall be represented by its Chairman, who may communicate directly with any office of the State. Art. 309. The National Council of Elections shall have supreme direction of matter relating to electoral acts and procedures, and shall have the following powers:
(1) To exercise directive, correctional and consultative superintendence over the other electoral organs ; (2) To prescribe all measures concerning the orderly conduct of elections ; (3) To decide in the last instance on all claims and appeals arising out of the electoral processes ; (4) To make the final determination in elections, and to declare elected the President of the Republic, Deputies and Senators and other public officials elected by popular vote, and to grant them the corresponding credentials ; (5) To render decisions without further ordinary or extraordinary recourse in disputes of a political nature which occur between parties or individuals in relation to the exercise of suffrage ; (6) To appoint the employees of its office ; (7) To exercise all other powers conferred on it by the Electoral Law.

Art. 310. Whenever the National Council of Elections acts as a court the votes of two of its members shall constitute a quorum, the presence of the Chairman being necessary. This court shall proceed as a jury in the judgment of the facts and shall decide in accordance with the law. Art. 311. The Chairman and Political Members of the National Council of Elections shall be paid by the State. Art. 312. The Electoral Law shall regulate the functioning of the Electoral Councils and Boards and shall fix the terms of office of the Departmental Councils and the date on which they begin. Art. 313. Whenever the same person is elected by popular vote to two or more offices, he shall, by the fact of taking possession of one of them, be considered to have irrevocably renounced the others. TITLE XIII
SOLE CHAPTER

The Army

Art. 314. The National Guard of Nicaragua is the only armed force in the Republic, intended to guarantee the independence of the Nation; the integrity of its territory, domestic peace and the security of individual rights. Any other armed bodies, by the mere fact of their organization, shall be under the authority and control of the National Guard. Art. 315. The President of the Republic is the Commander in Chief Of the National Guard.

Art. 316. The National Guard is a non-political organization. Its members in active service may not vote or engage in political activities of any kind. Art. 317. The public force is essentially obedient and may not deliberate. No member of the military in active service may collectively or individually express an opinion on matters relating to the service or which in any way attacks or criticizes the laws of the Republic. Neither. may he make petitions except on matters relating to the good service and morality of the body and in accordance with the laws of its institution. Art. 318. The organization and discipline of the Army shall be governed by the laws on the subject and additional regulations issued by the President of the Republic. Art. 319. Members of the National Guard shall have a special court for purely military crimes and offenses, and shall be punished in accordance with the Penal Code of the institution. If they commit common crimes or offenses, they shall be under the jurisdiction of the ordinary laws and courts, in whose hands offenders will be placed after their removal from the service. Art. 320. Military service is compulsory. The law shall determine the manner in which it shall be rendered. Art. 321. The State guarantees protection and pensions to members of the Army who become disabled in military service or in defense of their country or of order, and likewise to the families of those who lose their lives in such service. Art. 322. Members of the Army in active service may not hold offices by popular election. TITLE XIV
SOLE CHAPTER

Constitutional Laws Art. 323. The following are constitutional laws: the Law of Amparo,1 the Martial Law,2 and the Electoral Law. TITLE XV
SOLE CHAPTER

Supremacy of the Constition and its Amendment Art. 324. The Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic. No ' laws, decrees, regulations, orders, provisions, pacts, or treaties which are in conflict with it or which in any way alter its provisions shall have any validity. Art. 325. The agencies of the Government, jointly or separately, are forbidden to suspend the Constitution or to restrict the rights granted by it, except in the cases provided therein.

Laws which regulate the exercise of constitutional rights and guarantees shall be null in so far as those rights are diminished, restricted, or corrupted. Any official who violates this provision shall be liable for the damage caused. Art. 326. The Constitution and the Constitutional Laws may be wholly or partially amended. Art. 327. Partial amendment shall be subject to the following procedure:
(1) The initiative of an amendment of one or more articles must be submitted, with an explanation of reasons, to the Chamber of Deputies in an ordinary session, supported by the signatures of at least ten or more Deputies ; (2) After being read twice with an interval of three days, the Chamber shall decide, by an absolute majority of votes, whether or not the proposed amendment shall be considered ; (3) If the vote is affirmative, the presiding officials shall refer it to a Special Committee composed of five Representatives, two of whom are members of the minority party. This Committee must submit its report within eight days ; (4) The report and the proposal shall be discussed jointly in two debates in accordance with regular rules ; (5) If the Chamber, in approving or rejecting the report, supports the proposed amendment, it shall be sent to the Senate which, in acting upon it, shall follow the same procedure as in the Chamber of Deputies ; (6) If the Senate also approves the amendment, it shall invite the Chamber of Deputies to form a Congress in United Chambers ; (7) Congress in United Chambers shall appoint a Special Committee from among its members to draft the proposed law of amendment within a period of eight days. The Drafting Committee shall consist of five Deputies and two Senators, three of whom shall belong to the minority party. The proposed law of amendment shall be discussed in two debates and its approval requires an absolute majority of votes ; (8) The bill thus approved shall be sent to the Executive Power. The President of the Republic, when the next legislative session is inaugurated, shall return it to Congress with an explanation of reasons, either accepting or rejecting it or proposing amendments ; (9) If the bill is accepted, Congress shall send it to the Executive Power for publication. In the event of rejection or amendment, the bill shall be again discussed in two debates by Congress in United Chambers, during their first sessions. (10) The bill, as newly approved by an absolute majority of Congress in United Chambers, shall be sent to the Executive Power for publication.

Art. 328. Total amendment of the Constitution may only take place ton years after it has been in force, by a Constituent Assembly, when the National Congress has declared that such amendment is in order, following the procedure outlined in numerals 1) to 6), inclusive, of the preceding article. The National Congress is dissolved by the mere fact of deciding in favor of amendment.

TITLE XVI SOLE CHAPTER Final Provisions Art. 329. The present Constitution shall govern from the time of its publication in "La Gaceta", the Official Journal, and repeals the Constitution of 1948, published on January 22 of that year. Three original texts of this Constitution shall be signed by at least an absolute majority of the Representatives and by the President of the Republic and the Ministers of State. One shall be retained in the Secretariat of the National Congress, one in the Ministry of Government, and the third in the Supreme Court of Justice. Each shall be considered an authentic text of the Fundamental Law of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall order it published in "La Gaceta", the Official Journal. Art. 330. All public officials shall take an oath to comply with the Constitution and the law, and to enforce them faithfully. Art. 331. In every officially organized (colegiado) body, including the Boards of Directors of the State Banks and Credit Institutions, as well as in plural missions and delegations to International Conferences, one member shall belong to the minority party. For such purposes, the Chairman and Secretary of the National and Legal Governing Board of such party shall submit lists of three names for each position to whoever is authorized to make the appointment, which must be given to one of the names proposed. Art. 332. Whenever the National Congress is to elect an official belonging to the minority party, the election must be made from one of the three candidates proposed for each office, in a note addressed to the Congress, by the Chairman and Secretary of the National and Legal Governing Board of the minority party. This same rule is to be observed in filling a vacancy of an official belonging to the minority party. Art. 333. In other cases in which officials belonging to the minority party are to be elected or appointed, the election or appointment shall be made from one of the three candidates for each position proposed by the Chairman and Secretary of the National and Legal Governing Board of such party.. Art. 334. Wherever the Constitution uses the term "minority party", this refers to the political party that obtained second place by its votes in the direct popular election for President of the Republic. Art. 335. All laws now in force shall continue to be compulsory throughout the Republic in so far as they do not conflict with the provisions of this Constitution or the Constitutional Laws.

TITLE

XVII

SOLE CHAPTER

Transitory Provisions Art. 336. The Powers of State shall be reorganized in accordance with the following rules:
(1) In accordance with the Legislative Decree of March 7, 1950, the General of Division, Anastasio Somoza Garcia, shall hold the position of President of the Republic for the remainder of the term that expires on May 1, 1951. (2) On May 1, 1951, General of Division Anastasio Somoza Garcia shall assume the office of President of the Republic before Congress, as elected by the Nicaraguan people, according to credentials issued by the National Council on Elections, in accordance with the Legislative Decree of April 15, 1950. His term of office shall expire on May 1, 1957. (3) Upon approval of the Constitution and the Constitutional Laws, the National Constituent Assembly shall become the National Congress, which shall exercise the Legislative Power until April 15, 1957, divided into two Chambers, as follows : (a) The Senate shall consist of fifteen Proprietary Senators elected by the Assembly from among the Representatives who are over thirty-five years of age, together with the candidate of the minority party at the recent presidential elections, and the Life Senators established by the Constitution. The respective alternates, even if less than thirty-five years of age, shall become Alternate Senators. Of the fifteen Senators elected in the manner indicated, three shall belong to the minority party. (b) The Chamber of Deputies shall consist of forty-two Proprietary Representatives, with their respective Alternates remaining after election of the Senate. (4) For the legislative term expiring April 15, 1957, the following rules shall govern : (a) Alternates already incorporated and those incorporated later, shall form a part of the Senate in replacement of Life Senators who die, are absent or hold some other elective office. (b) The vacancy of an ex-President of the Republic, through death, absence or the holding of some other elective office, shall be filled by an alternate Representative who belongs or belonged to the political party of the ex-President and who shall be designated by the Chairman and Secretary of the National and Legal Governing Board of that party. (c) If the Presidential Candidate of the minority party in the most recent elections is unavailable, his functions as Senator shall be exercised by an Alternate Representative from the same party, designated by the President of the Senate. (d) In the event of the absolute inability to serve of an ex-President or the Presidential Candidate of the minority party, the incorporated Alternate shall continue to serve for a period equal to the term indicated for elected Representatives. (5) The Magistrates of the Judicial Power elected by Decree of the National Constituent Assembly of June 4, 1950, shall remain in office until May 1, 1957. (6) In the reorganization of the Municipalities the majority party ;shall be considered to be the one that obtained the greatest number of voles in the Cantons pertaining to the municipal district in the presidntalcof1932.Thisprvonalgeduith presidntalmbgMy1,95andexpirsoMy1,957.

(7) Other public officials who have begun their terms in accordance with the Constitution of 1948 and laws in effect, shall continue in office until May 1, 1951. (8) The current term of the members of the National Council of Elections shall terminate six months prior to the date of the next presidential election.

Done in the Hall of Sessions of the Constitutent Assembly, at Managua, National District, on November 1, 1950. (There follow the signatures of the President, other Officers, and members of the Constituent Assembly). To be published.Presidential ResidenceManagua, National District, November 1, 1950. (S) A. Somoza President of the Republic (followed by the signatures of the Ministers of State)

