NIGER

CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

REPUBLIC of NIGER
1990-1993 by SUBHA RAMANATHAN Commentary by Dr. MAMADOU DAGRA Translation by MARCIA W. COWARD

RELEASE 94-2 Issued March 1994

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

This work contains material © Copyright by The Philadelphia Constitution Foundation, reproduced with permission. For copyright and permission statements in Constitutions of the Countries of the World generally, please see Overall Table of Contents.

Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4 © Copyright 1994 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

PREAMBLE

Following the National Conference on Sovereignty that assembled the leading forces of the Nation from July 29 to November 3, 1991, in order to consolidate the attainments of the Republic and national independence which were proclaimed on December 18, 1958, and August 3, 1960, respectively: We, the Sovereign Nigerian People - affirm our unwavering aspiration to build a state based on law and a united and prosperous Nation, - proclaim our allegiance to the principles of pluralistic democracy and to the human rights as they defined in the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of 1948, the African Charter of the Rights of Man and of People of 1981, and as they are guaranteed by this Constitution, - affirm our allegiance to African unity and our commitment to do everything within our power to realize regional and sub-regional integration, - express our wish to cooperate in friendship and equality with all peoples who long for peace, justice and liberty, - adopt solemnly the present Constitution as Supreme Law of the State, to which we swear our loyalty, faithfulness and respect.

THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY Article 1. -	

The State of Niger shall be an independent and sovereign

Republic. Any attack on the republican form of the State shall be considered a crime of high treason, punishable by law. The Republic's Capital shall be Niamey. The national Emblem shall be a tricolor flag composed of three (3) equal rectangular horizontal bands, which, from top to bottom, are orange, white and green. An orange disc shall be in the center of the middle band. The Hymn of the Republic shall be "The Nigerian." The Motto of the Republic shall be "FRATERNITY-WORKPROGRESS." The State Seal, whose diameter shall be forty millimeters, shall be composed of a coat of arms containing a sun bordered on the right by a spear bearing two Toureg swords radiating upward from its bottom, and at the left by three stalks of grain, one upright and two radiating from its bottom, accompanied at its point by the head of a zebu (Indian ox), all in gold. The following inscriptions shall be in relief: - at the top: "Republic of Niger"; - at the bottom: "Fraternity-Work-Progress." Ceremonial arms of the Republic shall be composed of Sinople coat of arms with a blazing sun of gold, bordered at the right by a spear bearing two Toureq swords radiating upward from its bottom, and, at left, by three stalks of grain, one upright and two radiating upward from its bottom, accompanied at its point by the head of a zebu (Indian ox), all in gold. This coat of arms shall lie against a trophy of four flags of the Republic of Niger. The inscription "Republic of Niger" shall be placed below.
Article 2.	

Use of all properties of the Republic shall be reserved for public

power. Any illegal usage of properties of the Republic toward private ends or secular use shall be punishable by law.
Article 3.	 All communities comprising the Nigerian Nation shall enjoy the freedom of using their own languages in respect to each other.

The law shall determine methods of promoting and of formalizing the national language. The official language shall be French.
Article

4.	 and socially.

The Republic of Niger shall be one and indivisible, democratically

Its fundamental principles shall be: - government of the People, by the People and for the People; - separation of Church and State.
Article 5.	

National sovereignty shall belong to the People.

National sovereignty shall not be exercised by any fraction of the People nor by any individual. In the exercise of national sovereignty, all efforts which foster personal power, regionalism, ethnocentricity, clannishness, nepotism, feudalism, illegal aggrandizement, favoritism, corruption, and the trading of influence shall be forbidden and punishable by law. The people shall have the right and duty to resist an oppressive regime through civil disobedience. Any regime that deliberately violates the carrying out of this present Constitution shall be considered an oppressive regime.
Article 6.

The people shall have the right to defend the established democratic regime against a coup d'etat through civil disobedience. Civil disobedience shall be exercised peacefully and only as a last resort.
Article

7. The people shall exercise their sovereignty through elected representatives and through referendum. Circumstances which shall call for referendum shall be determined by law.

The Supreme Court shall oversee voting operations and shall announce results.
Article 8.	

Suffrage is universal, free, equal, direct and secret.

Under conditions determined by law, electors shall be those Nigerians of both sexes who shall have reached the age of 18 years on election day, or emancipated minors who are enjoying civic and political rights.
Article 9.	

The Republic of Niger shall be a State founded on law.

Equality shall be assured everyone under the law without distinction to sex or to social, racial, ethnic or religious background. All beliefs shall be respected and protected. Yet no religion or belief shall claim political power or interfere in affairs of state. The dispensation of any divisive propaganda of a regional, racist or ethnic character, and any display of racial, ethnic, political or religious discrimination shall be punishable by law. While within the territory of the Republic, foreigners shall benefit from the same rights and liberties as Nigerian citizens, according to conditions determined by law. Article 10. Within the framework of freedom of association recognized and guaranteed by the present Constitution, parties, alliances of political parties, syndicates and other associations may be formed and may participate in activities freely as long as they act in respect to the principles of national sovereignty and of democracy, and according to the laws of the Republic. Parties and alliances of political parties shall have the right of expression through voting. Political parties of an ethnic, regional, or religious character shall be forbidden. TITLE II - RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE INDIVIDUAL Article 11.- Each human being is sacred. The State shall have an absolute obligation to respect and to protect the individual. The full nurturing of each individual shall be guaranteed. Article 12. Each person shall have the right to life, health, liberty, security, physical wellbeing, education, and instruction according to conditions established by law. Article 13.	 No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruelty or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Article 14. Each individual and each agent of the State who is found guilty of acts of torture, of cruelty, or of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in the exercise of or in any way related to the exercise of his duties, whether under his or her own initiative or under instructions, shall be punished according to the law. Article 15. Each person shall have the right to full economic, secular, intellectual and spiritual development, as long as such development does not violate the right of others or infringe on the constitutional or legal order or on

good morality.
Article 16.	

No one shall be arrested or incarcerated except under a law adopted previously and when informed of the facts. No citizen shall be confined in exile or deported.

Article 17.	

No law or regulation shall be retroactive except where it concerns rights and benefits that can be conferred on the citizen.

Article

18. Any persons accused of a felonious act shall be presumed innocent until his or her guilt is established legally through a public process during which all necessary guarantees for his or her defense shall be assured.

No person shall be condemned for the commission or omission of any act which, at the time when it was committed, did not constitute an infraction under national law. Likewise, no person shall be inflicted with any penalty stronger than that applicable at the time the infraction was committed.
Article 19.	

Marriage and the family shall constitute the natural and moral basis of the human community. Both shall be under the protection of the State. The State and public entities shall have the power to oversee the physical and moral wellbeing of the family, particularly mothers and infants.

Article 20.	

Parents shall have the right and the duty to raise their children. They shall be supported in this duty by the State and by public entities.

Minors shall be protected by the State and public entities against exploitation and abandonment. The State shall watch over aged and handicapped persons.
Article 21.	

Every person's home shall be inviolable. A residence shall not be subject of search except under forms and conditions specified by law.

Article

22. Each person shall have the right to own property. No person shall be deprived of his or her property except when needed for public use, and, then, only when compensated fairly in advance.

Article 23.	

Secrecy of correspondence and communication shall be guaranteed under conditions defined by law.

Article 24.	

Each person shall have the right to freedom of thought, of opinion, of expression, of conscience, of religion, and of worship. The State shall guarantee the free exercise of worship and expression of

beliefs.

These rights shall be applicable in regard to public order, social tranquility, and national unity.
Article 25.

The State shall recognize and guarantee the right of coming and going, and freedoms of association, of assembly, of procession, and of demonstration, under conditions specified by law.

Article 26.

The State shall recognize the right of all citizens to work and to strive to create conditions which promote the enjoyment of this right and which guarantee to each worker fair compensation for his goods or services.

Article 27.	

The State shall recognize and guarantee the right of labor to organize and to strike, according to conditions foreseen by laws and regulations.

Article 28.	

Each person shall have the right to a healthy environment. The State shall be charged with protecting the environment.

The stockpiling and moving and evacuation of toxic wastes, whether pollutants from factories or from other industrial or crafts organizations situated on national property, shall be regulated by law. The transit, importation, stockpiling, burial, dumping on national property of toxic wastes or foreign pollutants on national property shall similarly constitute a crime against the Nation. Applicable sanctions shall be defined by law.
Article 29.	

Defense of the Nation and of the integrity of the territory of the Republic shall be a sacred duty of all Nigerian citizens.

Military service is obligatory. Conditions for fulfilling this duty shall be determined by law.
Article

30. Each Nigerian citizen, whether civilian or in the military, shall have the sacred duty to respect the Constitution and the legal order of the Republic under all circumstances. 31. Each citizen shall have the duty to work for the common good, to fulfill civic and professional obligations, and to fulfill responsibilities involving fiscal contributions (to the State).

Article

32. Public assets shall be considered sacred and inviolable. Each person shall respect and protect them scrupulously. Any act of sabotage, vandalism, corruption, misappropriation, waste or illegal enrichment shall be restrained by law.
Article

33.	 The State shall protect the rights and legitimate interests of Nigerian citizens beyond its borders.
Article Article

34.	

The State shall have the duty to assure the spreading of and the

teaching of the Constitution in a manner consistent with human rights and fundamental liberties.
Article 35.

Rights and duties proclaimed above and guaranteed by the present Constitution shall bind legislative, executive and judicial powers in regard to each person, by virtue of the law that is directly applicable. All rights and liberties shall be exercised in regard to laws and regulations in force.
EXECUTIVE POWER

Article 36.	

Article

37.	

The President of the Republic shall be Chief of State.

The President shall incarnate national unity. The President shall be the guarantor of national independence, national unity, territorial integrity, respect for the Constitution, and treaties and international agreements. The President shall assure the proper operation of public powers and the continuity of the State.
Article 38.

The President of the Republic shall be elected for five (5) years by free, direct, equal and secret universal suffrage. The President shall be reeligible (for re-election) only once.

All native-born Nigerians who are at least 40 years old and who possess civic and political rights shall be eligible for the Presidency of the Republic.
Article

Election of the President of the Republic shall be by absolute majority vote in two rounds. A candidate who achieves an absolute majority of votes in the first round shall be declared winner of the election.

39.	

If this condition is not met, there shall be a second round of voting fourteen (14) days later between the two candidates who led the vote during the first round. In the case of the withdrawal of either of the two leading candidates, remaining candidates shall be presented in the order of votes won in the first round of voting. The candidate who obtains the largest number of ballots in the second round of voting shall be declared winner of the election. Convocation of voters shall be by decree of the cabinet council. The first round of voting for President of the Republic shall take place at least thirty (30) days and no later than forty (40) days before expiration of the

	

term of the current President. Article 40.	 The term of the new President of the Republic shall take effect the same day that the term of his predecessor expires. The law shall establish conditions of eligibility, of campaigning, of the process of voting, of the tallying of votes, and of announcing results. The Supreme Court shall control the legality of voting operations and declare the final results. Article 41. Before taking office, the President of the Republic shall take the following oath before the Supreme Court and in the presence of the National Assembly: "I, 	 , the President of the Republic, elected in accordance with the law, solemnly swear on my honor before God and before the Nigerian people, the sole holder of sovereignty: - to respect and to demand respect for the Constitution that the people have freely created for themselves; - to fulfill loyally the important duties which are invested in me; - never to betray or to travesty the aspirations of the People; - to respect and defend the republican form of the State; - to preserve territorial integrity and national unity; - to respect and to defend the rights and liberties of all citizens; - neither to take nor to allow to be taken any measure that shall debase human dignity; - to work untiringly for the people's welfare; - to spare no effort to realize African unity; - and above all, to conduct myself as the faithful and loyal servant of the People. I submit that if I perjure myself, I shall be submitted to the rigors of the law." This oath shall be made to the President of the Supreme Court. Article 42. Within forty-eight (48) hours after the investiture ceremony, the President of the Supreme Court shall receive publicly a declaration of the assets of the President of the Republic, written on his honor. This declaration shall be subject of a similar revelation both annually on the same date and upon completion of his duties. The initial declaration of assets and said annual reports shall be published in the Official Journal. Article 43.	 During his tenure, the President of the Republic shall not, either through another or by himself, purchase or lease anything that belongs to the

State. The President shall not take part, either through another or by himself, in public or private sales of the State or of its subdivisions. In case the Presidency of the Republic is vacated due to death, Article 44.	 resignation or other obstacle, the President of the Assembly shall temporarily fulfill the responsibilities of the President of the Republic. Any final obstruction (of the President's duties) shall be declared by the Supreme Court, after the issue has been brought before it by the President of the National Assembly upon consultation with its officers. The vacating of the Presidency shall be followed by new Presidential elections no sooner than forty-five (45) days and no later than ninety (90) days after the vacancy occurs. When the President of the National Assembly acts as interim President of the Republic under the conditions enumerated above, he shall be able to announce his candidacy for the presidential election. He shall exercise all privileges conferred on the President of the Republic with the exception of those stated in lines 1 and 2 of Article 47, line 1 of Article 50, Article 51, line 1 of Article 52, Article 55, lines 2 and 3 of Article 58, and Articles 117 and 122. In case of impeachment of the President of the Republic before the High Court of Justice, the President of the Supreme Court shall fulfill all functions of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those mentioned in the preceding line. Articles 88 and 89 shall not be applied during the interim periods between presidents that are established by this Article. Article 45. During the absence of the President of the Republic from the country, or illness, or holiday, the Prime Minister shall act as interim President within the limit of powers delegated to him. Article 46. The role of the President of the Republic shall be considered incompatible with the exercise of any other elected position, with any other public, civil or military employment, and with any other professional activity. The President of the Republic shall have the power to appoint the Article 47.	 Prime Minister and to relieve him of his duties. The Prime Minister shall leave office upon dissolution of his government. At the proposal of the Prime Minister, the President of the Republic shall have the power to appoint other members of the Government and, likewise, to relieve them of their duties.

Article 48. The President of the Republic shall preside over cabinet council. The Prime Minister shall act as his substitute according to conditions fixed by the present Constitution. The President of the Republic shall promulgate laws within fifteen Article 49.	 (15) days following their release by the President of the National Assembly. This time limit shall be reduced to five (5) days in case of an emergency declared by the National Assembly. Before that period of time expires, the President of the Republic shall have the right to request a second deliberation of any law or of any of its articles. This second deliberation cannot be refused. Likewise, within the same time frame, the President of the Republic shall have the authority to request and to obtain the right to have the second deliberation held during the ordinary session of the National Assembly following the session during which the law was adopted at first reading. If the National Assembly approves the text by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of its members upon second reading, the law shall be promulgated. Article 50. The President of the Republic shall have the authority to dissolve the National Assembly after consulting the Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly. A new National Assembly shall be elected no sooner than forty-five (45) days and no later than ninety (90) days after said dissolution. No additional dissolution of the National Assembly can be undertaken within the twelve (12) months following the elections. Article 51. After advising the National Assembly, the President of the Republic shall have the authority to submit to referendum any law that he believes requires direct consultation with the People. When a law is adopted by referendum, it shall be promulgated by the President of the Republic within the extension of time specified in lines 1 and 2 of Article 49. The President of the Republic shall have the authority to Article 52.	 recognize ambassadors and special envoys in the service of foreign powers. The President of the Republic shall have the authority to name his own ambassadors and special envoys. Article 53.	 The President of the Republic shall be Chief of the Administration.

Article 54.	 Article 55.

The President of the Republic shall be Chief of Military Forces.

After consulting with the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly, and the President of the Supreme Court, the President of the Republic shall take exceptional measures when the institutions of the Republic, the Nation's independence, its territorial integrity or the execution of international obligations are threatened by a grave and immediate danger and when normal function of Constitutional public powers has been interrupted. He shall report to the Nation regarding any such exceptional measures. If the National Assembly is not in session, it shall reconvene without need of sanction. Such exceptional measures must be inspired by the desire to assure to Constitutionally-granted public authorities those means of accomplishing their mission within the shortest period of time. In no case shall the National Assembly be dissolved during the exercise of exceptional powers.
Article 56.	

The President of the Republic shall have the authority to proclaim a state of emergency under conditions determined by law. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon.

Article 57.	 Article 58.	

The President of the Republic shall sign ordinances and decrees that have been deliberated in the Council of Ministers. The President shall have the authority to make appointments to the State's civil and military posts. Members of the Supreme Court, the Grand Chancellor of National Orders, general Officers, Ambassadors and special envoys, Prefects and Subprefects, Secretaries of the Ministries, and Directors of the central administration shall be named by decree adopted in the cabinet council. An organic law shall determine other employees whose appointment shall be up to the Council of Ministers, as well as those conditions under which the power of the President of the Republic to make nominations can be delegated by him to others for exercise in his name.

Article 59.

The law shall determine benefits to be accorded to the President of the Republic and shall establish methods of paying pensions to previous Presidents of the Republic who are enjoying their civic rights. The Prime Minister shall be the Chief of the government. He shall direct, vitalize and coordinate governmental action.

Article 60.	

He shall guarantee that laws are executed. He shall have the authority to delegate certain of his powers to his ministers. If formally delegated, the Prime Minister shall take the place of the President of the Republic in presiding over the Council of Ministers, for a fixed agenda. All acts of the Prime Minister shall be countersigned, as Article 61.	 appropriate, by Ministers charged with their execution. Article 62.	 The Government shall determine and conduct National policy.

The Government shall be in command of the Administration and the Armed Forces. The Government shall be responsible to the National Assembly according to conditions in Articles 87 and 88. Article 63. Acts of the President of the Republic other than those in line 1 of Article 47, in Articles 50, 51, 55, and 78, and in line 2 of Article 98, shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister, and, if such be the case, by the Ministers who shall be responsible for them. Article 64. Before beginning their term in office, the Prime Minister and his Ministers must deliver to the President of the Supreme Court a sworn declaration of their wealth. This declaration shall be reviewed annually and upon cessation of their duties. The initial declaration of their wealth (assets) and all annual reviews shall be published in the Official Journal. Provisions of Article 43 shall also apply to members of the Government. The law shall determine which other public agents shall be required to declare their wealth (assets), as well as those means by which it shall be declared. Article 65. The duties of members of the Government shall be considered incompatible with the exercise of any other parliamentary authority, with professional representation on a local or national scale, with public employ, and with all other professional activity. LEGISLATIVE POWER Article 66.	 Legislative power shall be exercised by a single chamber called the "National Assembly," whose members shall carry the title of "Deputies."

Article 67.	

Deputies shall be elected by universal, free, direct, equal and

secret ballot.

The legislative term shall be five (5) years. General elections regarding reconvening the Assembly shall be no fewer than ten (10) days and no more than twenty (20) days before the conclusion of the previous legislature. The number of members of the National Assembly, their compensation, conditions of eligibility, regulation of eligibility and incompatibility, and methods of election, as well as conditions which determine the organization of new elections in case of vacancies in Deputies' seats, shall be fixed by law.
Article 68.	

The Supreme Court shall rule on candidates' eligibility.

The Supreme Court shall likewise validate the election of Deputies.
Article 69.	

Each Deputy shall represent the Nation.

Any peremptory authority shall be void. Each Deputy's right to vote shall be personal. In all cases, a proxy vote shall be permitted when a Deputy is absent because of illness, an obligation or a mission conferred by the Government or by the Assembly, or when fulfilling military obligations. Only one proxy shall be allowed.
Article 70.	

Members of the National Assembly shall enjoy parliamentary

immunity. No Deputy may be prosecuted, searched, arrested, detained or passed judgment on because of his opinions or voting record in the exercise of his duties. When the National Assembly is in session, no Deputy can be prosecuted or arrested on a correctional or criminal matter except upon authorization of the National Assembly, and then only in the case of a flagrant offense. When the National Assembly is not in session, a Deputy can be arrested only upon authorization of the administrative bureau of the National Assembly, and then only in the case of a flagrant offense, under an authorized prosecution or final judgement. The suspension of the detention of or proceedings against a Deputy shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the National Assembly.
Article 71.

The National Assembly shall be directed by a President who is assisted by administrative officers elected under conditions specified by its Rules of Procedure.

The President shall be elected for the duration of the legislature. Other administrative officers shall be elected each year.

Whenever the President of the National Assembly assumes interim authority for the President of the Republic, under conditions specified by Article 44 of the present Constitution, he shall be replaced in his duties according to Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly. In case the Presidency of the Assembly is vacated due to death, resignation or any other cause, the Assembly shall elect a new President within fifteen (15) days following said vacancy, if the Assembly is in session. If the National Assembly is not in session, it shall reconvene according to conditions specified by rule of procedure, without need of sanction.
Article 72.	

The National Assembly shall have the authority to establish law and to authorize taxes. It shall control action of the Government.

Article 73.	 The National Assembly shall meet in two ordinary sessions each year upon convocation by its President, without need of sanction.

The first session shall open the first Saturday in March and shall not exceed ninety (90) days. The second session, which shall occupy itself with the budget, shall open the first Saturday in October and shall not exceed sixty (60) days.
Article 74.

The National Assembly shall be convened into special session by its President under a determined agenda upon the request of the Prime Minister or of two-fifths (2/5) of the Deputies.

Such special sessions, outside of those held without need of sanction, shall be considered open or closed according to order of the President of the Republic. Sessions shall conclude when the agenda is exhausted. Special sessions shall not last more than fifteen (15) days. Sessions of the National Assembly shall be public. Minutes of proceedings of debates shall be published in the Official Journal.
Article 75.	

The Assembly shall have the authority to sit in closed-door session at the request of the Prime Minister or of one-third (1/3) of the Deputies.
Article 76.	

The work of the National Assembly shall proceed according to Rules of Procedure adopted by the Assembly in conformity to the Constitution.

Rules of Procedure shall determine, in particular: the composition and operational rules of its administrative officers, as well as powers and prerogatives of its President;

- the number, manner of selection, composition, role and qualifications of permanent committees as well as special temporary committees; the creation of parliamentary commissions of inquiry within the framework of regulation of governmental action; the organization of administrative services directed by a General Secretary under the authority of the President of the National Assembly; - various elections, excluding those expressly anticipated by this Constitution; conditions covering the right of interpellation as well as rules applying to written and oral questioning.
TITLE V RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE POWERS
Article 77.

The National Assembly shall inform the President of the Republic and the Government of its agendas for sessions and meetings, as well as of those of its committees.

Article 78.

Communication of the President of the Republic with the National Assembly may be direct or through messages to the Assembly that shall be read by the President of the National Assembly. These messages shall not be introduced in debate.

Article 79.

Members of the Government shall have complete access to the complete National Assembly or to its committees. They shall be heard, whether at their own request or at the request of Committees. They shall help each other by working together.

Article 80.

Members of the National Assembly shall have the authority, either individually or collectively, to interpellate the Prime Minister or any member of the Government by so requesting the opportunity.

Members of the National Assembly shall be able to obtain, by way of written or oral questions, information on the Government's activities and/or conduct of business.
Article 81.	

Rules concerning the following shall be determined by law:

- citizenship, civic rights and fundamental guarantees of public liberties; - taxes imposed upon the person and their assets of citizens for purposes of national Defense and public Security; - the nationality, status, and privileges accorded individuals, the matrimonial state, inheritance, and gifts; - procedures for authentication customs and bringing them into harmony with the fundamental principles of the Constitution; - determination of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as applicable penalties, penal procedures and amnesty; - the organization of jurisdictions for judicial orders and of procedures to be followed before these jurisdictions, creation of new orders of jurisdiction, and statutes for magistrates, ministerial officers and judicial assistants; - the tax base, interest rates and methods for collecting taxes of all kinds; - the system for issuing and circulating money; - the electoral system regarding the President of the Republic, members of the National Assembly, and local assemblies; - the creation of categories of public establishments; - nationalization of various enterprises and transfers of business property from the public sector to the private sector; Civil Service regulations;

- regulations for military personnel, public security police and similar forces; - regulations regarding traditional districts; the general organization of the Administration;

- territorial organization, and the creation and modification of administrative districts as well as the creation of electoral districts; state of siege and state of emergency. Article 82.	 The following fundamental principles shall be determined by law:

- organization of the national Defense;

- free administration of, spheres of authority of, and resources of territories; education and scientific research; - health; - protection of the environment and conservation of natural resources; protection, conservation and organization of space; - protection of the cultural right of inheritance; - regulation of property, material rights, and civil and commercial obligations; - the right to work, the right to social security, and the right to organize labor unions, and to strike; - conveyance of property and fiscal administration of the domain of the State; the insurance and savings industries; - regulation of transportation, postal services, and telecommunications; auditing of public property; - the penal code. The Finance bill shall determine the manner of regulation of the Article 83.	 State's public resources and of its expenses. Planning laws shall indicate the objectives of the State's actions in the economic and social realms. Regulatory laws shall sanction execution of the State's budget. Matters other than those considered within the domain of law Article 84.	 shall be of a regulatory nature. Texts of a legislative nature relating to thse matters which were passed before this Constitution goes into effect can be modified by decree upon the advice of the Supreme Court. Article 85.	 The National Assembly shall have the authority to declare war.

Article 86.	 A state of siege shall be decreed in the Council of Ministers. The National Assembly shall reconvene without need of sanction if it is not in session.

Prolongation of a state of siege beyond fifteen (15) days shall not be authorized by any other than the National Assembly. Article 87. In order to execute its program, the Government shall have the authority to request from the National Assembly its authorization to order by decree, for a limited time, those measures that would otherwise fall within the domain of the law. This authorization shall take the form of a qualifying law. That being the case, ordinances shall be adopted in the Council of Ministers upon the advice of the Supreme Court. Ordinances shall be in force following their publication but shall become null if they are not ratified by the National Assembly prior to a date established by the qualifying law. At the expiration of the time period mentioned in the first line of this Article, ordinances cannot be modified except by an appropriate law already in the domain of the law. Article 88. After deliberation in the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister shall have the authority to seek from the National Assembly support for the Government by presenting the Government's plans or, conceivably, a statement of general policy. The National Assembly's shall demonstrate its support or lack of support for the Government by its vote on a motion to censure. Such a motion shall not be admitted to a vote unless signed by at least one-tenth (1/10th) of the members of the National Assembly. The vote cannot take place until forty-eight (48) hours after its presentation. Upon receiving the favorable votes, the motion to censure can be adopted only by passage by a the majority of the Assembly membership. If the motion is rejected, its signers shall not have the authority to propose censure again throughout the course of that session, except within conditions in the first line of Article 88. After deliberation by the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister shall have the authority to seek a show of support for the Government by passage of a bill by the National Assembly. In this case, and according to conditions in the preceding line, the bill shall be considered adopted unless the National Assembly shall pass a motion to censure that has been introduced within the next twentyfour (24) hours. Article 89. When the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure or when it disapproves of the Government's plan or policy statement, the Prime Minister

shall present the Government's resignation to the President of the Republic. The Government shall have the authority to initiate laws jointly with members of the National Assembly.
Article 90.	 Article

91.	 Deputies of the National Assembly and of the Government shall have the right of amendment.

Article 92.

Motions, bills 'and amendments that are not within the domain of the law shall be inadmissible. Issues regarding admissibility shall be determined by the President of the National Assembly.

The Supreme Court shall rule on a dispute over admissibility within eight (8) days after such a dispute is presented to it by the Prime Minister or the President of the National Assembly.
Article 93.

Motions and amendments passed by the deputies shall not be admissible if their adoption shall reduce public resources or assets, either by creating or by increasing a public expense, unless said propositions or amendments are accompanied with a plan for increasing public receipts or achieving an equivalent economic gain. Discussion of draft bills shall follow the text as presented by the qualified Committee of the National Assembly.

Article 94.	

At the request of the Government, the Committee shall bring to the attention of the National Assembly all points of a bill with which the Government is not in accord.
Article 95.	

The National Assembly shall pass Finance bills within conditions established by law.

Article 96.

The National Assembly shall attend to the Finance bill from the opening of the budget session. The Finance bill shall include essential means for raising of funds necessitated for basic coverage of expenses.

The National Assembly shall vote a balanced budget. If the National Assembly has not expressed its opinion within sixty (60) days after a bill is presented, the provisions of that bill shall go into effect by ordinance. In order for the Finance bill to be ratified, it must be presented by the Government to a special session of the National Assembly within two weeks. If the National Assembly has not passed the budget by the conclusion of its special session, the budget shall be adopted by ordinance. 24

If the Finance bill is not passed in time to be promulgated before the beginning of the fiscal year, the Prime Minister shall immediately request that the National Assembly grant him provisional authorization to recover part of the budget by adding one-twelfth (1/12) to the budget of the preceding year. The National Assembly shall regulate the Nation's accounting Article 97.	 according to methods contained in the Finance bill. The National Assembly shall be able to charge to the Chamber those accounts and budgetary needs required by the Supreme Court for inquiries and studies relating to the execution of public receipts and expenses. Title VI - Control over the Constitutionality of Laws Article 98. Organic laws, before being promulgated, and by-laws of the National Assembly, before being applied, shall be submitted to the Supreme Court, which shall determine whether or not they conform to the Constitution. To the same end, laws may be deferred to the Supreme Court prior to their promulgation by the President of the Republic, by the President of the National Assembly, by the Prime Minister, or by a vote of one-tenth (1/10) of the Deputies. In cases covered by the preceding lines, the Supreme Court shall announce its ruling within one month. In case of an emergency, the ruling shall be forthcoming within eight (8) days, if the Government so requests. In the same case, the Supreme Court shall have the authority to suspend the timeframe required before a law is promulgated. By way of plea at bar, any person who is party to a legal proceedings shall be able to raise the question of unconstitutionality of a law before any jurisdiction. Any law, or any provision of a law, which shall be declared unconstitutional through application of the preceding line shall be immediately considered null and void. The judgement of the Supreme Court establishing said unconstitutionality shall be published in the Official Journal immediately following the procedure. Title VII - Judicial Power Article 99. 	 powers. Judicial power shall be independent from legislative and executive

Judicial power shall be exercised by the Supreme Court and other courts and tribunals created in accordance with this Constitution.

Article 100. Justice shall be rendered on national territory in the name of the

People and in strict accordance with rule of law as well as with the rights and liberties of each citizen.
Article 101. In the performance of their duties, judges shall submit only to the

authority of the law. The President of the Republic shall be guarantor of the independence of the judiciary. The President of the Republic shall be assisted by the Superior Council of the Magistracy.
Article 102. Magistrates of courts of justice shall be named by the President

of the Republic upon the motion of the Minister of Justice, Guardian of the Seals of State, at the advice of the Superior Council of the Magistracy. Magistrates of courts of justice shall be appointed for life.
Article 103. Composition, organization and operation of the Superior Council

of Magistracy shall be established by law.
Section 1 - The Supreme Court Article 104. The Supreme Court shall be the highest jurisdiction of the State.

The Supreme Court shall comprise four (4) chambers: the Constitutional Chamber, the Judicial Chamber, the Administrative Chamber, and the Chamber of Audits and Budgetary Discipline. Composition, organization, competence of and functioning of the Supreme Court shall be determined by law.
Section II - The High Court of Justice Article 105. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of Deputies elected

by the National Assembly from its own membership after each general reconvening. The High Court of Justice shall elect its President from among its members. The number of members, rules of operation, and procedures to be followed before the High Court of Justice shall be established by law.
Article 106. The President of the Republic shall not be held responsible for

acts committed in the exercise of his duties except in the case of high treason.

Judgement in any case shall be by the High Court of Justice. It shall be considered high treason if the President of the Republic violates his oath, or is known as author, co-author or accomplice to a serious violation of human rights or to a fraudulent transfer of any section of the national territory. Should the President of the Republic be found guilty of a crime of high treason, he shall be immediately stripped of office. The High Court shall be qualified to judge members of the Government regarding deeds which may be crimes or misdemeanors in the exercise of their office, excepting crimes and misdemeanors against the security of the State as well as connected crimes and offenses. Article 107. Impeachment of the President of the Republic shall passed by public ballot by a majority of two-thirds (2/3) of the Deputies comprising the National Assembly. Impeachment of members of the Government shall require a vote of simple majority, under the same conditions. Article 108. The High Court shall be bound by the legal definition of crimes and misdemeanors and by penalties incorporated in penal laws which are in force at the time of the acts alleged in the proceedings.
Title VIII -- Economic, Social and Cultural Council Article 109. The Economic, Social and Cultural Council shall assist the

President of the Republic, the Government, and the National Assembly. This Council shall give advice on questions submitted to it by the President of the Republic, the Government, or the National Assembly. Article 110. The Economic, Social and Cultural Council shall be considered qualified to examine draft bills and proposals for laws of an economic or social character, with the exclusion of Financial bills. It shall be obligatory to involve the Council in all bills relating to the economic and social life of the Nation, we well as long-range plans. The Council shall be qualified to be involved in all problems of interest to the Nation's economic and social life. The Council shall, on its own initiative, be qualified to undertake studies and inquiries relating to economic, social or cultural issues. Reports of the Council shall be transmitted to the Government for use as it sees fit.

Article 111. The composition, organization and operation of the Economic, Social and Cultural Council shall be determined by organic law. The composition of the Council shall take into account the concerns of a significant representation of various regions and of civil society. Title IX -- The Superior Council of Communications Article 112. The Superior Council of Communications shall be an administrative authority independent of any political power. Article 113. The mission of the Council shall be to assure and to guarantee the freedom and independence of broadcast and print media with respect to the law. The Council shall oversee ethical procedures in matters of information and equitable access of political parties, associations and citizens to official means of information and communication. Article 114. The composition, organization, jurisdiction and operation of the Superior Council of Communications shall be established by law.

Title X - Territorial Divisions (Collectivites) Article 115. The administration of territories shall be based on principles of decentralization and deconcentration. Territorial divisions (collectivities) shall be created by law. The fundamental principles concerning free administration of Territorial divisions, their spheres of influence and their resources (assets) shall be established by law. Article 116. The State shall oversee the harmonious development of all Territorial divisions on the basis of national solidarity, regional potential, and inter-regional equilibrium. Title XI -- Treaties and International Agreements Article 117. The President of the Republic shall have the authority to negotiate and to ratify Treaties and International Agreements. Article 118. Defense and Peace Treaties and Treaties and Agreements relating to international organizations which modify internal laws of State and which bring a financial responsibility to the State shall be ratified only according to law. Article 119. If the Supreme Court, upon instigation by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, or the Prime Minister, finds

that an international commitment contains a clause contrary to the Constitution, said commitment cannot be ratified unless and until the Constitution has been revised. Article 120. Upon their publication, Treaties and Agreements which are properly ratified shall have an authority superior to that of laws, subject to their application by the other party. Title XII -- Cooperation and Association with States Article 121. The Republic of Niger shall be able to complete with any other African State agreements of partnership or of community which carry partial or total surrender of sovereignty in view of realizing African unity. The Republic of Niger shall be able to conclude agreements of cooperation and of partnership with other States on the basis of rights and reciprocal advantages. The Republic of Niger shall accept the creation in cooperation with other nations of intergovernmental organizations characterized by common management, coordination and cooperative deliberation. These organizations shall be able have these special goals: - harmonization of economic, financial and monetary life; - establishment of unions which pursue economic integration through the promotion of production and trade; - creation of a foundation for solidarity; - harmonization of foreign politics; coordination of judicial organization; cooperation in matters of defense; cooperation and coordination regarding sanitation; cooperation in cultural, scientific and technical matters; coordination of transportation, communications and telecommunications; cooperation in solving problems caused by natural disaster; enhancement of the value of natural resources;

- defense of the environment. Title XIII - Revisions Article 122. Authority for revising the Constitution shall belong jointly to the President of the Republic upon the proposal of the Prime Minister and members of the National Assembly. Article 123. Consideration of a bill or proposition to revise the Constitution shall require the vote of a majority of three-quarters (3/4) of the members composing the National Assembly. Any revision shall only go into effect after it is approved by referendum and unless the bill or the proposition has been approved by a majority of fourfifths (4/5) of the members composing the National Assembly. Article 124. No procedure for revising the Constitution shall be activated or evoked if it incorporates a threat to the Nation's territorial integrity. The republican form of State, the principle of separation of Church and State, and the recognition of the possibility for a multitude of parties shall not be subject of any revision of the Constitution. Title XIV -- Transitional and Final Disposition Article 125. This Constitution shall be adopted by referendum. This Constitution shall enter into force upon promulgation by the President of the Republic within a period of eight (8) days following proclamation of referendum results by the Supreme Court. Article 126. The President of the Republic, the High Council of the Republic, and the transitional Government shall continue to exercise their responsibilities until new authorities have taken office. Article 127. The Fundamental Act No. XXI of the National Sovereign Conference of October 29, 1991, which specifies public powers during transition periods, shall be in force until new authorities take office. The President of the Republic, the President of the High Council of the Republic and the Prime Minister of the Transition period shall not be eligible to be candidates for President in elections taking place during the Transition.
Article 128. Unless expressly forbidden, other legislation currently in force

shall remain applicable, provided that it contains nothing contrary to this Constitution.
Article 129. All provisions necessary to apply this Constitution shall be the

object either of ordinances voted by the High Council of the Republic or by decrees of the cabinet council. Notwithstanding the provisions of the present Constitution, duly inventoried dossiers pending before the Commission charged with inquiry into crimes and political, economic and socio-cultural abuses at the time the present Constitution goes into effect shall still be submitted to the rules specified in Act V/CN of August 14, 1991, regarding creation of and considerations resulting from the acting Commission, especially those relative to sentencing and to authority over that judged. These dossiers, which shall be listed in the Official Journal, shall be transmitted intact to the new authorities.
Article 129:

Provisions necessary to apply this Constitution shall be the subject either of ordinances passed by the High Council of the Republic or of decrees ordered by the Council of Ministers.

