CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT 11. FLANZ

REPUBLIC of NIGER
by ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & TIMOTHY J. KENNEDY Translation by NICOLE QUADRI

Issued August 1990

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4

© Copyright 1990 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any. form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

REPUBLIC OF NIGER

Fraternity - Labor - Progress

CONSTITUTION OF SEPTEMBER 24, 1989

SUMMARY

Preamble

Title I - The "Societe de Developpement"

Title II - The State and Sovereignty

Title III - The Citizen's Rights and Liberties

Title IV - The Citizen's Duties

Title V - The "Mouvement National pour la Societe de Développement"

Title VI - The "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale"

Title VII - The President of the Republic and the Government

Title VIII - The "Assemblée Nationale"

3

Title IX - The relations between the "Assemblée Nationale" and the Government

Section 1: Respective Sectors of the Law and Regulations

Section 2: Elaboration of the Laws

Title X - The National Armed Forces

Title XI - The Supreme Court

Title XII - The Judicial Authority

Title XIII - The High Court justice

Title XIV - The "Conseil National de Développement"

Title XV - The Territorial Collectivities

Title XVI - The Treaties and International Agreements

Title XVII - The Cooperation and Association with the States

Title XVIII - Revision Title XIX - Diverse Dispositions

Title XX - Transitory Dispositions

4

PREAMBLE

Following the historical events of April 15, 1974 which brought an end to the First Republic, the National Armed Forces invited the people of Niger to look for a Nigerian way of development.

With a common fervor and a convergence of efforts, the people of Niger committed themselves to the realization of an endogenous model of development: the "Societe de Développement".

The "Charte nationale" adopted by the referendum of June 14, 1987, is the consecration of thisoption. It is the foundation of the Constitution.

The construction of a country, the edification of a society aspiring to an accelerated and harmonious development necessitate the instauration of a popular mobilisation framework.

The institution of a political movement, the "Mouvement National pour la Societe de Développement" (MNSD), responds to this need.

The people of Niger declare their attachment to the principles of democracy and human rights as defined by the "Declaration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen de 1789", the "Declaration Universelle des Droits de l'Homme de 1948", the "Charte africaine des Droits de l'Homme et des peuples de 1981", as guaranteed by the present Constitution.

They proclame their attachment to African unity and their commitment to do everything

5

in their power for its realization.

They maintain their will to cooperate toward the friendship between all people longing for peace, justice and freedom.

TITLE I "Société of Développement" Article 1 The fundamental option of the people of Niger is the "Société de

Développement".

The "Société de Développement" aims at the construction of a balanced and united nation based on solidarity, aspiring to the same ideal and driven by a common goal for progress. It aims at the responsible participation of all the people of Niger who are trying to solve the problems of economic, social and cultural development.

Article 2 The "Société de Développement" has for principal objectives:

national unity; national edification; social justice; participating democracy.

Article 3 The "Société de Développement"'s basic principles are consultation, concertation and participation.

6

Article 4 The effective and responsible participation of the populations toward the country's development must be contemplated within the "Société de Développement's structures and institutions: "Samariya, Coopratives, Associations socio-professionnelles, Conseils de Développement, Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement".

Article 5 The citizen of Niger's development and the national independence consolidation aimed by the "Société de Développement" are based upon the main orientations set by the "Charte nationale".

TITLE II State and Sovereignty

Art. 6 The State of Niger is an independent and sovereign Republic.

Any attempt prejudicial to the State's republican system is considered a crime of high treason andis punishable by law.

The national emblem is the tricolor flag composed of three horizontal bands, which from top to bottom are orange, white and green. The middle band has in its center an orange disc.

The National Anthem is "La Nigérienne". The State's coat of arms and seal are defined by law. The Republic's capital is Niamey. Its devise (motto??) is: Fraternity - Labor - Progress.

7

The national languages are: Arabic, Fulfulde, Gurmance, Hausa, Kanuri, Songhai zarma, Tamajaqand Tubu. The official language is French.

Article 7 The Republic of Niger is one, indivisible, lay, democratic, and social.

Its principle is the government of the people, by the people and for the people.

Article 8 The sovereignty belongs to the people.

No group nor any individual can claim this prerogative.

Personal power, regionalism, clan spirit, nepotism, feodal spirit, favoritism and corruption are banished in the exercise of power.

Article 9 The people exercise their sovereignty through their representants and by referendum. The law establishes when to call for referendum.

The Supreme Court sees to the legality of the referendum operations and proclaims its results.

Article 10 The suffrage is universal, based on equality and secrecy.

Every Nigerian, major, of both sex, enjoying civil and political rights is able to vote according to the conditions instituted by the law.

8

Article 11 The Republic of Niger is a State by right.

It assures to all equality before the law without any distinction of origin, race, sex or religion.

It respects all religious beliefs.

Any particularistic regionalist, racial or ethnic propagand, any manifestation of racial or ethnic discrimination are punishable by law.

Any manifestation of ideological, religious or philosophical intolerance is repressible by law.

Article 12 Within the freedom of association approved by the "Charte Nationale" and guaranteed by the present Constitution, associations are being created and exercise their activities freely under the condition to respect the principles of national sovereignty, of democracy and the laws of the Republic.

TITLE III Rights and Liberties of the Citizen Art. 13 The actual Constitution assures the citizen all the rights and liberties approved by the "Charte Nationale" and in particular;

the liberty of opinion and thought; the liberty of expression;

9

the liberty of conscience; the liberty of cult; the liberty of circulation; the liberty of residence; the liberty of correspondence and communication; the liberty of reunion; the liberty of association; the liberty of enterprise;

the liberty of press, publication and advertising;
the right to work; the right to justice; the right to education; the right to health; the right to security; the right to property;

the right to information;
the right of manifestation.

All these rights and liberties are exercised in the respect of the laws and regulations into effect.

TITLE IV Duties of the Citizen

Art. 14 Every citizen must respect the laws and regulations of the Republic.

10

Art. 15 Every citizen has the utmost duty to look after the defense of the homeland.

TITLE V The "Mouvement national pour la Société de Développement" Art. 16 The Nigerian political system is founded upon the principle of a political movement, assuring in its midst the free expression of opinions and ideologies: the "Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement (MNSD). Art. 17 The "Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement" is open to all citizens driven by the same patriotic ideal and working toward the realization of the objectives of the "Societe de Développement". Art. 18 The "Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement" determines the general policy of the country, inspiring itself from the "Charte Nationale" as the ideological reference and fundamental source of its policy. Art. 19 The direction of the country lies upon the principle of unicity of direction between the State and the "Mouvement". The duties assigned to the State's institutions and the "Mouvement"'s organs complement each other. However, the State's institutions and the "Mouvement"'s organs act in separate sectors and in different ways, in view of the concretisation of the "Société de Développement'"s

ideals.

Art. 20 "The Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement"'s modes of organization and operation are determined by its statutes.

TITLE VI

The "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale"

Art. 21 The "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale" (CSON), the State's supreme authority, is the State's and the "Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement"'s organ of direction, conception and animation.

Art. 22 The "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale" is composed of the civilians and the army.

Art. 23 The President of the "Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement" is the President of the "Conseil Supérieur d' Orientation Nationale".

Art. 24 The composition and operation of the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale" are determined by the statutes of the "Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement".

TITLE VII

12

The President of the Republic and Government Art. 25 The President of the Republic is the Chief of State. He incarnates the national unity. He protects the "Charte Nationale" and the Constitution. He ensures the State's continuity. He acts as the guarantor of national independence, territorial integrity, and the respect of treaties and international agreements.

Art. 26 The President of the Republic is elected for 7 years by direct and secret universal suffrage. He is reeligible once.

The "Congrès du Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement" designates the candidate to the presidency of the Republic at the recommendation of the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale".

Every native Nigerian, being at least 40 years of age and enjoying civic rights, is eligible to the presidency of the Republic.

Art. 27 The President of the Republic's election is acquired at the majority of votes.

The election writ is done by decree of the "Conseil des Ministres".

The new President of the Republic's mandate becomes effective from the expiration date of his predecessor's mandate.

The law establishes the conditions of eligibility, the candidatures presentation, the course of election, the counting of the votes and the poll proclamation.

13

The Supreme Court controls the legality of these operations.

Art. 28 Before entering into office, the President of the Republic takes an oath before the "Assemblée Nationale", in the following terms:

"I solemnly swear, before the people, to respect and to have the "Charte Nationale", the Constitution and the Republic's laws respected; to respect and defend the State's republican system; to preserve territorial integrity and national unity; to protect the citizens' rights and liberties, to work without respite for the peoples' happiness; to work with all my strength to the realization of the ideals of peace, justice, freedom in the world. The "Assemblée Nationale" is my witness."

Art. 29 In the event that the Republic's Presidency becomes vacant due to death, resignation or some unavoidable obstacle, the duties of the President of the Republic are carried on temporarily by the President of the "Assemblée Nationale".

Unavoidable obstacle is ascertained by the Supreme Court, seized by the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale".

New presidential elections 'take place within 45 days at least and 90 days at the most after the start of the vacancy.

The acting President cannot in any event be a candidate to the Presidency of the Republic. He exercises the President of the Republic's attributions except for those at paragraphs 2 & 3 Art. 30, paragraph 1 Art. 35, paragraph 2 Art. 36 and articles 31, 32,

14

33 & 106.

Art. 30 The President of the Republic is the sole holder of executive power.

He appoints the members of the Government and dismisses them. He can appoint a First Minister.

Art. 31 The President of the Republic has the initiative of the laws jointly with the membersof the "Assemblée Nationale".

He assures the promulgation of the laws within 15 days following their release by the President of the "Assemblée Nationale".

This time limit can be reduced to five (5) days in case of an emergency declared by the"Assemblee Nationale".

Before that period of time expires, the President of the Republic can ask the "Assemblée Nationale" for a second deliberation of the law or some of its articles. This second deliberation cannot be refused.

He can too, within the same period of time, ask and obtain by law that this second deliberation be held only during the ordinary session following the session during which the bill has been adopted at the first reading.

after a second reading, the "Assemblée Nationale passes the bill with a majority of 2/3 of its members, the law is promulgated.

15

Art. 32 The President of the Republic can, after notification by the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale", declare the dissolution of the "Assemblée Nationale".

A new assembly is elected within 45 days at least and 90 days at the most after this dissolution.

No new dissolution can take place during the year following the elections.

Art. 33 The President of the Republic, upon the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale"'s proposal and the "Bureau de l'Assemblée Nationale's notice can hold a referendum for any text which seems to him to necessitate the direct consultation of the people.

When the bill is adopted by referendum, the President of the Republic promulgates it within the period of time specified in Art. 31.

Art. 34 The President of the Republic executes the laws and guarantees the execution of the judicial decisions. He takes the regulations applicable to the entire Republic's territory.

Art. 35 The President of the Republic accredits the ambassadors and the envoys extraordinary to foreign states.

Foreign states' ambassadors and envoys extraordinary are accredited to him.

16

Art. 36 The President

4

the Republic is the Chief of the Administration.

He makes the appointments to the State's civil and military posts.

Art. 37 The President of the Republic is the Chief of the Armed forces.

Art. 38 When the Republic's institutions, the Nation's independence, the national territorial integrity, the regular operation of the constitutional public authorities or the execution of the international engagements are gravely and immediately threatened, the President of the Republic takes all due measures, as is expected in theses circumstances, in accordance with the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation. Nationale".

He issues a message to inform the Nation. -

The "Assemble° Nationale" is convoked of right (by law?). During this period of crisis, the "Assembles Nationale" cannot be dissolved.

Art. 39 The President of the Republic proclaims the state of emergency under the conditions established by the law.

Art. 40 The President of the Republic has the right of pardon.

Art. 41 The President of the Republic presides the "Conseil des Ministres".

The "Conseil des Ministres" deliberates necessarily on:

17

- the decisions regarding the State's general politicy; the bills;

- the ordinances prescribed by art. 67 and statutory orders; the appointments to the State's highest posts, the list of which is established by the law.

Art. 42. The bills, ordinances and statutory orders and can be submitted to the Supreme Court for advice before Wing examined by the "Conseil des Ministres".

Art. 43 The Government implements the directives of the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale" and conducts the Nation's policy according to the "Charte Nationale's fundamental principles.

The First Minister exercises his powers within the sphere of the powers delegated to him by the President of the Republic.

The President of the Republic can delegate some of his powers to the Ministers.

Art. 44 The functions of President of the Republic and Government member are incompatiblewith the exercise of all parliamentary mandate, public office and all professional activity.

Title VIIIA The "Assemblée Nationale"

Art. 45 The Parliament is constituted by a unique assembly, called the "Assemblée

18

Nationale, its members are called "deputes".

Art. 46 The "Assemblée Nationale" inspires itself from the "Charte Nationale's fundamental principles in its legislative action.

Art. 47 The "Assemblée Nationale" passes the bill and approves taxes.

Art. 48 The "deputes" are elected by universal suffrage directly and secretly from a complete national list made up by the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale".

The legislature length is (5) five years; the general elections in view of the "Assemblée's renewal take place at least ten (10) days and twenty (20) days at the most before the end of the current legislature.

The law determines the number of members in the "Assemblée Nationale", the conditions of eligibility , the regime of ineligibility and incompatibility, the methods of election, when to call for new elections in the event of a "depute's seat vacancy in the Chamber.

Art. 49 The Supreme Court statutes the candidates' eligibility.

It statutes too the validity of the "deputes"' election.

Art. 50 Twice a year, the "Assemblée Nationale" meets by law in ordinary session.

The first session starts March 1 and does not exceed ninety (90) days.

19

The second session, or the budget session, starts on October ten (10) and ends on December 10.

If the first of March or the 10th of October are legal holidays, the opening of the session takes place the first following working day.

Art. 51 The President of the "Assemblée Nationale" convenes an extraordinary session on a specific order of the day, upon the request of the President of the Republic or at the "deputes"' absolute majority.

Extraordinary sessions close as soon as the order of the day is over.

Art. 52 The "Assemblée Nationale" elects its President in its midst for the legislature's duration.

Art. 53 The "Assemblée Nationale"'s sessions are public. A full account of the debates is made public.

At the request of the President of the Republic or one third of "Assemblée" can sit in camera (private?).

the "deputes", the

Art. 54 Each "deputes" is the representant of the entire nation.

All election pledge is void.

The "deputes"' voting right is personal. However, the vote delegation is permitted when

20

a delegate is absent due to illness, to execute a mandate or a mission entrusted to him by the Government or the Assembly, or to comply with his military obligation. No one can get more than one vote delegation per ballot.

Art. 55 No delegate can be prosecuted, wanted, apprehended, detained or brought for trial for opinions or votes issued by him in the exercise of his functions.

Art. 56 During sessions the "deputes" can be prosecuted or apprehended for criminal or correctional matters only with the "Assembles Nationale'"s authorization, except when caught in the act. Out of session the "deputes" can be arrested only with the authorization of the "Assemblée Nationale", except when caught in the act, or in the case of authorized proceedings or final condemnations.

The detention or prosecution of a "depute" is deferred if the "Assemblée Nationale" requests it.

Art. 57 The "deputes" receive an indemnity fixed by the law.

Art. 58 The "Assemblée Nationale" establishes its internal regulations.

Title IX

Relations between the "Assemblée Nationale" and the Government

Art. 59 The President of the Republic communicates with the "Assemblée Nationale"

21

either directly or by messages issued by the President of the "Assemblée Nationale". These messages give rise to no objections.

Art 60 The Government's members have access to the "Commissions de l'Assemblée Nationale". They are heard at the request of the Commissions.

They can be assisted by their collaborators.

Section 1

Respective Fields of the Law and Regulations.

Art. 61 The law establishes the regulations regarding:

the citizenship, civic rights and fundamental guarantees offered to citizens in the exercise of public liberties;

the nationality, persons' status and capacity, matrimonial laws, successions and liberalities;

the procedure according which the customs will be ascertained and brought into harmony with the fundamental principles of the Constitution;

the determination of the crimes and offenses as well as the penalties applicable to them, the penal procedure, the amnisty;

22

the organization of the judicial and administrative tribunals and the procedure followed before these jurisdictions, the statute of the magistrates, the cabinet members and justice auxiliaries;

the basis of taxation, the rates and tax collection terms of all nature;

the issue of the currency system;

the "Assemblée Nationale's and local assemblies' electoral system;

the creation of categories of public institutions; the public office's general status;

the Administration's general organization;

the state of siege and emergency state.

Art. 62 The law establishes the fundamental principles:

of the National Defense's organization;

of the Education;

of the Health;

of the regime of property, real right, civic and commercial obligations;

23

of the labor law, trade union legislation, and social institutions;

of the cession and management of government estate; of the mutuality and economy; of the organization of production;

of the transports and telecommunications system.

Art. 63 Financial laws control the State's resources and expenses.

Program laws dictate the objectives of the State's economic and social action.

Art. 64 The "Assemblée Nationale" authorizes the declaration of war.

Art. 65 The state of siege is enacted by the "Conseil des ministres". The "Assemblée Nationale" holds a meeting by law, if it is not in session.

Only the "Assemblée Nationale" can authorize the prorogation of the state of siege beyond fifteen days.

Art. 66 The matters other than the ones regulated by law come under regulations.

The texts dealing with legislative matters in effect before the effective date of the present Constitution can be modified by decree as per advice of the Supreme Court.

24

Art. 67 The President of the Republic can, to execute his program, ask the "Assemblée Nationale" by a bill the authorization to take measures by ordinance for matters which normally come under the law, for a limited period of time.

The "Conseil des ministres" reviews the ordinances eventually at the recommendation of the Supreme Court. They take effect after their promulgation but become void if the ratification bill is not tabled before the "Assemblée Nationale" by the time appointed by the enabling law.

Upon the expiration of the time limit mentioned at par. 1 of the present article, the ordinances can only be modified by law, in their dispositions in the legislative field.

Art. 68 The propositions and amendments not pertaining to the law are inadmissible.
The President of the "Assemblée Nationale" declares them inadmissible.

In case of contestation, the Supreme Court, seized by the President of the Republic or the President of the "Assemblée Nationale", statutes within eight (8) days.

Section II

Statutes Elaboration

Art. 69 The bills and amendments filed by the "deputes" are not acceptable if their adoption might cause either a decrease of public resources, or the creation or aggravation

25

of a public charge, unless they are accompanied with a proposal of increased revenue or savings of equal value.

Art. 70 The bills debate focuses on the text presented by the competent Commission of the "Assemblée Nationale".

At the request of the Government, the Commission must bring to the attention of the "Assemblée Nationale" the points of disagreement with the Government.

Art. 71 The "deputes" have the right of amendment.

Art. 72 The "Assemblée Nationale passes the budget bill according to the law.

Art. 73 The budget bill is brought before the "Assemblée Nationale" at the opening of the budget session. The finance act must plan to maintain the balance between the receipts and expenditures.

The "Assemblée Nationale" votes the balance of the budget.

If the "Assemblée Nationale" does not express its opinion within sixty (60) days of the bringing in of the bill, the provisions of this project can be put into effect by ordinances.

The Government brings the bill, for ratification, to the "Assemblée Nationale" which holds a meeting in extraordinary session, within fifteen (15) days.

If the "Assemblée Nationale" does not vote the budget by the end of this extraordinary

26

session, the budget is definitely established by ordinance.

If the budget law cannot be filed on time to be promulgated before the opening of the session, the President of the Republic urgently requests from the "Assemble* Nationale" the authorization to maintain the previous year's budget ???

Art. 74 The "Assemblée Nationale" takes care of the Nation's accounts according to the provisions set by the financial act.

TITLE X The National Armed Forces

Art. 75 The National Armed Forces traditionally ensure the defense, the integrity and the security of the national territory against all outside aggression.

Art. 76 The Nation resorts on National Armed Forces to preserve the national security under the exceptional circumstances defined by the law.

Art. 77 Securing everywhere and under any circumstance the defense and integrity of the national territory against every form of aggression, the National Armed Forces see, at all times, to the safeguard of the material and moral interests of the populations and participate in their civic and military education.

Art. 78 The National Armed Forces take an active part in the development efforts, in particular in the farm production, the fight against desertification, the construction of

27

economic and social infrastructures.

Art. 79 The National Armed Forces are integrated in all sectors of public

life, they

exercise political and administrative functions in the same way as the other components
of the Nation.

TITLE XI

The Supreme Court

Art. 80 The Supreme Court is composed of four (4) (Chambers) Houses: the Constitutional Chamber, the Judicial Chamber, the Administrative Chamber and the Account Chamber.

The law determines the Supreme Court's composition, organization, attributions and operation.

TITLE XII

The Judicial Authority Art. 81 Justice is administered in the National territory in the name of the people, and with the strict observance of the law and the rights and liberties of every citizen.

Art. 82 No one can be apprehended unless a law was duly promulgated before the

28

incriminating act took place.

Art. 83 The laws and regulations have a retroactive effect only as far rights and advantages are concerned.

as

the citizen's

Art. 84 No one can arbitrarily be arrested. All accused is presumed innocent unless proven guilty following a procedure warranting him the right to defend himself. Judicial authority, the guarantor of individual liberty; assures the respect of this principle under the conditions provided by the law.

Arta 85 Judges are only liable to (subject) the law in their official capacity.

The President of the +Republic

is

the guarantor of the judges' independence. He is

assisted by the "Conseil Supérieur de la Magistrature".

Art. 86 The composition, organization and operation of the "Conseil Supérieur Magistrature" are determined by the law.

la

Art. 87 The magistrates are appointed at the Bench by the President of the Republic at the proposal of the Minister of Justice, keeper of the Seals, as per advice of the "Conseil Supérieur de la Magistrature".

TITLE XIII

The High Court of Justice

29

Art. 88 The High Court of Justice is composed of elected in its midst by the "Assemblée Nationale" after each general renewal. It elects its President among its members.

The law determines the number of its members, the rules dictating its operation and the procedure followed before it.

Art. 89 Only in case of high treason the President of the Republic is responsible for his acts whilst on duty and can be brought before the High Court.

The High Court (Supreme Court) is competent to judge the members of the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale" and of the Government for the acts qualified as crimes or offenses perpetrated while in office, except for crimes and offenses against the security of the State or related to it.

Art. 90 The indictment of the President of the Republic, of the members of the "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale" and of the members of the Government is voted by open ballot by a two-third majority of the "deputes" constituting the "Assemblée Nationale".

Art. 91 The High Court is bound by the crimes and offenses definition and by the penalties determination resulting from the penal laws in effect at the time of the perpetrated facts involved in the proceedings.

Title XIV

30

The "Conseil National de Développement"--

Art. 92 The "Conseil National de Développement", the deliberating authority in economic, socialand cultural matters advises about bills, ordinances or decrees submitted to it.

The economic, social and cultural programs bills are necessarily submitted to it.

The President of the Republic and the President of the "Assemblée Nationale" may consult the "Conseil National de Développement" for all economic, social and cultural problems.

Art. 93 The "Conseil National de Développement" holds an ordinary session every three (3) months.

It meets in special session at the request of the Government or the "Assemblée Nationale".

The police reports of these sessions are transmitted within 15 days to the Government or the "Assemblée Nationale".

Art. 94 The "Conseil National de Développement" sees to the good order of the development councils. It ensures the formation of the elected members from the start.

Art. 95 The composition of the "Conseil National de Développement", the duration of its mandate, the way its members are designated and the rules of its operation are determined by the law.

31

Art. 96 The councils are constituted by members elected democratically.

Art. 97 The national development advisers enjoy privileges as per articles 55 and 56 of the actual Constitution.

Art. 98 The national development advisers receive an allowance, the amount is determined by the law.

Title XV

The Territory Collectivities

Art. 99 The territorial collectivities are created by the law.

The law determines the fundamental principles of the Territorial Collectivities' free administration, their powers and resources.

Title XVI

The International Treaties and Agreements

Art. 100 The President of the Republic negotiates and ratifies the Treaties and International Agreements.

32

Art. 101

The peace treaties, treaties or agreements relating to international

organizations, the ones which modify the State's internal laws and the ones dealing with the State's financial involvement can only be ratified through a law.

Art. 102 In the event that the Supreme Court, seized by the President of the Republic or by the President of the "Assemblée Nationale", has declared that an international agreement comprises a clause adverse to the Constitution, it can be ratified only after the revision of the Constitution.

Art. 103 The treaties or agreements ratified regularly have from the day of their publication, an authority superior to the one of the laws, on the condition for each agreement or treaty, of their application by the other party.

Title XVII

The Cooperation and Association with the States

Art. 104 The Republic of Niger can conclude cooperation and association agreements with other States based on reciprocal rights and advantages.

It accepts to create with these States intergovernmental organisms of joint management, coordination and free cooperation.

Art. 105 These organizations can have for special object:

33

the harmonization of the economic, financial and monetary policy;
the establishment of unions aiming at the economic integration by the promotion of production and exchanges;

the creation of solidarity funds;

the harmonization development plans;

the harmonization of foreign policy;

the judicial organization coordination;

the cooperation in defense matters;

the cooperation and coordination in sanitary matters;

the cooperation in cultural, scientific and technical matters;

the coordination of transports, communications and telecommunications;

the cooperation in the fight against disasters.

34

Title XVIII

Revision

Art. 106 The President of the Republic and the members of the "Assemblée Nationale" have the initiative to revise the Constitution.

Art. 107 To be taken into consideration, the revision bill has to be voted by a threefourth majority of the members of the "Assemblée Nationale".

The revision takes effect only after its approval by referendum, except if the bill in question has been approved by a four-fifth majority of the members of the "Assemblée Nationale".

Art. 108 No revision procedure can be initiated or pursued when it may be prejudicial to the territory integrity.

The State's republican system cannot be subject to revision.

Title XIX

Diverse Dispositions

Art. 109 The necessary provisions for the application of the actual Constitution will be subjected to laws voted by the "Assemblée Nationale".

35

Art. 110 The legislation presently in effect is still applicable as long as it is not contrary to the present Constitution, except in the intervention of new texts.

Title XX

Transitory Dispositions

Art. 111 The established authorities will keep exercising their functions and the present institutions will be maintained until the advent of the new authorities and institutions.

Art. 112 The actual Constitution will be adopted by referendum. The proclamation of the referendum results will occur 72 hours following the start of the ballot.

Art. 113 The Chief of State, assuring the continuity of the State in accordance with the provisions of Art. III, promulgates the Constitution in a period of time not exceeding 15 days from the day of its adoption.

The Constitution comes into effect from the date of its promulgation.

Art. 114 The President of the Republic's election will take place within 90 days following the coming into effect of the Constitution.

An ordinance bearing on electoral law will determine how the list of candidatures is put forward and the presidential election organization.

36

Art. 115 The election of the "deputes" to the Assembles Nationale" will take place the same day as the presidential election.

An ordinance bearing on electoral law will determine the way the list of candidatures is put forward and the organization of the legislative elections.

The "Assembles Nationale" will be installed no more than 15 days after the promulgation of the election results.

Art. 116 The legality of the election operations will be ascertained by the highest judicial authority in the country.

Art. 117 The development advisers' mandate, in office at the time the Constitution took effect, expires when it comes to an end.

Art. 118 The "Conseil Supérieur d'Orientation Nationale" will be instituted at the end of the constitutional "Congrès du Mouvement National pour la Société de Développement".

37

