REPUBLIC OF PANAMA

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION

Translated from the official Spanish text by

JORGE FABREGA P. LL.B., M.A.

Copyright © 1977 For Index By Fox Publishing Corporation

PUBLISHED BY

PUBLISHING CORPORATION
BRADFORD, VERMONT 05033

PREAMBLE

We the Representatives of the Communities (Corregimientos) of the Republic of Panama meeting in a National Constituent Assembly elected by the people, and invoking God's protection, approve and sanction the following Political Constitution of the Republic of Panama, which is dedicated to the social, political, economic and moral principles that guided the Panamanian Revolution.

1

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA TITLE I THE PANAMANIAN STATE Article 1: The Panamanian Nation is organized as a sovereign and independent State, and its name is the Republic of Panama. Its Government is central, republican, democratic and representative. Article 2. Public power emanates from the people. It is exercised by the Government through the distribution of functions among Executive, Legislative and Judicial Branches, members of which act in harmonious collaboration among themselves, and with the Public Forces. Article 3. The territory of the Republic of Panama includes the land surface, the territorial sea, the undersea continental shelf, the subsoil and the air space between Colombia and Costa Rica, in accordance with the Boundary Treaties concluded by Panama with those States. National territory can never be ceded, assigned, or transferred, neither temporarily nor partially, to another State. Article 4. The Republic of Panama shall abide by universally recognized rules of international law not detrimental to National interests. Article 5. The territory of the Republic of Panama is distributed into Provinces and these into Districts divided into Communities (Corregimientos) which constitute the political basis of the State. Other political divisions may be created by law either to be subject to special rules, or for reasons of administrative convenience or public services. Article 6. The symbols of the Republic are the anthem, the flag, and the coat of arms adopted by Law No. 34 of 1949. Article 7. Spanish is the official language of the Republic.

2

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION TITLE II CITIZENSHIP, AND STATUS OF FOREIGNERS

Article 8. Panamanian citizenship is acquired by birth, by naturalization or by Constitutional provision. Article 9. The following are Panamanians by birth:
1. Those born in the National territory. 2. The offspring of parents who are Panamanian by birth, born outside the territory of the Republic, provided they establish their domicile in the National territory. 3. The offspring of parents who are Panamanian by naturalization, born outside the territory of the Republic, provided they establish their domicile in the Republic of Panama and state their desire to elect Panamanian citizenship, not later than one year after reaching legal age.

Article 10. The following may request Panamanian citizenship by naturalization: 1. Aliens with five (5) years of continuous residence within the territory of the Republic, if, after having reached legal age, they declare their intention to become naturalized, expressly renounce their citizenship of origin or any other citizenship, and establish that they have a command of the Spanish language and elementary knowledge of Panamanian geography, history and political organization; 2. Those aliens with three (3) years of continuous residence within the territory of the Republic, who have children born on National territory of a Panamanian father or mother, or who have a spouse of Panamanian citizenship, provided they make the statement and submit the evidence to which the preceding refers. 3. Those nationals, by birth, of Spain or any Latin American nation, provided they fulfill the same requirements demanded in their state of origin for the naturalization of Panamanians.

3

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Article 11. All children born abroad who, before their seventh (7th) birthday, were legally adopted by Panamanian nationals are Panamanians without requiring naturalization papers, provided they establish their domicile in the Republic of Panama, and, not later than one year after they become of legal age, state their desire to elect Panamanian citizenship. Article 12. Regulations concerning naturalization shall be established by law. The State may refuse a request for naturalization papers for reasons of morality, security, health, physical or mental impairment. Article 13. Panamanian nationality by origin or acquired by birth cannot be lost, but express or implied renunciation of it, suspends citizenship. Panamanian nationality derived from or acquired by naturalization shall be lost for the same reasons. There is express renunciation when the person states in writing to the Chief Executive that he desires to abandon Panamanian citizenship; and implied renunciation when the person acquires the citizenship of a foreign state; or is in the service of an enemy state. Article 14. Immigration shall be regulated by law, considering social, economic and demographic interests of the country. Article 15. Both nationals and aliens who are within the territory of the Republic shall be subject to the Constitution and Panamanian Law. Article 16. Panamanians by naturalization shall not be obliged to take up arms against the country of their birth.

4

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION TITLE III INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES Chapter 1 Fundamental Guarantees Article 17. The Authorities of the Republic are established for the purpose of protecting the lives, honor and property of all nationals, wherever they may be, and aliens who may be under the Republic's jurisdiction, of insuring the effectiveness of individual and social rights and duties, and of observing and causing to be observed the Constitution and the Law. Article 18. Private persons are solely responsible to the Authorities for violation of the Constitution or the Law. Public Officers are responsible, for the same reasons, and also for exceeding their authority, or for dereliction in the performance of their duties. Article 19. There shall be no public or private privileges, or discrimination by reason of race, birth, social class, sex, religion or political ideas. Article 20. All Panamanians and aliens are equal before the law, but the Law, for reasons of labor, health, morality, public security and National economy, may subject to special conditions, or may deny the exercise of specific activities to aliens in general, Likewise, the Law or the Authorities may, according to circumstances, take measures that exclusively affect nationals of certain countries, in case of war, or in accordance with what may be established in public treaties. Article 21. No one may be deprived of his liberty except by an order in writing from a competent authority, issued in accordance with legal formalities, and for reasons previously defined by law. Those executing said order are obliged to give a copy thereof to the person concerned, if he requests it.

5

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA A culprit surprised in the act of committing a crime (flagrante delicto) may be apprehended by any person and must be turned over immediately to the Authorities. No one may be detained for more than twenty-four hours without being placed at the disposal of the competent authority. Public officers who violate this precept shall suffer immediate loss of employment and shall be subject to all other penalties established by law, concerning this violation. There shall not be imprisonment, detention or arrest for debts or strictly civil obligations. Article 22. Any individual arrested for reasons not specified or without the legal formalities prescribed by this Constitution, or by law, shall be placed at liberty upon his or another person's petition through a writ of Habeas Corpus, which can be interposed before a Court, immediately after the arrest, regardless of the applicable penalty. The proceeding shall be summary. Article 23. The State may not extradite its nationals nor aliens for political offenses. Article 24. No person is obliged to testify against himself, his spouse, relatives to the 4th degree of consanguinity or 2nd degree of affinity in criminal, correctional or Police proceedings. Article 25. The domicile or residence is inviolable. No one may enter therein without the consent of the owner, except by written order of a Competent Authority and for a specific purpose, or to assist the victims of a crime or disaster. Labor, Social Security and Health Officials, upon presentation of valid identification, may make domiciliary visits or inspections to residences or work centers to check on the fulfillment of social and public health laws. Article 26. Every person may travel freely throughout the National territory and change domicile or residence without 6

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION restrictions other than those which the transit, fiscal, health, and immigration laws or regulations may prescribe. Article 27. The penitentiary system is based on principles of security, rehabilitation and social defense. It is unlawful to apply measures which may damage the physical, mental, or moral integrity of incarcerated individuals. A program for training prisoners in an occupation shall be established, which should permit them to be usefully reintegrated into society, at the time of their release. Prisoners who are minors shall be governed by a special regime on custody, protection and education. Article 28. Correspondence and other private documents are inviolable, and shall not be seized or examined except by order of a Competent Authority, for specific purposes, and in accordance with legal formalities. In all cases secrecy shall be maintained with respect to matters not related to the reason for the seizure or examination. Private telephone communications are also inviolable, and may not be intercepted. The examination of documents must always be effected in the presence of the person concerned, or of a member of his family, or, for lack of same, before two honorable residents of the same place. Article 29. There is no penalty of death, expatriation, or confiscation of property. Article 30. Only those acts shall be punished which have been declared punishable by law antedating their perpetration, and exactly applicable to the imputed act. Article 31. No one shall be tried except by Competent Authority and in accordance with legal formalities, nor more than once for the same criminal, police or disciplinary cause. Article 32. The following may inflict penalties without previous trial, and within the precise terms of law: 7

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA 1. Officials exercising authority and jurisdiction, who can fine, or arrest, anyone who insults them or is in contempt of their authority in the act of their discharge of official duties, or because of their performance of same; 2. Chiefs of Public Forces, who can arrest their subordinates in order to subdue an insurrection or mutiny or for an infraction of discipline; 3. Masters of ships or aircraft who have power, when outside of port, to repress insurrection or mutiny, or to maintain order on board, and to detain temporarily any actual or presumed culprit.
Article 33. In case of manifest violation of a Constitutional

or legal precept, to the detriment of any person, the order of a superior does not relieve from responsibility the agent who executed it. Exception is made of individuals of the Public Forces when they are in actual service, in which case the responsibility falls exclusively on the immediate superior who gave the order.
Article 34. All religions may be professed and all forms of

worship practiced freely, without any other limitation than respect for Christian morality and public order. It is recognized that the Roman Catholic religion is practiced by the majority of Panamanians.
Article 35. Religious organizations have juridical capacity

and manage and administer their property within the limits prescribed by law, the same as other juridical persons.
Article 36. Every person may express his opinion freely, either orally or in writing, by means of the press or any other method, without being subject to prior censorship. Legal responsibility (liability) will, however, be incurred when by any of these means, the reputation or honor of persons is assailed, or when social security or public order is attacked.

8

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION

Article 37. All inhabitants of the Republic have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms for lawful ends. Public demonstrations or gatherings in open air are not subject to permission and only previous notification to the local Administrative Authorities, twenty-four hours in advance, is required to perform them. Authorities can take Police action to prevent or restrain abuse of this right, when the form in which it is exercised causes, or may cause, traffic disturbances, breach of the peace, or violation of the rights of others. Article 38. The formation of companies, associations, or foundations that are not contrary to morals or legal order, is permitted. They may obtain recognition as juridical persons. The capacity, recognition and regulation of these companies and other juridical persons shall be determined by Panamanian law. Article 39. Every person is free to exercise any profession
or trade, subject to regulations established by law with respect to competence, morality, social welfare and security, professional affiliation, public health, unionization, and compulsory union dues. There shall not be established any tax or assessment for the exercise of liberal professions, trades and arts.

Article 40. Every person shall have the right to present, and obtain prompt decisions on, respectful petitions and complaints to Public Officials for reasons of social or private interest. A Public Official to whom such a petition, inquiry, or complaint is presented, must make a decision on it within thirty days. Penalties which apply to a violation of this provision shall be determined by law.
9

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA
Article 41. Ministers of religious faiths and members of

religious orders may not hold public posts even if elected by popular vote, except in cases of positions related to social welfare, public education, of scientific research. Officials of the Catholic Church in Panama, such as Bishops, Vicars General, Episcopal Vicars, Apostolic Administrators, and Prelates Nullius, must be Panamanian citizens by birth, and so must ministers of other religions with functions or jurisdictions equal to the above mentioned Catholic dignitaries.
Article 42. Laws have no retroactive effect, except those of

public order or social interest when they so provide. In criminal matters the law favorable to the accused always has preference and is retroactive even though the judgement may have become final.
Article 43. Private property acquired by juridical or natural persons is guaranteed in accordance with law. Article 44. Private property implies obligations on the part of its owners because of the social function it must fulfill. For reasons of public utility or social interest defined by law, there may be expropriation through a summary proceedings and compensation. Article 45. When the application of a law enacted for

reasons of public benefit or social interest results in a conflict between private rights and the need recognized by the law itself, private interest must yield to the public or social interest.
Article 46. In case of war, grave disturbance of public order or urgent social interest requiring prompt action, the Executive Power may decree the expropriation or seizure of private property. When return of the seized object is feasible, the seizure will be only for the duration of the circumstances that may cause it.

10

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION The State is always responsible for all expropriations that the Executive Power thus carries out, and for the losses and damage caused by the seizure, and will pay the value thereof as soon as the determining cause for the expropriation or seizure ends. Article 47. No person is obliged to pay a tax or impost which has not been legally established and its manner of collection prescribed by law. Article 48. Every author, artist, or inventor enjoys the exclusive ownership of his work or invention during the time and in the manner prescribed by law. Article 49. Every person against whom a Public Officer shall issue or execute a mandatory order or an injunction violating the rights and guarantees established by this Constitution, shall have the right of the order being revoked upon his petition or the petition of any other person. The writ for protection of constitutional guarantees, to which this Article refers, shall be subject to summary proceedings and the cognizance of Courts of Justice. Article 50. In case of foreign war or internal disturbance that threatens public peace and order, all, or a part, of the Republic may be declared in a state of siege, and the effects of Articles 21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 36, 37, and 43 of this Constitution may be temporarily suspended, partially or totally. Chapter 2 The Family Article 51. The State protects marriage, motherhood and the family. What is relative to civil status is determined by law. The State shall protect the physical, mental and moral health of minors and shall guarantee their rights to support, health, education and social security and welfare. 11

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA
Article 52. Marriage is the legal basis of the family. It rests

on equality of rights of both spouses and may be dissolved in accordance with the provisions of the law.
Article 53. The de facto, or common-law, union between persons legally capable of contracting marriage, maintained continuously during five years under conditions of singleness and stability, shall have all the effects of civil marriage. To this end, it will suffice that the interested parties request the Civil Registrar, jointly, to record the de facto union which can be processed through the "Corregidores". When this request has not been made, the marriage may be proved, for the purpose of claiming the rights thereof, by any of the spouses or any interested person, in accordance with the procedures established by the law. But the Public Ministry, in the interest of morals and of law, or third persons who assert rights susceptible of being affected by the aforesaid recording, provided always the recording was contrary to fact, may object to the recording, or attack it after it has been effected. Article 54. Parental authority is the nexus of rights and

duties that parents have in relation to their children. Parents are obliged to support, educate and protect their children to ensure their proper physical and spiritual upbringing and development, and the latter are obliged to respect and assist their parents. The exercise of parental authority shall be regulated by law, in accordance with social interests and the welfare of the children.
Article 55. Parents have, with respect to their children born out of wedlock, the same duties as towards their children born in wedlock. All the children are equal according to law, and have the same rights of inheritance in intestate successions. The rights of minors or incapacitated children and of destitute parents in testate successions, shall be recognized by law.

12

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION
Article 56. Investigation of paternity shall be regulated by law. Classifications as to the nature of the relationship are abolished. There shall not be entered any statement establishing differences of birth, or, on the civil status of the parents, in the registration records, nor in any verification, baptismal or christening records, or certificate referring to the relationship. Authority is hereby granted to the father of a child born before the effective date of this Constitution to protect the child by the provisions of this Article, by means of rectifying any record or attestation in which any classification may have been established with respect to said child. The consent of the mother is not required, but if the child is of legal age, he must give his consent thereto. In acts of acknowledgement of paternity, anyone who is legally affected by said act may oppose this measure. Procedures shall be established by law. Article 57. The State shall protect the social and economic

development of the family and shall organize the family homestead, determining the nature and amount of property that must constitute it, on the basis that it is inalienable and unattachable.
Article 58. The State shall create an Entity for the protection of the family, for the purpose of:

1. Promoting responsible parenthood through informal educational programs; 2. Institutionalizing pre-school education in centers specializing in the care of pre-school children of private and public employees, and 3. Protecting minors and taking care of the social readjustment of those who are abandoned, helpless, morally misguided, or with behavior maladjustment problems. The functioning of a special jurisdiction over minors, which, among other duties, shall take cognizance 13

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA of investigation of paternity, of family desertion, and of juvenile behavior problems, shall be organized and determined by law. Chapter 3 Work Article 59. Work is a right and duty of the individual and accordingly the State is obliged to devise economic policies to promote full employment, and to ensure to every workman the necessary conditions for a decent existence. Article 60. Every workman in the service of the State or of public or private enterprises is guaranteed a minimum wage or salary. Workmen of enterprises specified by law shall share in the profits thereof in accordance with the economic conditions of the country. Article 61. Rules for periodic adjustment of the minimum salary or wage of the workman shall be set by law, to cover the normal requirements of his family, to improve worker's standard of living according to specific conditions of each economic region and activity. The law may also determine the method of fixing minimum salaries or wages for professions or trades. Whenever job or piece work is performed, it is obligatory that the minimum wage be ensured for each day's work. The minimum of all wages or salaries is unattachable, except for support obligations as established by law. Working tools of the workmen are also unattachable. Article 62. A like wage or salary shall always be paid for like work under identical conditions, irrespective of the person who performs it, without taking into account sex, nationality, age, race, social standing, political or religious ideologies. 14

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION
Article 63. The right of organization is acknowledged for employers, employees, workmen and professionals of all classes, for purposes of economic and social activities. The Executive Power shall have a nonextendable term of thirty (30) days in which to grant or reject registration of a union. Regulations concerning registration of unions shall be established by law, which registration shall determine the legal personality (status) thereof. The Executive Power may not dissolve a union except when it deviates from its exclusive purposes, and is so declared by a competent court, by means of a final judgement. The Boards of Directors of these associations shall be constituted exclusively of Panamanians. Article 64. The right to strike is hereby recognized. Regulations concerning the exercise of this right, including special restrictions for Public Service, shall be established by law. Article 65. The maximum work day shall be eight (8) hours,

and the labor week up to forty-eight (48) hours. The maximum night work shall not be more than seven (7) hours. Overtime shall be paid with surcharge. The maximum work day may be reduced to six (6) hours per day for those over fourteen and under eighteen. Employment of children under 14, and night work of those under 16, is unlawful, save for the exceptions established by law. Likewise, it is unlawful to employ children under 14 as domestic servants, and to employ children and women in unhealthy occupations. In addition to weekly rest, all workmen shall be entitled to paid vacations. The law may establish a weekly rest with pay in accordance with social and economic conditions of the country, and the benefit for the workmen. 15

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Article 66. All stipulations that imply waiver, diminishment, modification, or release of any right recognized in favor of the workman are void, and, as such, do not bind the contracting parties although expressed in a labor agreement or in any other pact. Everything relating to labor contracts shall be regulated by law. Article 67. Motherhood of the working woman is protected. The pregnant woman may not be separated from her public or private employment for this reason. For a minimum of six weeks prior to confinement and eight weeks thereafter, she is entitled to rest with the same remuneration that she was receiving, and her job shall be kept for her, as well as all the rights inherent to her contract. Upon returning to work, the mother may not be dismissed for one year, except in special cases prescribed by law, which shall in addition regulate the special working conditions of the pregnant working woman. Article 68. It is unlawful to engage foreign workmen who can lower the working conditions or standards of living of the National worker. Hiring of foreign managers, administrative and executive directors, technicians and professionals for public and private services shall be regulated by law, always ensuring the rights of the Panamanians in regard to National interest. Article 69. No workman can be dismissed without justified reason and without the formalities established by law. This will specify the just reasons for the dismissal, its special exceptions, and corresponding compensation. Article 70. Free professional education for the worker is established, imparted by the State or private enterprise, and regulated by law. Article 71. Training of union members is established. It will be imparted exclusively by the State and by Panamanian union organizations. 16

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 72. All controversies arising from relations between capital and labor shall be subjected to labor jurisdiction, which shall be exercised in accordance with the provision of the law. Article 73. Relations between capital and labor, shall be regulated by law, placing them on a basis of social justice, and establishing special state protection for the benefit of workmen. Article 74. The rights and guarantees established in this Chapter shall be considered as minimum benefits for workmen. Chapter 4 National Culture Article 75. The right of every individual to participate in the Culture of the Nation is recognized and thus the State shall foster the participation of all inhabitants of the Republic in National Culture. Article 76. National Culture consists of the artistic, philosophic and scientific manifestations produced by man in Panama through the ages. The State shall promote, develop and safeguard this cultural heritage. Article 77. The State shall supervise the defense, dissemination and purity of the Spanish language. Article 78. The State shall formulate national scientific policy destined to promote the development of science and technology. Article 79. The State recognizes the individuality and universal value of artistic work; it shall sponsor and encourage Panamanian artists by making their works known through channels of Cultural communication, and shall promote, at the National level, the development of art in all its manifestations, 17

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA by means of academic institutions of information and recreation. Article 80. The historical heritage of the Nation is composed of its archeological objects and sites, historical documents, monuments, and personal or real property that testify to the Nation's past. The State shall decree the expropriation of those items which are in the hands of private parties. Regulations concerning custody of such items shall be established by law, based on the historical primacy of same. Necessary steps to adapt historical heritage items to commercial, tourist, industrial, and technological programs shall be regulated by law. Article 81. The State shall foster the development of physical culture, through sport, education, and recreation centers which shall be regulated by law. Article 82. The State recognizes that folkloric tradition constitutes an essential element of national culture, and shall promote its study, preservation and publication, establishing its primacy over manifestations or tendencies that adulterate it. Article 83. Aboriginal languages shall be the object of special study, conservation and dissemination. The State shall promote programs of bilingual literacy in indigenous communities. Article 84. The social communications media are instruments of information, education, recreation, and cultural and scientific dissemination. When they are used for the dissemination of publicity and propaganda, these must not be contrary to health, morals, education, cultural formation of the local and national conscience. Operation of above mentioned media shall be regulated by law. Article 85. The State recognizes and respects the ethnic identity of national indigenous communities, and shall
18

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION establish programs to develop the material, social and spiritual values of each of their cultures. It shall establish an institution for the study, preservation and spread of these cultures and their languages, and for promotion of full development of said human groups. Chapter 5 Education Article 86. It is incumbent, exclusively, upon the State to organize and direct National education in all the National territory and to guarantee the right to and duty of education. Article 87. All Panamanians are entitled to receive a democratic and scientific education, the purpose of which shall be to develop in the student a National conscience, based on the understanding of the history and problems of the country; on the authority of science, technology and culture; on the work habit; and on his participation in the process of economic development, social justice and human solidarity. Article 88. Education is a public service. It shall be imparted by a single system in all the National territory. Education may be public or private. Partially or wholly paid education by the State is public; that which is imparted without any cost whatever to the State is private education. However, all education is public in the sense that all educational establishments, either public or private, are open to all pupils irrespective of race, social position, political ideas, religion, or nature of the union between their parents or guardians. The operation of all educational establishments by natural or juridical persons may be authorized only by law. Article 89. Public education is free at all pre-University levels. Primary level or general basic education is compulsory. 19

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Free education obliges the State to furnish students with all supplies necessary for their instruction until they complete their general basic education. Free education does not prevent a tuition fee at the noncompulsory level. Article 90. Study plans, the establishment of instructional programs and levels, and a system of National education guidance, shall be regulated by law, in accordance with National needs. Article 91. Occupational education is established as a special element of the educational system, with basic education and special training programs. Article 92. Private undertakings whose operations significantly alter the school population in a certain area, shall contribute to meet the educational requirements of the children of their workmen in accordance with official regulations. Urban development enterprises shall have the same responsibilities with respect to the areas in which they operate. Article 93. Only academic and professional titles issued by the State, or authorized by it, are recognized. The Official University of the State shall supervise the degrees of private Universities officially approved, to guarantee the degrees they use, and shall revalidate those of foreign Universities in the cases established by law. Article 94. Education shall be imparted in the official language. Only in specially qualified cases of public interest can an educational establishment be permitted by law to teach in a foreign language. The history of Panama and civic education shall always be taught by Panamanians. 20

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 95. Necessary incentives for the publication of National didactic works, and provisions for their use as official texts, shall be established by law. Article 96. The State shall establish a system of economic benefits in scholarships, supplements, or any economic assistance, to • students who deserve or require it. When students have equal merits, preference shall be given to those who are financially in need of these benefits. Article 97. The Official University of the Republic is autonomous. Juridical status, its own patrimony, and the right to administer it are hereby recognized. It is empowered to organize its own study programs, and to appoint and dismiss personnel in the manner determined by law. It will include in its activities the study of national problems and diffusion of National Culture. Equal importance shall be given to University education provided in Regional Centers as that provided in the capital city. Article 98. In order that the economic autonomy of the University be made effective, the State shall provide it with what is essential for its establishment, operation, and future development, as well as the endowment dealt with in the preceding article, and the necessary resources to increase it. Article 99. Freedom of teaching is recognized, subject to no other limitations than those that for reasons of public order may be established in the University Charter. Article 100. Exceptional students of all types shall be afforded special education, based on scientific research and educational guidance. Article 101. Catholic religion shall be taught in public schools, but students shall not be obliged to attend classes in religion, nor acts of religious worship and services, when their parents or guardians request it. 21

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Article 102. The State shall develop programs of education and promotion for indigenous groups which posses their own cultural mores, in order to ensure their active participation in public life. Chapter 6 Health, Social Security and Social Welfare Article 103. It is an essential function of the State to protect the health of all the people of the Republic. The individual, as part of the national community, is entitled to promotion, protection, conservation, recovery and rehabilitation of his health and the obligation to preserve it, health being understood to be complete physical, mental and social well -being . Article 104. In matters of health, the State is primarily obliged to develop the following activities, integrating the functions of prevention and cure: 1. Establishment of a national policy of food and nutrition ensuring optimum nutritional conditions for the entire population through adequate production and provision of food, and appropriate changes in consumption standards. 2. Training of individuals and social groups, through education, to publicize individual and collective obligations as regards health, as well as principles of personal hygiene and health at home. 3. Protection of mother and child by supplying educational, preventive and curative medical assistance to pregnant women periodically, and to look after the nutritional state and health of the child. 4. Combatting contagious diseases through environmental health, development of potable water availabilities, and adopting means for immunization, prophylaxis, and 22

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION treatment, provided collectively and individually to all the population. 5. Establishment, in accordance with the requirements of each region, of hospitals, dental clinics, and dispensaries, to supply medicines to all the people. These health services and medicines shall be given free to those who lack economic means to purchase them. 6. Regulation, and supervision, of the fulfillment of conditions of hygiene and safety in places of work, establishing a National policy of Industrial Medicine and Hygiene.
Article 105. All individuals are entitled to the security of

their economic means for subsistence in case of disability or impossibility of obtaining remunerated work. Social Security services shall be granted and administered by Autonomous Entities and shall cover sickness, maternity, disability, family subsidies, old age, widowhood, orphanhood, compulsory lay off, labor accidents and occupational diseases, and all other contingencies that may be the object of social prevision or security. The establishment of such services, as and when demanded by social requirements, shall be provided for by law. The State shall create assistance and social welfare institutions. The fundamental tasks of these are the economic and social rehabilitation of the dependent sectors or those lacking economic means and care of the mentally and the chronically ill and disabled indigents deficient, and groups that have not been integrated into the Social Security system.
Article 106. The State may establish special funds for pensions with contributions and participation of workers in the public and private sectors, to improve the services of social security in connection with pensions. The law shall regulate this matter. Article 107. Government Health Agencies, including Autonomous and Semi-autonomous Institutions, shall be 23

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA integrated by law to function harmoniously. The law shall regulate this matter. Article 108. Communities have the duty and the right to participate in the planning, execution and evaluation of the different Health Programs. Article 109. The State shall establish a National Housing Policy in order to provide housing for all people, especially those in lower income groups. Article 110. The State is basically obliged to see to the conservation of ecological conditions, preventing pollution of the environment and imbalance of the eco-systems in relation to the economic and social development of the nation.

Chapter 7 Agrarian System Article 111. The State shall supervise the rational distribution of land, to ensure its more productive use, and the right of each farmer to a decent existence. The law shall regulate this matter. Article 112. The State shall not permit the existence of uncultivated, unproductive or idle lands, and shall regulate work relations on the farms, promoting maximum productivity and fair distribution of the benefits of same. Article 113. The State shall give special attention to indigenous farming communities, with the purpose of promoting their economic, social, and political participation in the national life. Article 114. The proper use of agricultural land is a duty of the owner, owed to the community, and shall be regulated by law in accordance with its ecological classification, to avoid underutilization and a decrease of its production potential.
24

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION
Article 115. To fulfill the objectives of the Agrarian Policy,

the State shall carry out the following activities: 1. Grant necessary farm lands to rural dwellers and regulate the use of the water. A special system of collective ownership for rural communities which so request may be established by law; 2. Organize credit assistance to meet the finance needs of agricultural operations, and particularly those of low income persons and groups, and give special attention to small and medium producers; 3. Take measures to ensure stable markets and fair prices for products and to foster the establishment of Agencies, Corporations and Cooperatives for production, processing, distribution and consumption; 4. Establish means of communication and transportation to link rural and indigenous Communities with centers of storage, distribution and consumption; 5. Settle new lands and regulate the tenure and use of such lands and of those incorporated into the economy as a result of the construction of new highways; 6. Foster the development of the Agrarian Sector by means of technical assistance and promotion of organization, training, protection, mechanization and other activities determined by law, and 7. Perform studies of the land in order to establish the agrological classification of Panamanian land. The policy established for the implementation of this Chapter shall be applicable to Indian Communities in accordance with scientific methods of cultural change.
Article 116. The State guarantees to indigenous Communi-

ties the reservation of necessary lands and collective ownership thereof, to ensure their economic well-being. Procedures to be followed for obtaining this purpose, and the definition of boundaries within which private appropriation of land is prohibited, shall be regulated by law.
25

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Article 117. Agrarian jurisdiction is established. Organization and functions of Agrarian Courts shall be determined by law. TITLE IV POLITICAL RIGHTS Chapter 1 Citizenship Article 118. All Panamanians over eighteen (18) years of age are citizens of the Republic, without regard to sex. Article 119. Political rights and the capacity to perform public functions with power and jurisdiction, are reserved to natural born Panamanian citizens. Article 120. The exercise of citizen rights is suspended: 1. In cases mentioned expressly in Article 13 of this Constitution. 2. For penalties according to law. Article 121. Suspension and recovery of citizenship shall be governed by law. Chapter 2 Suffrage Article 122. Suffrage is a right and a duty of all citizens in exercise of their rights. It shall be regulated by law on the basis that it is free and universal, direct or indirect, and the vote is equal and secret. Authorities are obliged to guarantee freedom and honesty in suffrage. Article 123. Prohibitions for Public Officials in electoral matters, stipulating electoral offenses, establishing the corresponding penalties, and regulating the formation, functioning and permanence of political parties, shall be established by law.
26

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 124. The formation of any party having as its basis sex, race or religion, or which attempts to impair the National sovereignty or destroy the democratic structure of Government is prohibited. Article 125. The State may supervise and contribute to the expense incurred by natural persons and political parties in the electoral process. Such supervision and contributions shall be determined and regulated by law, observing equality of expenditures of all parties and candidates.

Chapter 3 Electoral Court Article 126. An autonomous Electoral Court is established to interpret and apply the Electoral Law exclusively and to direct, supervise and superintend all phases of the process of elections. It shall have jurisdiction in all the Republic and shall be composed of three (3) Judges, who will be elected for a period of seven years, thusly; • One by the National Assembly of Community Representatives, one by the Supreme Court of Justice, and one by the Executive Branch, none of them belonging to the entities mentioned. The person elected by the Superme Court of Justice shall be a Lawyer. • An alternate shall be named for each regular Judge. The Electoral Tribunal shall have subordinate employees as specified by law. Judges of the Electoral Tribunal are responsible before the Supreme Court of Justice for breaches or offenses committed in the fulfillment of their obligations and the provisions of Articles 187, 190, 192, 193, 194, and 196, with penalties determined by law. The Electoral Court shall have such subordinate employees as may be established by law. 27

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA
Article 127. Apart from those that are conferred by law, the

Electoral Tribunal shall have functions, which it shall exercise, solely, as follows, except those mentioned in Nos. 3 and 5: 1. To regulate the Electoral Law, according to the letter and spirit, interpret it and enforce it, and decide on disputes that its application may originate. 2. To punish offenses and crimes against freedom and honesty of suffrage in accordance with the law. 3. To take an electoral census. 4. To organize, direct and supervise the registration of voters and the issuance of personal identity cards, * and resolving of disputes, claims and denouncements that may arise in this respect. 5. To process applications for migration and naturalization. 6. To appoint members of Electoral corporations. The decisions of the Electoral Court may be reviewed only before same, and once legal proceedings have been fulfilled, they will be definitive, irrevocable and binding. Petition of unconstitutionality is excepted.
Article 128. The Office of the Electoral Attorney is instituted as an independent agency and coadjuvant with the Electoral Court, whose functions shall be specified by law. The Electoral Attorney shall be a Lawyer, and to him are applicable the provisions of Article 126, third paragraph, of this Constitution.

TITLE V LEGISLATIVE BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT
("El Organo Legislativo")

Chapter 1
General Provisions * Cdclulas de identidad. 28

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 129. Legislative power of the Republic is vested in the National Assembly of Community Representatives* and the National Legislative Council, according to Articles 2, 141, and 148 of this Constitution.

Chapter 2 National Assembly of Community Representatives
(Asamblea Nacional de Representantes de Corregimientos)

Article 130. The National Assembly of Community Representatives shall be composed of as many Representatives as the number of Communities (Corregimientos) into which the national territory is divided. Each Community shall elect a Representative, and his alternate, by direct popular vote, in the same way, and on the same day; for a term of six years and may be reelected. Article 131. The National Assembly of Community Representatives shall meet by its own right, without prior call, in the Capital of the Republic, from the 11th of October to the 11th of November, in each of the six (6) years of the term for which the Representatives were elected. Article 132. The National Assembly shall hold regular and special meetings. The former are those held during the period indicated in the preceding paragraph; the latter, those held in accordance with Article 142 hereof and that are called by the Executive Branch for specific matters at specific times. Article 133. To be a Community Representative it is required: 1. To be Panamanian by birth or to have acquired definitively, Panamanian citizenship, ten (10) years prior to the date of the elections; 2. To have attained the age of eighteen (18) years. * Asamblea Nacional de Representantes de Corregimientos. 29

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA 3. Not to have been convicted of a crime against public property, freedom, or honesty of suffrage; 4. To reside in the Community which he represents, at least during the year immediately prior to the election. Article 134. A Community Representative shall lose his office for the following reasons: 1. Voluntary change of residence to another Community (Corregimiento); 2. Conviction based on crime; 3. Revocation of his mandate. Application of such grounds shall be regulated by law. Article 135. When vacancies occur in the Representation of a Community, elections shall be held within the two (2) following months to elect new Representatives. Article 136. Community Representatives may not be appointed for any public remunerated office in their respective Municipality. Violation of this provision makes the appointment null and void. A Community Representative post becomes permanently vacant when the incumbent is appointed to the Judicial Branch, the Public Ministry, or the Electoral Court; and temporarily vacant when the incumbent is named a Minister of State, a Chief of an Autonomous or Semi-autonomous Institution, or of a Diplomatic Mission. Article 137. Members of the National Assembly of Community Representatives are not legally liable for opinions expressed in the performance of their duties, and are entitled to consideration and respect from the Authorities. During the six year term for which they are elected, Representatives may not be prosecuted or arrested for criminal or Police action without prior authorization of the Provincial Coordinating Council to which they belong, except in cases of flagrante delicto. 30

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 138. Community Representatives shall receive the emoluments prescribed by law, which shall be paid from the National Treasury. Article 139. Contracts which Community Representatives may not make on their own behalf or through another party with the State and with Autonomous or Semi-autonomous Institutions and Entities related thereto, and contracts which they may not negotiate on behalf of others shall be specified by law. Article 140. The National Assembly of Community Representatives must approve, with or without modifications, or disapprove, the amendments to the Constitution submitted to it by the National Legislative Council. Amendments must be ratified by the National Assembly which takes office in the following term. Article 141. The Legislative functions of the National Assembly consist of issuing laws to: 1. Approve or disapprove public treaties concluded by the Executive Power; 2. Declare war and empower the Executive Power to negotiate peace; 3. Approve or disapprove amendments as to the political division of National territory proposed by the National Legislative Council; 4. Give amnesty for political offenses; 5. Determine and approve the rules of its proceedings. Article 142. Accusations or denunciations against the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General of the Republic, the Commander in Chief of the National Guard and the Solicitor General of the Administration, shall be subject to the cognizance of a Judicial Commission made up of the Executive Board of the National Assembly, of three (3) Representatives from each Province, and of one (1) from the
31

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA District of San Blas, elected by the National Assembly. The Commission shall judge, if there are sufficient grounds, whether violations of the Constitution and laws of the Republic were committed by all or any of those Government Officials so accused, during the performance of the duties of their Office. Procedures to be followed and penalties to be applied shall be established by law.
Article 143. Administrative functions of the National Assembly of Community Representatives are: 1. To elect from its membership its Executive Board, which will be composed of a President and ten (10) Vice-Presidents, one for each Province and one for the District of San Blas. 2. To elect the President and Vice-President of the Republic on the day of its installation, by nomination and vote. The election shall be carried out using slates of candidates. Nominations of candidates for President and Vice-President of the Republic must be supported by no less than thirty percent (30%) of the Representatives. If none, or only one, of the slates of candidates obtains the necessary percentage, the Nominees shall be the three with the greatest number of supporters. If, on the first ballot, no slate of candidates has obtained an absolute majority, a second ballot shall be carried out between the two slates of candidates that have obtained the largest amount of votes in the first. In the second, unmarked ballots shall be added to the slate of candidates that obtains the greatest number of votes. The President of the National Assembly shall vote only in case of a tie, to decide the election. 3. To accept or refuse the resignation of the President and Vice-President of the Republic. 4. To give the President of the Republic or the Vice-President, authorization to absent themselves from office for over six (6) months, and authorize them to leave the Na32

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION tional territory for a period of more than three (3) months. To elect one of the Judges of the Electoral Court, in accordance with Article 126 of this Constitution. To request that Civil Servants submit oral or written reports and request their presence at meetings, stating the purpose thereof, when it deems it necessary to illustrate the discussion. To receive an Annual Report on State matters from the Ministries, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Comptroller General, the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and the Autonomous and Semi-autonomous Institutions. To supervise Public Administrative Officials at the Provincial level. sentatives is forbidden: 1. To elect one of its members as President or Vice-President of the Republic. 2. To take votes of approval or disapproval with respect to the acts of the President of the Republic. 3. To require public reports on pending diplomatic negotiations of a private nature. 4. To delegate any of their functions.
Article 145. Laws enacted by the National Assembly shall

5. 6.

7.

8.

Article 144. The National Assembly of Community Repre-

be proposed by the Special Committees of the Assembly or by the National Legislative Council. Their enactment shall require approval in a single debate by an absolute majority of the members of the Assembly. Laws must be published ("promulgadas") within six working days following their enactment, and shall take effect from the time of their publication, unless the law itself provides that they shall become effective on some other date.
33

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Chapter 3 The National Legislative Council
("Consejo Nacional de LegislaciOn")

Article 146. The National Legislative Council shall be composed of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, the Ministers of State, and the members of the Legislative Commission. Article 147. The members of the Legislative Commission shall have the right to voice and vote in the National Legislative Council and may initiate legislation. Their functions are those determined in this Constitution and by law. Article 148. With the exception of those corresponding to the National Assembly, the National Legislative Council shall enact the laws necessary for fulfillment of the purposes of the State, and the performance of the functions of the Government established in this Constitution, and especially the following: 1. To issue, put into effect, amend or repeal the national codes; 2. To determine the number and nomenclature of the Ministries of State and to assign their functions to them; 3. To limit and regulate the awarding of vacant lands; 4. To decide upon the use of national property for public purposes; 5. To decide upon the transfer of national property, either personal or real; 6. To approve the Budget of Revenues and Expenditures of the Republic and to decide upon supplementary or special appropriations in relations thereto; 7. To establish taxes, duties, revenues and official monopolies;
34

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION 8. To establish administrative departments with internal autonomy, interministerial agencies and technical councils; 9. To establish and organize public services; 10. To determine the standard, weight, value, form, type and denomination of the national currency; 11. To direct and approve the rules of its proceedings. Article 149. The National Legislative Council shall propose amendments to the political division of the national territory, to the National Assembly, for its approval or rejection. Article 150. Laws ("bills") may be proposed by the members of the National Legislative Council. The Provincial Coordinating Councils shall propose laws through the President of the National Assembly. Article 151. Proposed laws shall be approved in a single debate by an absolute majority of the members of the Legislative Council, which shall hold such consultations as may be necessary with the Provincial Coordinating Councils and the national groups which may be affected by the proposed legislation. Article 152. The National Legislative Council may request oral or written reports from public officials and may require their presence at meetings, stating the purpose thereof, when it deems this necessary to illustrate the discussion. Article 153. The qualifications for members of the Legislative Commission are the same as those for Ministers of State. Article 154. The President of the National Assembly and the members of the Legislative Commission shall receive the remuneration determined by the Executive Branch of Government.
35

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA TITLE VI THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT
("El Organo Ejecutivo")

Chapter 1 The President and the Vice-President of the Republic Article 155. The Executive Branch of Government is constituted of two citizens called the President of the Republic and the Vice-President of the Republic, with the indispensable cooperation of the Ministers of State. Article 156. In each particular case, the President or Vice-President of the Republic, with the Minister of the respective division, shall exercise his functions as Representative of the Executive Branch of Government. Article 157. The President of the Republic shall be elected by an absolute majority of votes by the National Assembly of Community (Corregimiento) Representatives, for a term of six years. Together with the President of the Republic, there shall be elected the Vice-President of the Republic, who shall replace the President in his absence, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 168 and 169 of this Constitution. Article 158. A citizen who has been elected President or Vice-President of the Republic, may not be reelected to the same office in the two terms immediately following. Article 159. In order to become President or Vice-President of the Republic, it is required: 1. To be Panamanian by birth; 2. To have reached thirty-five years of age. Article 160. Persons convicted of offenses against public property may not be elected President or Vice-President of the Republic.
36

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION
Article 161. The President and Vice-President of the

Republic shall take office before the National Assembly and shall take the following oath: "I swear before God and the country to comply faithfully with the Constitution and the Laws of the Republic" . A citizen who has no religious beliefs may dispense with the invocation to God in the oath.
Article 162. If for any reason the President or Vice-President of the Republic cannot take office before the National Assembly, he shall do so before the Supreme Court of Justice, and in default of the latter, he shall take office before a Notary, or in the last resort, before two competent witnesses. Article 163. Functions which may be exercised by the President of the Republic by himself are: 1. To coordinate all the work of the Public Administration; 2. To see that the National Assembly of Community Representatives shall meet on the day appointed by the Constitution, or by the decree convoking it to extraordinary sessions; 3. To submit, yearly, on the first day of the session of the National Assembly, a message relative to the affairs of the Administration; 4. To direct foreign relations, to accredit and receive diplomatic and consular agents, as well as to enter into public treaties and agreements, which will be submitted to the consideration of the National Assembly of Community Representatives; 5. To supervise the proper functioning of the Administration and the satisfactory conduct of public institutions; 6. To grant pardons for political offenses, to reduce penalties, and to grant conditional liberty to those guilty of common crimes;
37

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA 7. To appoint and remove freely the Ministers of State and members of the Legislative Commission; 8. To appoint the Comptroller General and DeputyComptroller General of the Republic, the chiefs of Autonomous and Semi-autonomous Entities, and one Judge of the Electoral Court, in accordance with this Constitution and by law; 9. To exercise the powers conferred upon him by this Constitution and by law; 10. To observe and enforce strict compliance with Panamanian Laws and to promulgate those enacted by the National Legislative Council. *
Article 164. Functions that the President of the Republic must exercise with the cooperation of the respective Minister, the Cabinet Council, or the National Legislative Council, as the case may be, are: 1. To appoint Chief and Officers of the Public Forces in accordance with this Constitution, Panamanian Law, and the Military Regulations; 2. To appoint, with the approval of the Cabinet Council, the Justices of the Supreme Court, the Attorney General of the Republic, and the Solicitor General, and their alternates; 3. To appoint and dismiss freely the Governors of the Provinces; 4. To supervise the collection and administration of National revenues; 5. To regulate laws requiring it, for their better compliance, without deviating from the text or the spirit thereof; 6. To submit to the National Assembly of Community Representatives an annual report on the administra* Consejo Nacional de Legislaci6n.
38

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION tive, political and economic affairs of the State; To execute administrative contracts for the performance of services and the execution of public works. The President may delegate this power in whole or in part to the Vice-President of the Republic; To appoint, with the cooperation of the respective Minister and in accordance with the provisions of Title XII hereof, persons who are to hold offices or positions, appointment to which does not fall within the competence of any other Public Official or Entity. The President of the Republic may delegate his nominating power into other public officers, in accordance with the law; To issue letters of naturalization in accordance with the procedure established by law; To exercise the other functions pertaining to him by this Constitution and by law.

7.

8.

9. 10.

Article 165. The Vice-President of the Republic has the fol-

lowing functions: 1. To appear before the National Assembly each year in order to submit a report on the Budget of Revenues and Expenditures of the Republic, and the National Development Plan; 2. To grant nationals who so request, permission to accept positions with foreign Governments, in cases where such permission is necessary under the law; 3. To attend sessions of the Cabinet Council, with voice and vote; 4. To exercise the other functions granted him by this Constitution and by law;
Article 166. The President and Vice-President of the Republic may delegate their powers to other Public Officials or Entities, in the manner prescribed by law.

39

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA
Article 167. No act of the President or Vice-President of the

Republic, except those which may be exercised by them alone, will have any validity or effect if it is not counter-signed by the Minister of State in the respective branch, who by this action renders himself responsible thereof. The orders and resolutions that a Minister of State issues on the instructions of the President or VicePresident of the Republic will be obligatory and may be invalidated only by the President or Vice-President, provided they are not contrary to the Constitution or to law.
Article 168. The President and the Vice-President of the

Republic may separate themselves from their functions only with leave, which shall not be for more than six months, and which shall be granted by the Cabinet Council. They may not leave the national territory for more than thirty days each time, without permission from that body. During his leave of absence the President shall be replaced by the Vice-President, who shall have the title of Acting Head of the Executive Branch. In the absence of the Vice-President of the Republic, his functions shall be performed by a Minister of State appointed by the President of the Republic, who must meet the requirements for this office and shall have the title of Acting Vice-President of the Republic.
Article 169. In case of the permanent absence of the President of the Republic, his functions shall be assumed by the Vice-President of the Republic for the remainder of the term. When the Vice-President assumes the functions of the President, he shall convoke the National Assembly of Community Representatives within thirty days so that it may elect a new Vice-President. During the period mentioned in the preceding paragraph, a Minister of State shall serve as Acting Vice-

40

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION President of the Republic. He shall be elected in the manner prescribed in Article 168 of this Constitution. In case of the permanent absence of the VicePresident of the Republic, his functions shall be assumed by a Minister of State, appointed in the manner prescribed in Article 168 of this Constitution. When the Acting Vice-President assumes the functions of the President of the Republic, he shall convoke the National Assembly within thirty (30) days so that it may elect a new Vice-President of the Republic for the remainder of the Constitutional term.

Article 170. The emoluments assigned by law to the President and Vice-President of the Republic may be changed, but the change will not be effective until the following Presidential term.

Article 171. The President and Vice-President of the Republic are responsible only in the following cases: 1. For exceeding their Constitutional powers; 2. For impeding the meeting of the National Assembly; or for obstructing it or any other Public Body or Authority established by the Constitution, in the exercise of its functions; 3. For crimes against the Nation or against public property. In the first two cases the penalty shall be removal from office and disqualification to hold public office for the period of time fixed by law. In the third case ordinary law shall apply. Article 172. There may not be elected President of the
Republic: 1. A citizen who, called to exercise the Presidency because of the permanent or temporary absence of the President, has held the position at any time during the three 41

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA years immediately preceding the term for which the election is held; 2. Name of the relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity of a President of the Republic who has exercised his functions in the term immediately preceding, or such relatives of the citizen indicated in Section 1 of this Article.

Article 173. There may not be elected Vice-President of the Republic: 1. The President of the Republic elected by the National Assembly who has performed his functions at any time, when the election of the Vice-President of the Republic is for the term following his own; 2. Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity of the President of the Republic elected by the National Assembly of Community Representatives; for the term following that in which the President of the Republic has held office; 3. A citizen who, as Vice-President of the Republic, has held the Presidency at any time during the three years preceding the term for which the election is held; 4. Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity of the citizen mentioned in the preceding section, for the term immediately following that in which that citizen has held the Presidency, and 5. Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity of the President of the Republic.
Chapter 2

Ministers of State Article 174. The Ministers of State are Chiefs of their respective branches and cooperate with the President and Vice42

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION President of the Republic in the exercise of their functions, pursuant to this Constitution and the law. Article 175. The distribution of the business of State, according to their nature, among the Ministers of State, will be effected in accordance with law. Article 176. Ministers of State must be Panamanians by birth, must have reached twenty-five years of age, and must not have been convicted for a crime against public property. Article 177. No person may be appointed Minister of State who is a relative of the President of the Republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity, nor may persons of those relationships be members of the same Cabinet. Article 178. Each Minister of State shall personally submit to the National Assembly of Community Representatives an annual report or statement concerning the state of affairs of his Ministry and such reforms as he may deem expedient to introduce. Chapter 3 Cabinet Council ("Consejo de Gabinete") Article 179. The Cabinet Council is constituted by a meeting of the Ministers of State and the Vice-President of the Republic under the direction of the President of the Republic or the Acting President. Article 180. Functions of the Cabinet Council are: 1. To act as an advisory body in matters submitted to it by the President of the Republic, and in those matters in which it should be heard by virtue of the Constitution or the law;

43

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA 2. To approve, with the President of the Republic, appointments of Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General of the Republic, the Solicitor General and their alternates; 3. To approve the execution of contracts, the negotiation of loans and the transfer of personal or real national property in the manner established by law; 4. To empower the President of the Republic to settle or submit to arbitration litigious matters to which the State is a party. For this, the favorable opinion of the Attorney General of the Republic is required; 5. To agree upon, under the collective responsibility of all its members and of the Commander in Chief of the National Guard, decrees which the President may issue on the suspension and restoration of (constitutional) guarantees; 6. To request from public bodies and public officials those reports deemed necessary or convenient for the dispatch of affairs it should consider, and to summon the latter and representatives of the former to give oral reports; 7. To issue regulations for its internal government; 8. To exercise other functions established by this Constitution or by law. Chapter 4 The General Council of State ("Consejo General de Estado") Article 181. The General Council of State consists of the meeting of the President of the Republic, who shall preside over it, with the Vice-President of the Republic, the Ministers of State, General Directors of Autonomous and Semiautonomous Entities, the Commander in Chief of the National 44

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Guard, the Comptroller General of the Republic, the Attorney General of the Republic, the Solicitor General, the Legislative Commission and the President of the National Assembly of Community Representatives, the Supreme Court of Justice and the Electoral Court. Article 182. The Council of State has the following functions: 1. To act as an advisory and coordinating body on matters submitted to it by the President of the Republic; 2. To exercise the other functions established by law.

TITLE VII ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE Chapter 1 The Judicial Branch of Government (The Judiciary) ("El Organo Judicial") Article 183. The Administration of Justice is free, expeditious and uninterrupted. The effectiveness of these precepts shall be guaranteed by law. Article 184. The Judicial Branch is composed of the Supreme Court of Justice, lower courts, and such other courts as the law may establish. Article 185. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of the number of Justices determined by law, appointed for a period of ten years as from the 1st of January 1973. Each Justice shall have an alternate, appointed for the same term, who will replace him in his absence. If a Justiceship becomes permanently vacant during the course of a term, a new Justice shall be appointed to serve the remainder of said term.
45

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA The Court shall be divided by law into several divisions (Chambers), composed of three permanent members.
Article 186. To be a Justice of the Supreme Court, it is required: 1. To be a Panamanian by birth. 2. To have reached thirty-five years of age. 3. To be in full enjoyment of civil and political rights. 4. To hold a University degree in Law, registered in the Office established by law. 5. To have completed a ten year period of either the practice of Law, or of service in any other position for which a University Law degree is required. Article 187. Any person who has been convicted of a crime against public property may not fill any office in the Judicial Branch of Government. Article 188. Apart from its constitutional and legal powers, the Supreme Court of Justice shall, as follows: 1. Guard the integrity of the Constitution. For this purpose, and after hearing the opinion of the Attorney General of the Republic or the Solicitor General of the Administration, the Court in plenary session shall try and judge on cases concerning the unconstitutionality of laws, decrees, decisions, resolutions and other acts that for reasons of substance or formality are challenged before it, by any person.

When, during proceedings of a process, the Public Officials entrusted with the administration of justice considers, or it is observed by one of the parties, that the legal or regulatory provision applicable to the case is unconstitutional, he shall submit the question to the cognizance of the Court in plenary session, and the pro-

46

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION ceedings shall continue, until it (the question of unconstitutionality) is decided. The parties only shall be able to formulate such observations one time during the process of a suit. 2. Exercise contentious-administrative jurisdiction over acts, resolutions and orders or provisions which are executed, adopted or issued in the performance of their functions, or on the pretext of performing them, by Civil Servants, National, Provincial, Municipal, and Public Entity Servants, and Autonomous or Semi-autonomous Public Entities. In such cases, the Supreme Court of Justice, after hearing the opinion of the Solicitor General of the Administration shall annul the acts that have been accused of unlawfulness, re-establish the private rights violated; enact new provisions in lieu of those challenged, and prejudicially render a judgement with regard to the meaning, effects or legal validity of an administrative act, or (legal) validity thereof. Persons affected by the act, resolution, order or decision in question may have recourse to contentious-administrative jurisdiction; and exercising public action, any natural or juridical person, domiciled in the country, in every case in which a Civil Servant or Public Authority has acted in violation of laws. The decisions issued by the Supreme Court in exercising of the powers conferred on it by this Article are final, definitive and binding and shall be published in the Official Gazette.
Article 189. No action of unconstitutionality shall be ad-

mitted against the judgement of the Supreme Court and of any of its chambers.
Article 190. The principal Justices and Judges shall not occupy any other public position except that of Professor of Law in an educational institution of University level.
47

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA

Article 191. In the Tribunals and Courts established by law, Justices and Judges shall be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice or the Judges shall be appointed by their immediate superior. Subordinate personnel shall be appointed by the respective Tribunal or Judge. All these appointments shall be made according to the Judicial Career, pursuant to Title XII hereof. Article 192. Justices and Judges are independent in the performance of their functions and are subject only to the Constitution and to law. But, lower courts are obliged to abide by and comply with the decisions that superior courts may issue on revoking or reversing, by virtue of legal proceedings, decisions rendered by the former. Article 193. Justices and Judges will not be discharged from office, nor suspended or transferred from the exercise of their functions, except in cases and with the formalities established by law. Article 194. Officials in the Judicial Branch of Government shall not participate in politics, except to vote in elections, nor practice law nor commerce nor hold any other remunerated position, except with what is provided in Article 190 hereof. Article 195. The financial regimen of the Judicial Branch and of the Public Ministry shall be regulated by law, jointly, in accordance with the requirements of the administration of justice. All elimination of offices or positions in the Judiciary shall be effective at the end of the corresponding term. Article 196. Justices and Judges may not be detained nor arrested except by virtue of a written order from a Judicial Authority competent to judge them. Article 197. Trial by jury is (hereby) established. Cases to be adjudicated by this system shall be determined by law.
48

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Chapter 2
The Public Ministry ("Ministerio Pablico") * Article 198. The Public Ministry shall be conducted by an Attorney General of the Republic, * * the Solicitor General of the Administration,*** by the District and Municipal Attorneys, * * * * and such other officers as the law may designate. Officials of the Public Ministry may be delegated to exercise the functions of the Attorney General in the manner prescribed by law. Each officer of the Public Ministry shall have two alternates who shall replace him, during temporary absences and during permanent absence while the vacancy is being filled. Article 199. Functions of Officers of the Public Ministry

are: 1. To defend the interest of the Nation, or of the Municipality; 2. To promote the compliance or execution of laws, court decisions, and administrative orders; 3. To supervise the official conduct of Public Officials and Employees and to take care that all completely discharge their duties; 4. To prosecute offenses and violations of Constitutional or legal provisions; 5. To serve as legal advisors to the Administrative Officers, and 6. To exercise the other functions established by law.
[Corresponds roughly to the Attorney General Office] *	 ** Procurador General de la Naci6n. *** Procurador de la AdministraciOn. **** Fiscales y Personeros.

49

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Article 200. The same qualifications are required to be Attorney General of the Republic and Solicitor General of the Administration, as to be a Justice of the Supreme Court of Justice, and both shall be appointed for a term of six years, which shall begin January 1, 1973. Article 201. The special functions of the Attorney General of the Republic are: 1. To arraign before the Supreme Court of Justice those Officials whose trials correspond to that body; 2. To see to it that the other Officers of the Public Ministry faithfully discharge their duties and to take appropriate action to hold them responsible for offenses or crimes committed by them. Article 202. The same provisions are effective with respect to the Officers of the Public Ministry as are established with respect to Judicial Officers by Articles 187, 190, 192, 193, 194, and 196. Article 203. The Attorney General of the Republic and the Solicitor General of the Administration and their alternates shall be appointed by the Executive Branch of Government. District and Municipal Attorneys shall be appointed by their immediate superior in rank. The other officers shall be appointed in accordance with the Judicial Career, as established in the provisions of Title XII hereof. TITLE VIII PROVINCIAL REGIME Article 204. There shall be in each Province a Governor whose appointment and removal shall be at the pleasure of the Executive, and who shall be the Agent and Representative of the latter before the Municipalities within his jurisdiction. Each Governor shall have an alternate.
50

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Functions and duties of Governors shall be determined by law. Article 205. Each Province shall include the number of districts provided by law. Article 206. A Provincial Coordinating Council shall function in each Province, to promote, coordinate and conciliate official activities. At the same time, it shall serve as an advisory body. This Council shall be composed of Community Representatives* and other members determined by law regulating its organization and function. TITLE IX MUNICIPAL REGIME Article 207. The Municipality is the autonomous political organization established within a district. The Municipal organization shall be democratic and will respond to the essentially administrative character of local government. Article 208. It is the duty of the Municipalities to promote the development of the Community and the realization of social welfare, and to collaborate with the National Government for these purposes. The portion of the Municipal income that must be allocated to these ends and specifically for education shall be determined by law, taking into account population, geographical location and economic-social development. Article 209. The Municipal Authorities have the duty to comply with, and cause to be complied with, the Constitution and laws of the Republic, the decrees and orders of the Chief
* Representantes de Corregimientos.

51

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA Executive, and the decisions of the ordinary or administrative Courts of Justice. Article 210. No Municipal Civil Servant may be suspended or discharged by the National Administrative Authorities. Article 211. The State shall supply Municipal Management when the latter may be insufficient in cases of epidemic, grave disturbance of the public order, or other reasons of general interest, in the manner prescribed by law. Article 212. There shall be an organization in each Municipality that shall be called Municipal Council, composed of a minimum of five Representatives in the National Assembly of Community Representatives. If the number of Representatives of a district is less than five, the Mayor of the Municipality, in accordance with the Representatives, shall appoint as many persons as may be necessary to complete the number. Persons so appointed should have solely the rank and functions of councilmen. Article 213. By popular initiative and through the vote of the respective Councils, two or more Municipalities may request their incorporation into a single one, or into an association, for reasons of common benefit. Corresponding procedures shall be established by law. The Municipalities of a Province may with like requisites unify their regime, establishing a common treasury and fiscal administration. In this case there may be created an Intermunicipal Council or Commission whose composition shall be determined by law. Article 214. Citizens have the right of initiative and referendum in the matters entrusted to the Councils. Article 215. The law may establish, in accordance with economic capacity and human resources of the municipalities, which of them shall be governed by a system of expert
52

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION commissioners to render those services that the law itself may establish.

Article 216. There shall be a Mayor* in each district, chief
of the Municipal Administration, and also, each Mayor shall have an alternate. Persons convicted of offenses against the public property may not be elected to these offices. In cases pertaining to the appointment of a Mayor, the Governors of the Provinces, within seven days following their taking office, shall present three names as candidates for the position to Municipal Councils, and shall appoint the candidates selected by the Councils for both positions. The Municipal Treasurer shall be appointed by the Municipal Council. The Mayors and their alternates shall be appointed for a period of three years and may be reelected for another term. They may be removed only for the causes prescribed by law. The council shall designate a Vice-President who will replace the President during absences and shall have the powers established by law.

Article 217. The Mayors, apart from the duties established in Article 209 of this Constitution and by law, shall have the following functions: 1. To preside over the Municipal Council, and to submit bills, especially of the budget for revenues and expenditures; 2. To put in order the expenditures of the local administration, conforming to the budget and the rules and accounting regulations; 3. To appoint and remove Community Officials with the agreement of Community Representatives, and to appoint and remove Municipal employees whose appoint* Alcalde.
53

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA ment does not come under another Authority, subject to what is stated in Title XII of this Constitution, and 4. To promote progress in the Municipal Community and to supervise Municipal Employees in the fulfillment of their obligations.
Article 218. Mayors and Community Officials shall receive

a remuneration for their services, that shall be paid from the National or Municipal Treasury, according to what is determined by law.
Article 219. Municipal taxes are those which have no effect outside of the District, but exceptions shall be established by law which specify taxes as Municipal notwithstanding that they so originate. On this basis, the proper separation of National revenues and expenditures and those that are Municipal shall be established by law. Article 220. The following shall be sources of Municipal

income apart from those provided by law in accordance with the preceding Article: 1. Income from public lands or properties or from Municipal assets. Fees for the use of goods or services. 2. 3. Duties on public performances. 4. Taxes on the sale of alcoholic beverages. 5. Duties on the extraction of sands, quarried stone, rock, clay, coral, gravel and limestone. Fines imposed by Municipal Authorities. 6. 7. State subsidies and grants. 8. Duties, established by law, on the extraction of woods, and lumbering. 9. Tax on the slaughtering of bovine and porcine livestock which shall be paid in the Municipality of the animal's origin.
54

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 221. Municipalities shall be able to create Municipal and/or Mixed enterprises for the development of properties or services. Article 222. The State shall not grant exemptions of Municipal duties, charges or taxes. Municipalities alone shall do so by means of a Municipal Resolution. Article 223. Municipalities shall contract loans with prior authorization of the Executive. Branch of Government. Procedure shall be determined by law. Article 224. There shall be a Community Board in each Community* that shall promote the development of the Community and supervise the solution of its problems. Community Boards shall exercise functions of conciliation in the settlement of disputes and others designated by law. Article 225. The Community Board shall be composed of the Community Representative, who shall preside over it, the Community Official, and three citizen residents chosen in the manner determined by the Municipal Council. Community Boards shall be able to request the cooperation and advice of National or Municipal Officials, and of private persons. A special regime for Community Boards that shall function in Communities which are not administratively constituted in Municipalities shall be established by law. TITLE X PUBLIC FINANCE Chapter 1 Properties and Rights of the State
* Corregimiento.
55

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA
Article 226. The following belong to the State:

1. Properties existing in the territory that belonged to the Republic of Columbia. 2. Rights and actions which the Republic of Colombia possessed as owner, within or without the country, by reason of sovereignty that it exercised over the territory of the Isthmus of Panama. 3. Properties, revenues, estates, securities, rights, and actions which pertained to the extinct Department of Panama. 4. Vacant and free lands. 5. The subsoil, which could be exploited by State or Mixed enterprises or may be the object of concessions or contracts for the exploitation of its resources, as established by law. Mining rights granted and not exercised within the period and conditions fixed by law, will revert to the State. 6. Salt works, mines, underground and thermal waters, hydrocarbons, quarries, and deposits of all kinds, which may not be the object of private appropriation but may be exploited directly by the State, through State or Mixed enterprises, or to be the subject of concessions, or other contracts for operation by private enterprises. Regulation of all matters pertaining to the various forms of exploitations shall be determined by law. 7. Historical monuments, documents and other assets which are evidences of the past history of the Republic. The procedure by which they will revert to the State when held by private parties under any title shall be determined by law. 8. Archeological sites and objects, the exploration, study and restoration of which shall be regulated by law.
Article 227. The following belong to the State and are of public use and therefore may not be the object of private appropriation: 56

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION 1. Territorial sea, lake and river waters, the shores and banks of same and of navigable rivers and ports and estuaries. All these properties are of free and common benefit, subject to the regulations established by law; 2. Lands and waters destined for public services and all kinds of communications; 3. Lands and waters designated, or that the State may designate, for public irrigation services, hydroelectric production, drainage and aqueducts; 4. Air space, the undersea continental shelf, the bed and subsoil of the territorial sea; 5. All other properties defined by law for public use. In all cases in which property of private ownership is converted by law into property for public use, the owner thereof shall be compensated. Article 228. Concessions for the exploitation of the soil, subsoil, forests and for utilization of waters, means of communications or transportation, and other public service undertakings, shall be inspired by social welfare and public interest. Article 229. All artistic and historical wealth of the country constitutes the Cultural Heritage of the Republic and will be under the guardianship of the State which may prohibit its destruction, exportation or transmission. Article 230. The power of issuing money belongs to the State, which may transfer it, to official banks of issue, in the manner determined by law. Article 231. There shall not be in the Republic paper money of compulsory tender. Article 232. Official or Semi-official Banks which function as Autonomous Entities supervised by the State shall be established and regulated by law. Subsidiary responsibilities of the State with respect to the obligations assumed by these Banks shall be regulated by law.
57

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA
Article 233.

By law, all taxes imposed upon the taxpayer

shall be, as far as possible, in direct proportion to his economic capacity, subject to the need to receive public funds and protect domestic production.
Article 234. There may be established by law, for revenue

purposes, official monopolies on imported articles or those not produced in the country. Upon the establishment of a monopoly by virtue of which any person is deprived of the right to engage in a lawful business or industry, the State shall compensate in advance those persons or enterprises whose businesses have been expropriated under the terms of this Article.
Article 235.

No public expenditure may be made that has

not been authorized in accordance with the Constitution or by law. Likewise, no credit may be transferred to an object not included in the respective budget.
Article 236. All receipts and disbursements of the Public

Treasuries must be included and authorized in the respective Budget of Revenues and Expenditures. No revenues shall be collected through taxes unless established by law and no expenditures shall be paid unless included in the budget.
Article 237. When it is necessary to make an expenditure for which insufficient funds or no funds have been voted, a supplemental or extraordinary appropriation may be granted to the respective Ministry. For this purpose, the National Legislative Council shall request an opinion from the Comptroller General of the Republic as to the practicability and suitability of this appropriation. All those who take part in this process shall be held responsible for their action. Article 238. The execution or repair of National works,

purchases made from State funds or funds of its Autonomous or Semi-autonomous Entities or of the Municipalities, and the sale or lease of property belonging thereto, shall be effected
58

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION by public bidding except in the cases specified by law. Measures shall be established by law to ensure in all bidding the maximum benefit to the State and full justice in the award.

Chapter 2 Office of the Comptroller General of the Republic
("Contraloria General de la Republica")

Article 239. There shall be an independent department known as Office of the Comptroller General of the Republic. It shall be directed by a Public Official known as the Comptroller General of the Republic, assisted by a Deputy Comptroller General. They shall be appointed for a period equal to that of the President of the Republic, during which they may not be suspended or removed except by the Supreme Court of Justice, for reasons defined by law. These Officers shall be appointed as from 1st January after each Presidential electionary period. The qualifications to be a Comptroller General of the Republic or Deputy Comptroller General of the Republic are: to be a natural born Panamanian citizen, to have attained the age of thirty-five, not to have been convicted for offenses against public property. Article 240. The following are the functions of the Office of the Comptroller General apart from those presented by law in accordance with the preceding Article: 1. To conduct the general accounts of the Nation, including that of the domestic and external debt; 2. To supervise, regulate and control all the acts of management of funds and other public property, so that they will be executed correctly and as provided by law. The Office of the Comptroller shall determine the cases in which it will exercise prior and subsequent control
59

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA over management of funds, as well as those in which it will only exercise the latter; To examine, audit and close accounts of Public Servants, Entities or Persons who administer, manage or guard funds or other public property. Criminal responsibility is subject to cognizance by ordinary Courts; To conduct inspections and investigations in order to determine the regularity or irregularity of operations affecting public wealth and if appropriate, to present the corresponding complaints. To demand from Civil Servants corresponding reports on fiscal management of National, Provincial, Municipal, Autonomous or Semi-autonomous Public Institutions. To adopt and promote the adoption of necessary measures to provide credits for Public Entities; To demand the declaration of unconstitutionality or illegality of laws and other acts in violation of the Constitution or Panamanian laws, which affect public assets; To prescribe accounting systems of Public Entities mentioned in Subdivision 5 of this Article; To inform the Executive Branch on the financial state of the public administration and submit opinions on the feasibility or convenience of the issuance of supplementary or extraordinary appropriations; To direct and compile National statistics; To appoint employees of its departments in accordance with this Constitution, and by law; To submit to the Executive and National Assembly of Community Representatives, an annual report of its activities; To examine the accounts of management personnel when problems arise in same because of possible irregularities. 60

3.

4.

5.

6. 7.

8. 9.

10. 11. 12.

13.

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION TITLE XI NATIONAL ECONOMY
Article 241. The exercise of economic activities corresponds primarily to private parties. But the State will guide, direct, regulate, replace or create such activities in accordance with social need and within the norms of the present Title, for the purpose of increasing National wealth and assuring its benefits to the largest possible number of inhabitants of the country. The State shall plan economic and social development by means of special sections or departments, the organization and functions of which shall be determined by law. Article 242. Measures which shall be established by law to

accomplish the purpose dealt with in a preceding Article are: 1. To create Commissions of technicians and specialists to study the conditions and the possibilities of all types of economic activities, and to formulate recommendations for developing them; 2. To promote the creation of private enterprises that will function in accordance with the recommendations mentioned in the preceding sections, and to establish State enterprises and encourage the formation of mixed companies with State participation. State companies shall be established to meet social needs and for public security and the public interest; 3. To establish credit and development institutions or other appropriate facilities to serve those engaged in small economic activities; 4. To establish theoretical-practical centers for teaching of Commerce, Agriculture, Cattle-raising, Tourism and Arts and Crafts, including the Manual Arts, and for the training of workers and specialized industrial managers. 61

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA
Article 243. The State will intervene in any kind of private enterprise, in accordance with the regulations established by law, to ensure social justice to which the present Constitution refers and especially for the following purposes: 1. To regulate, through special institutions, service rates and price of items of any nature and especially those of basic necessity; 2. To demand proper efficiency in services and adequate quality in articles mentioned in the preceding section; 3. To coordinate services and the production of goods. Articles of basic necessities shall be defined by law. Article 244. Panamanian capital must constitute the

majority invested in private undertakings of public utility that operate in the country. Exceptions shall be permitted and defined by law.
Article 245. The State shall create public utility enterprises

through Autonomous or Semi-autonomous Entities, and other adequate means. In the same manner, it shall assume ownership, expropriation and compensation, of public utility enterprises belonging to private persons, when authorized by law, and necessary for collective welfare.
Article 246. In areas or regions in which the level of social

or economic development so requires, the State may establish Autonomous or Semi-autonomous National, Regional or Municipal Institutions to promote comprehensive development of the section or region. These Institutions may coordinate State and Municipal programs in cooperation with Municipal or Inter-Municipal Councils. The organization, jurisdiction, financing and discharge of fiscal duties of such development Institutions shall be regulated by law.
Article 247. It is the duty of the State to promote and supervise cooperatives, and for this purpose it shall create those institutions that may be necessary. A special rule for 62

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION their organization, functioning, recognition and registration, which shall be free, shall be prescribed by law. Article 248. The State shall regulate the adequate use of land in accordance with its potential use and National development programs, in order to yield optimum benefits. Article 249. No foreign Government nor foreign Official or Semi-official Entities or Institutions may acquire title over any part of the National territory, except for embassies in accordance with the provisions of the law. Article 250. No foreign natural or juridical person, nor National juridical person having foreign capital, entirely or in part, may acquire ownership of National or private lands situated at a distance less than ten kilometers from the border. Insular territory may only be transferred for specific purposes of National development and under the following conditions: 1. When it is not considered a strategic area or reserved for Governmental Programs. When it is declared an area of special development, and 2. legislation has been prescribed for its development, provided National Safety is guaranteed. The transfer of insular territory does not affect the ownership of goods for public use. In the preceding cases, vested rights operating at the time this Constitution becomes effective will be respected; however the respective property may be expropriated at any time through payment of an adequate compensation. Article 251. There shall be no property that may not be freely transferred, nor irredeemable obligations, except what is stipulated in Articles 57 and 116 hereof. Nevertheless, temporary limitations to the right of transfer and the conditions or modes that suspend or retard the redemption of
63

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA the obligations shall be valid for a maximum period of twenty years.
Article 252. Only the following may engage in retail trade:

1. Panamanians by birth. 2. Individuals who, at the time this Constitution becomes effective, were naturalized and married to a Panamanian national or had children by a Panamanian national. 3. Naturalized Panamanians, included in the preceding case, after three years from the date of their obtaining their final papers. 4. National or foreign juridical persons and foreign natural persons who at the time this Constitution becomes effective, were legally engaged in retail trade, and 5. Juridical persons formed by Panamanians or by foreigners authorized to engage in it individually, in accordance with this Article, as well as those who, although not constituted in the manner herein provided, are legally engaged in retail trade at the time this Constitution becomes effective. Foreigners not authorized to engage in retail trade may, however, participate in those companies which sell products manufactured by the same. As retail trade is understood engaging in sales to the consumer, acting as agent or representative of productive or mercantile concerns, or in any other activities classified by law as pertaining to such trade. There are excepted from this rule cases in which the farmer, or manufacturer in manual industries, sells his own products. A system of supervision and sanctions shall be established by law in order to prevent those persons who, pursuant to this Article,	 may	 not	 engage	 in	 retail	 trade, from doing so through interposed persons* or in any fraudulent manner.
* interposita persona.

64

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 253. As wholesale trade is understood that which is not covered by the preceding Article, and may be engaged in by any person, natural or juridical. When it is necessary to protect wholesale trade operated by Panamanians, the exercise of such trade by foreigners may be restricted by law. In no case shall this restriction affect the foreigners who, at the time the pertinent provisions enter into effect, are engaged legally in wholesale trade. Article 254. Any combination, contract or action which tends to restrict or prevent free trade and competition, and which has the effect of a monopoly to the detriment of the public, is prohibited in Commerce and Industry. In this practice is included the operation by a single natural or juridical person of a series or chains of mercantile retail establishments in a manner that ruins or tends to eliminate the competition of small merchants or industrialists. Any person may file an action* before the courts in order to oppose any combination, contract or action, the object of which is to establish monopolistic practices. This matter shall be regulated by law. Article 255. Hunting, fishing and exploitation of forests shall be regulated by law, with special care in protecting and conserving the fauna and flora of the country. Article 256. Only the State may operate games of luck and chance, and activities that give rise to wagers. All types of games as well as any activities which give rise to wagers whatever the system may be, shall be regulated by law. Article 257. There shall not be any private monopolies.

* acciôn popular. 65

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA TITLE XII PUBLIC EMPLOYEES ("Servidores Pfiblicos") Chapter 1 Fundamental Provisions Article 258. Public employees* are persons appointed temporarily or permanently to posts in the Executive, Legislative or Judicial Branches of Government, as well as Municipalities, and Autonomous and Semi-autonomous Entities, and in general those who receive remuneration from the State. Article 259. Public Employees shall be of Panamanian nationality and shall be appointed without discrimination for reasons of race, sex, religion or political affiliation. Their appointment and removal may not be the absolute and discretional prerogative of any Authority, except as provided in this Constitution. Public Employees shall be governed by the merit system. Stability in their positions shall depend on their competence, loyalty and morality in service. Article 260. Students and graduates of Educational Institutions shall render temporary services to the Community before freely practicing their profession or trade under compulsory Civil Service established by this Constitution, and regulated by law. Chapter 2 Basic Principles of Personnel Administration Article 261. The rights and duties of Public Employees, as, well as the principles governing tenure, promotion,
* Servidores

66

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION suspension, transfer, dismissal, separation and retirement shall be established by law. Appointments of Career Personnel shall be based on the merit system. Public Employees are obliged to personally discharge their duties, to which they shall dedicate their maximum capabilities and for which they shall receive a fair remuneration. Article 262. Public Employees may not receive two or more salaries paid by the State, except in special cases determined by law, nor may they hold positions with simultaneous periods of work. The pensions of Public Servants shall be based on actuarial studies and reasonable budgetary allocations. Article 263. The President and Vice-President of the Republic, Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, and of other Ordinary or Special Courts, the Attorney General of the Republic and the Solicitor General of the Administration, Judges, Ministers of State, the Comptroller General of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly of Community* Representatives, members of the General Staff of the National Guard, members of the Legislative Commission, and all Chief Public Officials must make a sworn declaration, before a notary, of their assets upon taking and leaving office. There shall be no charge to the declarer for this service. Pertinent procedure shall be regulated by law. Chapter 3 Organization of Personnel Administration Article 264. The following Careers are established in public service, in accordance with the merit system: 1. The Administrative Career;
* Corregimiento
67

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA The Judicial Career; The Education Career; The Diplomatic and Consular Career; The Health Career; The Military Career; Other Careers as determined by law. The structure and organization of these Careers shall be established by law, in accordance with the requirements of the Administration.
Article 265. All official departments shall function on the basis of a Manual of Procedures and a Position Classification Manual. Article 266. The following do not form part of the Adminis-

2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.

trative Career (Civil Service): 1. Officials whose appointments are regulated by this Constitution; 2. Directors and Deputy Directors of Autonomous and Semi-autonomous Entities, Public Officials appointed for a specific time or for fixed periods established by law, and those serving in honorary positions; 3. Secretarial staff service personnel immediately attached to Public Officials who do not form part of any Career; 4. Public Officials with authority and jurisdiction who are not part of a Career; 5. Professionals, technicians or manual workers required for temporary or special services in the Ministries and in Autonomous or Semi-autonomous Institutions; 6. Public Employees whose positions are regulated by the Labor Code; 7. Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions as determined by law. Chapter 4
General Provisions

68

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION Article 267. The provisions contained in Articles 187, 190, 192, 193, 194, and 196 hereof shall be applied in accordance with the stipulations set forth in this Title. Article 268. Public Employees may not approve contracts on their own behalf or through third parties, * with the department or agency in which they work, when such contracts are for profit and of a character unsuited to the service they render. TITLE XIII NATIONAL DEFENSE AND PUBLIC SECURITY Article 269. National Defense and Public Security shall be exercised by an Institution called the National Guard. Its functioning and regime shall be regulated by law. Article 270. All Panamanians are obliged to bear arms to defend national independence and territorial integrity of the State, except as provided in Article 16 hereof. Enforcement of this provision and the conditions for exemption from compliance with it shall be regulated by law. Article 271. The Government alone may possess arms and implements of war. For their manufacture, importation and exportation, previous permission is required from the Chief Executive. Arms which are not considered as arms of war, and their importation, manufacture and use shall be defined and regulated by law. FINAL PROVISIONS Article 272. This Constitution shall enter into force on October 11, 1972. Article 273. All laws and other legal provisions contrary to this Constitution are repealed, except those pertaining to
* "interposita persona"

69

REPUBLIC OF PANAMA parental authority* and support, the contrary parts of which shall continue in force for a period not exceeding twelve months from the date this Constitution enters into effect. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS Article 274. Treaties which may be executed by the Executive Branch of Government with respect to the Panama Canal, its adjacent zone, and the protection of said Canal, and for the construction of a new Canal at sea level or of a third set of locks, shall be submitted to a National Plebiscite. Article 275. The Community Representatives elected on August 6, 1972, shall install the Municipal Councils on October 15, 1972. For the purposes of the exercise of their functions, it is understood that the first session of the National Assembly of Community Representatives has occurred during the period from September 11, 1972, to October 11, 1972. The District of San Blas and the Municipality of Puerto Obaldia shall form the Provincial Coordinating Council of San Blas, and the Community**Representatives of the District of San Blas and Puerto Obaldia shall be members thereof. Article 276. The Executive Branch of Government shall determine the initial number of members of the Legislative Commission and shall proceed to appoint them from the time this Constitution becomes effective; likewise, the Executive Branch shall establish the procedure by means of which internal rules and regulations of the Legislative Commission shall be approved. Article 277. Brigadier General Omar Torrijos Herrera, Commander in Chief of the National Guard, is recognized as Maximum Leader of the Panamanian Revolution. Consequent* patria potestad * * Corregimiento 70

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION ly, and to ensure the fulfillment of the objectives of the revolutionary process, he is authorized, during a term of six years, to exercise the following powers: To coordinate the functions of the Public Administration; To appoint and remove freely the Ministers of State and members of the Legislative Commission; To appoint the Comptroller General and Deputy Comptroller General of the Republic, General Directors of Autonomous and Semi-autonomous Entities, and the Justice of the Electoral Court to be appointed by the Chief Executive, pursuant to the provisions of this Constitution and by law; To appoint the Chiefs and Officers of the Public Forces in accordance with this Constitution, a the law and the Military Regulations; To appoint with the approval of the Cabinet Council, the Justices of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General of the Republic, the Solicitor General of the Administration, and their respective alternates; To approve the execution of contracts and negotiations of loans and to direct foreign relations. General Omar Torrijos Herrera is empowered, furthermore, to attend meetings of the Cabinet Council and the National Legislative council with voice and vote, and to participate with voice in the debates of the National Assembly of Community Representatives, the Provincial Coordinating Councils and the Community Boards. Given in Panama City, October 11, 1972.

71

