We, the Deputies of the Panamanian People, met in Constituent National Assembly, invoking the protection of God, decree the following Political Constitution of the Republic of Panama:
TITLE I THE PANAMANIAN STATE

Art. 1. The Panamanian Nation is constituted as a unitary and independent state. Its system of government is republican, democratic and representative, and its name is Republic of Panama. Art. 2. The public power emanates only from the people. It is exercised by the State as this Constitution establishes it, by means of legislative, executive, and judicial organs which act within limits and separately but in harmonious collaboration. Art. 3. The Republic of Panama is established over the continental and insular territory included between Colombia and Costa Rica, in accordance with the boundary treaties made by Panama with those republics. The jurisdictional limitations stipulated in public treaties made previous to this Constitution are recognized. Art. 4. The Republic of Panama respects the rules of international law. Art. 5. The territory of the Republic is divided into autonomous municipalities grouped in provinces. The law may create regions subject to special regulations and may establish other divisions of territory for reasons of administrative convenience or public service. Art. 6. The symbols of the Nation are: the anthem, the flag, and the coat of arms adopted prior to the year 1941. Art. 7. Spanish is the language of the Republic.
TITLE II
NATIONALITY AND ALIENAGE

Art. 8. Panamanian nationality is held by birth, according to the conditions which this Constitution establishes, and is acquired by naturalization. 



Art. 9. Panamanians by birth are: (a) The children of a Panamanian father or mother born in the territory of the Republic; (b) Those born in the national territory to a foreign father and mother, if after reaching their majority they declare in writing before the executive that they choose Panamanian citizenship and positively and irrevocably renounce the citizenship of their parents, and furthermore demonstrate that they are spiritually and materially incorporated into the national life; (c) Those born of unknown parents in national territory not subject to jurisdictional limitations; (d) The children of a Panamanian father or mother born outside the territory of the Republic, provided that they are domiciled in Panama and that at the time of exercising any of the rights that this Constitution or the law recognizes as belonging exclusively to Panamanians by birth they have been domiciled in the Republic for the two preceding years; and (e) Those who acquired this right in accordance with the Constitution of 1904 and the amending act of 1928. Art. 10. Panamanians by naturalization are: (a) Foreigners with five consecutive years of residence in the Republic if, after having reached twenty-one years of age, they declare their desire to become naturalized as Panamanians, expressly renounce their nationality of origin or any other, and demonstrate that they know the Spanish language and the rudiments of Panamanian geography, history, and political organization; (b) Foreigners with three consecutive years of residence in the territory of the Republic who have children born there of Panamanian father or mother or a spouse of Panamanian nationality, provided that they make the declaration and present the proof specified in the preceding paragraph; and (c) Nationals by birth of Spain or any independent American nation, provided that they fulfill the same conditions required in their state of origin for the naturalization of Panamanians. Art. 11. Those who had been naturalized before the entering into effect of this Constitution will retain their status as such for the next five years, but will lose it if, when this time expires, they have not demonstrated that they know the Spanish language and the rudiments of Panamanian geography, history, and political organization. Naturalized Panamanians who before the entrance into effect of this Constitution have performed in the Republic any official function or have been, in accordance with the law, candidates for office by popular election, shall be exempt from this obligation. The same exemption is established for those born in Spain or in any independent American nation. Art. 12. It is an obligation of the State to carry on by all adequate means a methodical and constant endeavor to bind intellectually, morally, and politically to our nationality all groups or individuals who, though born in the territory of the Republic, are not integrated with the Republic. It will also be the obligation of the State to furnish facilities for spiritual assimilation to those who plan to obtain Panamanian nationality by naturalization. Art. 13. The Colombians who took part in the movement for independence are Panamanians by virtue of the Constitution without the necessity of naturalization papers. Art. 14. The foreigner who desires to obtain Panamanian nationality will make application to the executive, who will give him a provisional paper, valid for one year. If at the end of this period he ratifies his application and no act that gives reason for denying it has come to the attention of the executive, final papers will be issued to him. For reasons of morality, security, health, or physical or mental incapacity, an application for naturalization papers may always be denied. The law will determine the rights that those who obtain provisional papers enjoy. The application for naturalization will be denied persons from states or regions whose constituents may not enter the Republic in conformity with the law, for economic reasons or reasons of social necessity. Art. 15. Panamanian nationality, once acquired, is lost only by express or tacit renunciation. There is express renunciation when the person declares in writing to the executive his desire to relinquish Panamanian nationality. There is tacit renunciation: (1) When the status of national of a foreign country is acquired; (2) When employment by another government is accepted without the permission of the executive, except for the case in which the employment is to work on an enterprise in which the Republic has an interest in conjunction with another nation; (3) When the national enters the service of an enemy state. Nationality may be recovered only by virtue of rehabilitation by the National Assembly. Art. 16. Panamanian nationals as well as foreigners within the territory of the Republic are obliged to live subject to the Constitution and laws and to respect and obey the authorities. Art. 17. Naturalized foreigners shall not be obliged to take up arms against the country of their birth. Art. 18. The capacity, recognition, and, in general, the rules and regulations of companies and other juridical persons will be determined by the Panamanian law. TITLE III
INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES

Chapter1 Fundamental Guarantees Art. 19. The authorities of the Republic are instituted to protect the life, honor, and property of its nationals wherever they may be and of the foreigners who may be under its jurisdiction; to assure the effectiveness of individual and social rights and duties; and to fulfill and cause to be fulfilled the Constitution and the law. Art. 20. Private persons are responsible before the authorities only for infraction of the Constitution or of the law. Public officials are responsible for the same cause, and also for abuse or neglect of their duties. Art. 21. All Panamanians and foreigners are equal before the law. There will be no personal exemptions or privileges or distinctions by reason of race, birth, social class, sex, religion, or political ideas, but the law may, for reasons of health, morality, public security, and national economy, subject foreigners in general to special conditions or deny them the exercise of specified activities. The law or the authorities may also, according to the case, take steps which affect exclusively nationals of


specified countries in case of war or in conformity with the provisions of public treaties. Political rights are reserved to nationals, except as provided in Article 192. Art. 22. No one may be deprived of his liberty except by virtue of the written order of a competent authority, issued in conformity with the legal formalities and for a reason previously defined in the law. Those executing the said order are obliged to give a copy thereof to the interested party, if he requests it. A culprit surprised in the act of committing an offense may be apprehended by any person and must be delivered immediately to the authority. No one may be detained for more than twenty-four hours without being placed at the disposal of the competent authority. Members of the police who violate this precept may be punished by the immediate loss of employment without prejudice to the penalties that the law imposes therefor. There is no imprisonment, detention, or arrest for purely civil debts or obligations. Art. 23. The State may not obligate itself by any international treaty of extradition to surrender its own nationals. Neither shall it concede the extradition of foreigners who are prosecuted for political offenses. Art. 24. Every individual detained in cases or in a manner other than those prescribed by this Constitution and the law shall be set at liberty upon his own petition or that of any other person. For this purpose the law will establish rules for the remedy of habeas corpus by means of summary judicial proceedings without considering the applicable penalty. Art. 25. No one is obliged, in a criminal, correctional, or police matter, to give testimony against himself, his spouse or his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity. Art. 26. The home is inviolable. No one may enter another's home without the consent of its owner, except by written order of competent authority or to help victims of crimes or disasters. Labor, social welfare, and health officials may make, on prior notice, domiciliary searches or inspections of places of work for the purpose of assuring the fulfillment of the social and public health laws. Art. 27. Every person -may pass freely through the national territory and change his residence without restrictions other than those which the transit, fiscal, health, and immigration laws and rules impose. Art. 28. The jails are places of security and regeneration. Any severity which is not necessary for these purposes is prohibited therein. Art. 29. Correspondence and other private documents are inviolable and may not be seized or examined except by direction of competent authority and in accordance with legal formalities. In any case, privacy will be observed as to matters apart from the object of the seizure or the examination. The examination of papers will be always effected in the presence of the interested party, or of a member of his family, or, in their absence, of two honorable residents of the same place. Art. 30. There is no penalty of death, expatriation, or confiscation of property. Art. 31. Only those acts that have been declared punishable by law previous to their perpetration and exactly applicable to the imputed act shall be punished.



Art. 32. No one shall be tried except by competent authority and in conformity with legal proceedings, or more than once for the same cause. Art. 33. The following may prescribe penalties without previous trial in the cases and under the precise terms of the law: (1) Officials exercising control and jurisdiction, who may impose fine or arrest upon anyone who insults them or is lacking in respect toward them in connection with their discharge of the duties of their offices or by reason of their discharge of the same; (2) Chiefs of police, who may impose the penalty of arrest upon their subordinates in order to curb insubordination or mutiny; and (3) Ship captains, who, being outside a port, have the power to restrain insubordination or mutiny or maintain order on board, and to detain temporarily any actual or presumed culprit. Art. 34. In case of overt infraction of a constitutional or legal precept to the detriment of any person, the order of a superior does not exempt from responsibility the agent who executes it. Exception is made with respect to individuals of the public forces when they are in service, in which case the responsibility devolves only upon the hierarchical superior who gives the order. Art. 35. The profession of all religions as well as the exercise of all forms of worship is free without limitation other than the respect for Christian morality and public order. Art. 36. It is recognized that the Catholic religion is that of the majority of Panamanians. It will be taught in the public schools, but learning it and attendance at acts of religious worship will not be obligatory for the pupils, when their parents or guardians so request. The law will determine the aid that should be given to this religion for missions to the native tribes and for other analogous ends. Art. 37. Religious associations have juridical capacity and may manage and administer their property within the limits designated by the law, the same as other juridical persons. Art. 38. Every person may freely express his thoughts, orally, in writing, or by any other means, without previous censorship. But legal responsibility exists when by any of these means attacks are made upon the reputation or honor of persons or upon the social security or public order. Art. 39. All inhabitants of the Republic have-the right to assemble peacefully and without arms for lawful ends. Open air manifestations or meetings are not subject to permit. Only previous notice to the local administrative authority, twenty-four hours in advance, is required. The authorities may take police measures to prevent or restrain abuses in the exercise of this right when the way in which it is exercised causes or may cause disturbance of traffic or of public order, or violation of rights of others. Art. 40. Companies, associations, and foundations that are not contrary to morals or legal order may be formed and may obtain recognition as juridical persons. Art. 41. Every person is free to engage in any profession or trade, subject to the rules established by law in regard to competence, morality, security, and public health. No tax or contribution will be established for engaging in the liberal professions and in the trades and arts.



Art. 42. Any person has the right to present respectful petitions and complaints to public officials, for reasons of social or private interest, and to obtain prompt action thereon. The official to whom a petition, question, or complaint is presented shall be obliged to act thereon within a period of thirty days. The law will designate the appropriate punishments for the violation of this precept. Art. 43. The ministers of religious cults may not perform public, civil, or military duties except those relating to social welfare or public instruction. Art. 44. The laws have no retroactive effect, except those of public order or of social interest. In criminal matters the law favorable to the accused always has preference and retroactivity, even when there has been final sentence. Art. 45. Private property acquired according to law by juridical or natural persons is guaranteed and may not be denied recognition or impugned by reason of subsequent laws. Private property implies obligations of its owner by reason of the social function that it must serve. Art. 46. For reasons of public utility or social interest defined in the law, there may be expropriation by judicial decree and with prior indemnification. Art. 47. When the application of a law based on reasons of public utility or social interest results in a conflict between the rights of individuals and the necessity recognized in the said law, the private interest must yield to the public or social interest. Art. 48. No one is obliged to pay a tax or impost which has not been legally established and which is not collected in the manner prescribed by law. Art. 49. In case of war, grave disturbance of the public order, or urgent social interest requiring prompt measures, the executive may decree the expropriation or seizure of private property, and the indemnification may not be previous. When the return of the seized object is practicable, the seizure will be only for the duration of the circumstances that have caused it. The State is always responsible for any expropriation that the executive thus accomplishes and for the losses and damages caused by the seizure, and will pay the amount thereof as soon as the reason for the expropriation or seizure ceases. Art. 50. Every author and inventor enjoys the exclusive ownership of his work-and invention during the time and in the manner that the law establishes. Art. 51. Every person against whom a mandatory or restraining order, violating the rights and guarantees held sacred by this Constitution, is issued or executed by any public official shall have the right to have the order revoked upon his own petition or that of any other person. The law shall determine the form of this summary proceeding for protection of the constitutional guarantees. The remedy to which this article refers will always be within the competence of the judicial tribunals. Art. 52. In case of external war or internal disturbance that threatens the public peace or order, the entire Republic or part thereof may be declared to be in state of siege and the effects of Articles 22, 24, 26, 27, 29, 38, 39, and 45 may be temporarily suspended partially or totally. Art. 53. The National Assembly will declare the state of siege and temporary suspension when it is in session. If it is in recess, they will be declared by decree signed by the President, his ministers, and the members of the permanent legislative commission, and in the same decree the National Assembly will be convoked so that within a maximum period of five days it will meet and take appropriate action. Upon termination of the cause, the assembly, if it is in session, and, if the assembly is not in session, the cabinet council, with the approval of the permanent legislative commission, will lift the state of siege or the suspension. Chapter2 The Family Art. 54. The State protects matrimony, maternity, and the family and guarantees the rights of the child until his adolescence. The law will determine that which relates to civil status. Art. 55. Matrimony is the legal foundation of the family, rests on the equality of rights of the spouses and may be dissolved in accordance with the law. Art. 56. The union in fact between persons legally qualified to contract matrimony, maintained for ten consecutive years in a public manner and under conditions of permanence, will have all the effects of civil matrimony. For this purpose, it will be sufficient that the interested parties jointly petition the civil registrar to record the marriage in fact. When this petition has not been made, the marriage may be proved, for the purpose of claiming the rights thereof, by any interested party, under the procedure specified by the judicial law. But the public minister, in the interest of morals or of the law, or third parties who allege rights liable to be affected by the recording, if the declaration is contrary to the reality of the facts, may oppose the recording or impugn it after it has been made. Art. 57. The parental jurisdiction is the union of duties and rights that parents have in relation to their children. Parents are obliged to feed, assist, educate, and instruct their children, and the latter to respect and assist their parents. The law will regulate the exercise of parental jurisdiction in accordance with the social interest and the welfare of the children. Art. 58. Parents have the same duties with regard to their illegitimate children as toward their children born in wedlock. All the children are equal before the law and have the same right of inheritance in intestate succession. Art. 59. The law will regulate the investigation of paternity. All discriminations based on the nature of the filiation are abolished. No declaration whatsoever establishing difference of birth or of civil status of the parents will be put in their registration records, nor in any verification, baptismal record, or certificate referring to the filiation. The power is granted to the father of a child born before the entrance into effect of this Constitution to protect him by the provisions of this article, by means of the rectification of any record or certificate in which any classification may have been established with respect to the said child.



The consent of the mother is not required for this. If the child is of age, he should give his consent. In the acts of simulation of paternity, anyone who is legally affected by the acts may oppose this measure. The law will designate the procedure. Art. 60. The State will see to the social and economic development of the family and will organize the family patrimony, determining the nature and quantity of property that it should include on the basis of inalienability and immunity from garnishment. Art. 61. The State will provide for the rearing and education of children whose parents or guardians are economically incapable of doing so or who have no relatives obligated to render such services to them. Art. 62. Minors who are abandoned, physically or mentally deficient, wayward or delinquent, will be submitted to special legislation on supervision, rehabilitation and protection. Chapter 3 Work Art. 63. Work is a right and a duty of the individual. The State will use the resources that are within its reach to provide occupation for every one who lacks it and will assure every worker the economic conditions necessary for a decent existence. Art. 64. Every worker in the service of the State or of public or private enterprises or of private individuals is guaranteed a minimum salary or wage. Art. 65. The law will establish the manner of adjusting the minimum salary or wage periodically for the purpose of improving the worker's standard of living and with attention to the peculiarities of each region and each industrial, commercial, or agricultural activity. In piece work by agreement or at fixed prices it is obligatory that the minimum salary for a day's work be assured. The minimum of every salary or wage is exempt from garnishment, except for maintenance obligations in the form that the law establishes. The work tools of laborers are also exempt. Art. 66. For equal work, under identical conditions, equal salary or wage must always be paid, irrespective of the persons who perform it and without distinction as to sex or nationality. Art. 67. The right of organization is recognized for employers, employees, workers, and professional people of all classes for the exclusive ends of their economic-social activity. The executive will have a period, not to be extended, of thirty days to accept or reject the registration of a workers' or employers' syndicate, The registration will specify the legal representation of the syndicate. The law will regulate everything concerning the recognition by the executive, of syndicates of employers, employees, workers, and professional men. The executive may dissolve a syndicate only when it departs from its exclusive purposes and a competent tribunal so declares by final decree. The management of these associations will be made up of Panamanian& exclusively.


Art. 68. The right of strike and suspension of work is recognized. The law will regulate the exercise thereof and may subject it to special restrictions in the public services that it designates. Art. 69. The maximum length of the working day is eight hours and the working week is up to forty-eight hours. The maximum working night will not be more than seven hours. Overtime will be compensated by extra pay. The maximum working day may be reduced to six hours for those over fourteen and less than eighteen years of age. Work by those less than fourteen and night work by those less than sixteen is forbidden except in the cases that the law specifies. The employment of those less than twelve as domestic servants and work by minors and women in unhealthful occupations are likewise prohibited. In addition to weekly rest, every worker shall have the right to vacations with pay. Art. 70. Stipulations that imply renunciation, diminution, weakening, or relinquishment of any right recognized in favor of the worker are null and, as such, do not bind the contracting parties although expressed in a work agreement or any other pact. The law will regulate everything relating to the work contract. Art. 71. The working mother is protected. A woman who is pregnant may not be discharged for this cause. For six weeks before the birth and eight afterwards, she will enjoy necessary rest recompensed in the same way as work, and will retain her employment and all the rights pertaining to her contract. Art. 72. The law will regulate immigration with a view to the national economic system and social necessities. The hiring of laborers who might lower the working conditions or standards of living of the national worker is forbidden. Art. 73. Every worker dismissed without just cause and without the formalities that the law establishes has the right to be indemnified by his employer. The law will designate the just causes for dismissal and the scale of indemnification according to the length of service. Art. 74. It is a duty of industrial enterprises in the spheres of their specialties to establish schools of apprenticeship designed to promote labor education among the children of their laborers or associates. The law will regulate this matter. Art. 75. The labor jurisdiction to which all controversies that originate between capital and labor are submitted is established. The law will establish the rules for the said jurisdiction and the entities that have to put it into practice. Art. 76. The relations between capital and labor are a matter for regulation by the law, on a basis of social justice so that, without prejudicing any of the parties, the conditions necessary for a normal life may be guaranteed to the worker, and capital may be assured of an equitable compensation for its investment. Chapter4 The National Culture Art. 77. The service of national education in its intellectual, moral, civic, and physical aspects is an essential duty of the State. The national

education shall be inspired by the democratic doctrine and by ideals of national growth and human solidarity. It is for the State to fix the bases of education, which will be organized in such a way that unity, coordination, and continuity will exist in all grades. Every educational establishment is of public and social utility. Art. 78. Primary education is obligatory. Public pre-school, primary, and secondary education of all grades and kinds will be gratuitous. The gratuitousness of pre-school and primary education implies the obligation of the State to provide all implements necessary for the instruction of the pupil. The gratuitousness of secondary education does not prevent the establishment of a matriculation fee. Art. 79. Freedom of instruction is guaranteed. The State may, nevertheless, intervene in private educational establishments so that the national and social purposes of culture and the better intellectual, moral, civic, and physical training of the pupils may be accomplished. Art. 80. No educational establishment may refuse to admit pupils because of the nature of the union of their parent or guardian or because of social, racial, or political differences. The violation of this precept by private schools will cause the loss of the official subsidy, if they had one; of the privilege of having their degrees and certificates recognized by the State, if they had it; and, in case of persistence, the loss of the right to continue giving instruction. Art. 81. The teaching of national history and civic education will always be under national professors. In no private educational establishment will instruction be given in a foreign language without the permission of the ministry of education granted for attested reasons of public interest. The programs of primary education in private schools will be the same as in the public schools; but permission for the establishment of additional courses in any language may be granted. It is obligatory for private schools to include in their secondary programs the teaching of national history and geography and civic education. Art. 82. The State may grant scholarships or economic aid only to students who have won public competitions or contests or who have obtained in their studies the qualifications that make them worthy of State aid according to the law. In case of equal merit, preference will be given to the participants whose economic means do not allow them to pursue the studies for which they entered the contest. Art. 83. The law will establish the necessary incentives for the publication of national pedagogical works and the standards for their adoption as official texts. Art. 84. The expenditures for the support of the educational service will have preference over any others. The organic law of the department will determine the proportion of the revenues that should be allotted for this service. Art. 85. Only the academic and professional degrees issued by the State or authorized by it in accordance with legal provisions are recognized. Art. 86. The official university of the Republic is autonomous. Its legal representation, its patrimony, and its right to administer the same


are recognized. It has the power to organize its curriculum and designate and group its personnel in the manner that the law determines. It will include in its activities the study of national problems and the diffusion of the culture of the people. Art. 87. In order to make the economic autonomy of the university effective, the State will endow it with what is indispensable for its installation and its future operation and development, as well as with the patrimony mentioned in the preceding article and the means necessary to increase it. Art. 88. Freedom of the lecture-room is recognized without limitations other than those established by the university statute for reasons of public order. Art. 89. The State will promote the establishment of special technical schools, industrial, professional, agricultural, and commercial, and adapt them to the specific necessities of the nation. The law will establish, beginning with the primary school, services of vocational orientation that will permit the discovery of the aptitudes and capacities of the pupils and their guidance toward better individual and social usefulness. Art. 90. The State will promote by all possible means the culture of the people and will maintain a system of gratuitous complementary courses for adults, with the purpose of preventing and eliminating illiteracy and increasing the practical capacities of the working classes. Art. 91. The law will establish a department of physical culture that will have the purpose of diffusing such culture in the educational institutions and among the people. Chapter 5 Public Health and Social Welfare Art. 92. It is an essential function of the State to safeguard the public health. The individual has the right to the protection, conservation, and restitution of his health, and the obligation to preserve it. As a consequence, the State will develop principally the following detailed activities: (a) To combat contagious diseases by means of individual treatment and sanitation of environment; (b) To protect maternity and to reduce infant mortality by means of medical assistance and adequate nutrition; (c) To complement the feeding of needy children and to give service of medical vigilance to child students; (d) To establish, according to the needs of each region, hospitals, dental clinics, and dispensaries, in which services are given and medicines are supplied free to those who lack pecuniary resources; and (e) To publish systematically the principles of scientific feeding, personal hygiene, and sanitation of the home. The National Assembly will issue the sanitary code. Art. 93. Every individual has the right to the security of economic means of subsistence, in case of incapacity to work or to obtain compensated work. Social security services will be provided and administered by autonomous entities and will cover illness, maternity, family subsidy, old age, widowhood, orphanhood, forced work stoppage, employment accidents,, and occupational illness, and all other contingencies that affect the capacity to work and to consume. The law will provide for the establishment of such services, as social needs may require. The State will establish institutions of social assistance and welfare. Their fundamental tasks are the economic and moral rehabilitation of the dependent groups and the care of the mentally deficient, the chronically ill, and invalids lacking economic resources. The State will likewise promote the establishment of inexpensive dwellings for workers. Chapter6 Country and Native Groups Art. 94. The State will give special protection to the country and native groups for the purpose of integrating them in an effective manner with the national community with regard to their standards of living economic, political, and intellectual. The action relative to the natives will conserve and at the same time develop the values of the aboriginal culture. Art. 95. In order to accomplish the economic integration of the said groups, the State will methodically perform the following activities: (a) To grant gratuitously to the country people and natives the necessary land for work, issuing the pertinent deeds of ownership. Lands near the centers of population and main transportation arteries will be preferred. When uncultivated national lands are lacking under these conditions, private untilled or idle land will be expropriated. These expropriations will take effect only when the untilled land exceeds one hundred hectares or, if of smaller size, belongs to people who do not devote themselves exclusively to agriculture or cattle raising as a means of livelihood; (b) To reserve lands for indigenous communities and prohibit their adjudication for any reason. The existence of the native reservations already established is recognized; (c) To create, by adequate means, agrarian credit services or technical institutions that take to the country people and natives the knowledge and resources necessary to establish among themselves scientific systems of cultivation; (d) To take steps to assure a stable market and equitable prices for products, and to stimulate the establishment of production, distribution, and consumption co-operatives; (e) To establish means of communication and transport to unite the country and native groups with the centers of distribution and consumption; (f) To promote and stimulate the development of agriculture, rural industry, and regional arts by means of prizes or other similar incentives in the manner that the law determines. Art. 96. Besides the general ends of national culture, the schools for country people and natives should serve the following: (a) To create the consciousness of the duties, rights, dignity, and possibilities of the Panamanian citizen; (b) To awaken interest in life in the country by means of objective teaching of the material elements indispensable to a secure, healthful, and decorous rural living; and


(c) To take to the rural and native homes the activity of the agencies of education and welfare that tend to raise their moral, cultural, and social level.
TITLE IV
POLITICAL RIGHTS

Chapter1 General Provisions Art. 97. All Panamanians over twenty-one years of age are citizens of the Republic without distinction as to sex. Art. 98. Citizenship consists of the right to vote and to be elected for public posts by popular election and of the capacity to perform public duties with authority and jurisdiction except as provided in Article 192 for a special situation. Art. 99. Citizenship is lost: (1) By loss of Pananamian nationality according to this Constitution; and (2) By penalty in conformity with the law. Art. 100. Citizenship is recovered by means of rehabilitation by the National Assembly. Art. 101. Citizenship is suspended: (1) By judicial resolution in the cases that the law specifies; and, (2) By pendency of a criminal cause, from the time that the judge orders trial, in the cases in which there is no right of bail. Chapter2 Suffrage Art. 102. The suffrage is a right and duty of all citizens. The law will regulate it on the following bases: (1) The suffrage is free. All official aid to candidates for posts of popular election is forbidden, even when the means used for such purpose are supervised; (2) The authorities are impartial guarantors of the suffrage and not direct or indirect instruments of political compulsion. All exaction of quotas or contributions from public employees for political purposes, even under the pretext that they are voluntary, is forbidden to the authorities; (3) All popular elections, and those which public entities must hold when more than two citizens are to be elected, will be held according to some system that assures proportional representation to the parties; (4) Every citizen will be provided with a permanent personal cedula, the acquisition of which is obligatory and which will serve as his identification in the popular elections and other affairs that require it; and, (5) The vote is universal, equal, direct, and secret. Art. 103. The law will regulate the manner of organizing the political parties. The formation of any party which has as its basis sex, race, or religion, or which tends to destroy the democratic form of government, is illegal. Art. 104. Violation of the principles contained in Article 102 constitutes a crime. The law will establish the corresponding penalties, subject to the provisions of Article 148.


Chapter8 The Electoral Organism

Art. 105. In the Republic there will be a national electoral jury whose election, composition, and attributes will be determined by the law upon the principle of proportional representation, guaranteeing the supervision of its functions by the political parties and groups not represented in this and other electoral bodies.
TITLE V
THE LEGISLATIVE ORGAN

Chapter 1 National Assembly Art. 106. The legislative organ is a body called National Assembly, composed of deputies in the same number as the electoral circuits in the ratio of one for every fifteen thousand inhabitants and one more for a residue that is not less than seven thousand five hundred. A province with less than fifteen thousand inhabitants has the right to elect a deputy. For each deputy there will be elected two alternates, who will successively replace the principals in cases of permanent or temporary absence. Art. 107. The deputies, once elected, represent the entire Nation, are not subject to any mandate, and obey only the dictates of their own consciences. Art. 108. The deputies and their alternates will be elected by direct popular vote for a period of four years. Art. 109. The National Assembly will meet annually by its own right, without the necessity of convocation, in the capital of the Republic, the first day of October. Art. 110. Every period of regular or special sessions is called a legislature. The regular legislature cannot be extended and will last ninety lawful days. Art. 111. The executive may convoke the National Assembly for special sessions for the time he specifies, to deal exclusively with the matters which he submits to it. Art. 112. To be a deputy to the National Assembly, it is required to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights and to be twenty-five years old. Art. 113. The members of the National Assembly are not legally responsible for their opinions and votes in the performance of duty. Art. 114. From the day of his election until the end of the period for which he was elected, no deputy may be accused, prosecuted, arrested, or called to criminal or police trial without prior authorization of the assembly or the permanent legislative commission, when the chamber is in recess. Neither may he be sued civilly during the interval between thirty days before and thirty after each period of sessions. Upon the request of a deputy, the assembly or the permanent legislative commission may, according to the circumstances, lift temporarily or partially his immunity. Art. 115. Deputies may not be appointed to any remunerated public post, except that of minister of state, magistrate of the Supreme Court



of Justice, chief of diplomatic mission with the rank of ambassador or minister plenipotentiary, or professor in official universities. The violation of this precept nullifies the appointment. Acceptance of the office of magistrate causes an absolute vacancy in the office of deputy, and acceptance of the offices of minister of state or chief of diplomatic mission causes a temporary vacancy. Art. 116. No increase or decrease in the per diem or new allowances of any kind will be effective until after the members of the assembly in which they were passed have ceased to serve. Art. 117. The deputies to the National Assembly may not make, personally or through others intervening, any contract with the organs of the State or institutions or enterprises affiliated with it, or accept from any one authority to handle business with these organs, institutions, or enterprises while the assembly is in session. The following cases are excepted: (a) When it is a matter of personal or professional use of public services or current operations of the same type with institutions or enterprises affiliated with the State; (b) When it is a matter of contracts made with any of the organs or entities mentioned in this article, by means of bidding, by companies, other than anonymous companies, of which a deputy is a member, provided that his participation therein antedates his election to office; (c) When, by means of bidding or without it, contracts are made with such organs or entities by anonymous companies in which a total of not more than twenty-five per cent of the shares belongs to deputies of the National Assembly;
(d) When the deputy acts in the exercise of his profession as a lawyer,
outside the period of sessions or during it, but by means of license.

The deputy who, according to clauses (a), (b), and (c) of this article, makes a contract with any of the organs of the State or with institutions or enterprises affiliated with it or has negotiations with any of them will lose
his immunity in regard to everything concerning such contracts or negotiations. Art. 118. The legislative functions of the National Assembly consist in issuing the laws necessary for the fulfillment of the ends and the performance of the functions of the State declared in this Constitution, and
especially for the following: (1) To issue, put into effect, amend, or repeal the national codes; (2) To determine the number and nomenclature of the ministries of state and to distribute among them the business of the administration; (3) To establish or abolish offices and to determine their functions, duties, attributes, periods, and allocations; (4) To issue the general law of salaries upon the proposal of the executive organ; (5) To approve or to disapprove the public treaties that the executive makes; (6) To approve or disapprove the contracts or agreements that the executive makes with natural or juridical persons; (7) To authorize the executive to make contracts, negotiate loans, transfer national property, movable or immovable, the value of which exceeds five thousand balboas, and to perform other analogous functions within the constitutional orbit; (8) To declare war and empower the executive to negotiate the peace; (9) To designate the place where the organs of state are to be located;



(10) To establish or change the political division of the national territory; (11) To limit and regulate the assignment of uncultivated lands; (12) To determine the peace-time footing of the army; (13) To organize the services established by this Constitution; (14) To promote the sciences and arts; to promote agriculture, industries, and the useful or charitable enterprises worthy of stimulation and help; (15) To decide upon monuments that the State should erect; (16) To approve with or without modifications the public works bill presented by the executive for the fiscal year in conformity with the provisions of Article 144., In discussing the bill, preference will be given to those works already commenced in accordance with the previous fiscal year; (17) To organize the national statistics and to arrange for the taking of the census of the population; (18) To grant amnesty for political offenses; (19) To organize the public credit; (20) To recognize the national debt and to provide for its service; (21) To decree the expenditures of the administration in view of the budget which the executive presents, approving or modifying it. If, for any reason whatsoever, the budget is not issued by the National Assembly, that of the previous fiscal year will remain in effect. In this case, the approval of the permanent legislative commission, which may or may not modify it, will be necessary; (22) To establish duties, taxes, revenues, and official monopolies in order to attend to the public services; (23) To provide for the application of national property to public uses, as well as for the manner and condition of such application; (24) To determine the fineness, weight, value, form, type, and denomination of the national money; (25) To clothe the executive temporarily, when he so requests, with precise extraordinary powers, which will be exercised by means of decree-laws if necessity demands or public convenience makes it advisable. The law by which the said powers are conferred will specifically set forth the subject and purposes of the decree-laws, and, if these latter deal with matters reserved for organic laws, must be approved by the absolute majority of the members of the assembly. Every decree-law that the executive issues in the exercise of the powers that are conferred upon him must be submitted to the National Assembly for legislation upon the matter. If the effects of the decree-law have been completed, because it was of a transitory nature, the assembly should declare whether it approves or disapproves, in order to determine the corresponding responsibilities if any. For the exercise of the extraordinary powers to which this refers, the agreement of the permanent legislative commission will paragraph be necessary; (26) To establish administrative departments, with internal autonomy, interministerial organs, and technical councils, for the purpose of assuring the efficacy of the administrative functions, co-ordinating the action of different branch offices, and technically planning and developing the labors of the public administration. Art. 119. The judicial functions of the National Assembly are: (1) To take cognizance of the accusations or denunciations that are presented against the President of the Republic and the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the tribunal of administrative litigation and to judge them, if there is occasion, for acts performed in the exercise of their duties to the prejudice of the free functioning of the public power or in violation of the Constitution and the laws;



(2) To take cognizance of the accusations or denunciations that are presented against the deputies to the National Assembly. The law will establish the proceedings that should be followed and the penalties that should be applied. Art. 120. The administrative functions of the National Assembly are: (1) To decide upon the rules for its internal order; (2) To examine the credentials of its own members and to decide whether or -not they are in the form prescribed by law; (3) To accept or reject the resignation of the President of the Republic; (4) To grant permission to the President of the Republic to lay aside his duties for as much as six months and to leave the national territory under such permission; (5) To approve or disapprove the nominations which are made by the executive and which under this Constitution or the law require the ratification of the National Assembly; (6) To appoint the attorney general of the Nation and his alternates and the comptroller general and sub-comptroller general of the Republic and to approve or disapprove the appointments of the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and their alternates and the magistrates of the tribunal of administrative litigation and their alternates; (7) To appoint commissions to investigate any matter relating to acts performed or measures proposed by the executive and to inform the assembly so that it can decree the measures which it considers appropriate. These commissions will necessarily include representatives of all parties of which the assembly is composed and will have the right to call private persons as well as officials and authorities to come and testify before them, and the right to request data and documents that they consider necessary for the purposes of the investigation; (8) To pass votes of censure against the ministers of state when they, in the judgment of the assembly, are responsible for illegal acts or grave errors which have been notoriously prejudicial to the interests of the State. So that the vote of censure may be taken, it must be proposed in writing, six days before its discussion, by not less than half of the deputies and approved by the vote of two-thirds of their number; (9) To examine and close finally at each regular meeting the general treasury account which the executive presents to it; (10) To request of the ministers of state oral or written reports and to require their attendance at the meetings, stating the object thereof, when this is deemed necessary to elucidate the debate; and (11) To rehabilitate those who have lost nationality or citizenship. Art. 121. The National Assembly is forbidden: (1) To issue laws that violate the letter or spirit of this Constitution; (2) To recognize as charges against the public treasury indemnifications which have not been previously declared by the tribunals and to vote money to pay for scholarships, pensions, exemptions from duty with reduced pay, gratuities, or expenditures that have not been decreed according to preexisting general laws; (3) To decree acts of proscription or persecution against persons or corporations; (4) To give votes of praise or censure with respect to acts of the President of the Republic: (5) To urge or compel public officials to adopt specified measures; (6) To make appointments other than those which are assigned to it according to this Constitution; (7) To demand public reports on pending diplomatic negotiations of a confidential nature;




(8) To order or authorize public works other than those decreed in the law, to which paragraph 15 of Article 118 refers, except in emergency cases expressly so declared by the assembly; and (9) To delegate any of the functions belonging to it except as provided in paragraph 25 of Article 118.

Art. 122. At least three days before the close of the regular sessions the National Assembly will designate a permanent legislative commission composed of five principal members with an alternate for each principal, all active deputies, who will be elected as follows:
(a) The total number of deputies of which the National Assembly is composed will be divided by the number of members to be elected to the commission. The result will determine the election quotient; (b) For the election of the members of the permanent legislative commission, each deputy will cast a single ballot for a principal and an alternate, who must necessarily be deputies, and those who have obtained at least a number of votes, equal to the election quotient will be declared to be elected; and (c) If, after the representations have been determined on the basis of the election quotient, posts remain to be filled, those who have obtained the highest number of votes will be declared to be elected to fill them. In case of a tie, decision will be by lot. This commission will perform its functions during the period of recess between one legislature and the next. Art. 123. In conjunction with the executive, this commission will take cognizance of: (1) The cases of suspension of constitutional guarantees; (2) The issuance of decree-laws in conformity with this Constitution; (3) Everything relating to the exercise of the extraordinary powers with which the executive may be invested; (4) The issuance of supplementary special credits; and (5) The issuance of the budget in the case mentioned in paragraph 21 of Article 118, and of the corresponding plan of public works. Moreover, the commission will have the following attributes: (6) During the recess of the assembly, to take cognizance of every penal or correctional procedure initiated against the deputies or the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice; (7) During the recess of the assembly, to give approval for the President of the Republic to leave the national territory and grant him permission to leave his duties for as much as six months; and (8) To elaborate, according to the most pressing necessities, bills for the consideration of the assembly in its next session. Chapter , Legislation Art. 124. The laws originate in the assembly and are divided thus: (a) Organic, those which are issued in fulfillment of paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 13, 19, 21, 22, and 26 of Article 118; and (b) Ordinary, those which are issued under the other paragraphs of the said Article.

Art. 125.

The laws will be proposed:

(a) When they are organic: (1) By special commissions of the assembly; (2) By the ministers of state; and



(3) By the Supreme Court of Justice, if they relate to the issuance or amendment of the civil, commercial, penal, or procedural codes. (b) When they are ordinary, by any member of the assembly or minister of state. Organic laws require, for their issuance, the favorable vote, in each one of the debates, of the absolute majority of the assembly. Ordinary laws require only the approval of the majority of the deputies attending the respective sessions. Art. 126. No bill will be a law of the Republic if it has not been approved by the National Assembly in three debates, on separate days, and sanctioned by the executive in the form provided by this Constitution. Art. 127. Every bill that has not been presented by one of the special commissions mentioned in paragraph (a) of Article 125 will be referred by the President to a commission to be studied and discussed within a reasonable time. The commission may take the advice of experts and obtain information from individuals or private or public entities affected by the subject dealt with in the bill. At the termination of the period of study, the commission will inform the assembly whether or not it is appropriate to legislate upon the matter to which the bill refers, with a clear and methodical expression of the conclusions adopted. The commission will designate from its membership a reporter who will participate in the respective debates before the assembly. A similar procedure will be followed with regard to organic bills in the special commissions mentioned in paragraph (a) of Article 125. The first debate on any bill is that which takes place in the commission mentioned in this Article. If the bill has been recommended by the commission, it will pass to the second debate. A bill may also pass to the second debate when the majority of the assembly, at the request of one of its members, reverses the opinion of the commission and gives the bill its approval. Art. 128. When approved, a bill will go to the executive, and if he sanctions it, he will have it promulgated as law. In case he disapproves, he will send it with his objections to the assembly. Art. 129. The executive will have a period of six working days to return any bill with objections, when it consists of fifty articles or less; of ten days, when it consists of more than fifty articles and less than two hundred; and of fifteen days, when it contains two hundred or more articles. If the executive has not returned the bill with objections within the periods indicated, he may not fail to approve it and have it promulgated. But if the assembly goes into recess during the said periods the executive must publish the bill, approved or vetoed, within ten days following the closing of the assembly. Art. 130. A bill vetoed in its entirety by the executive will go back to the assembly for a third debate. If it has been vetoed only in part, it will go back for a second debate for the sole purpose of considering the formulated objections. If the objections are considered by the National Assembly and the bill is approved by two-thirds of the deputies who compose the assembly, the executive will sanction it and have it promulgated without being able to




present new objections. If the approbation of this number of deputies is not obtained, the bill will remain rejected. Art. 131. When the executive objects to a bill as unconstitutional and the assembly, by the stated majority, insists upon its adoption, the former will send it to the Supreme Court of Justice to decide upon its constitutionality. The decision of the court declaring the bill constitutional obliges the executive to approve it and to have it promulgated. Art. 132. If the executive does not fulfill the duty of approving and having the laws promulgated within the periods and according to the conditions that this title establishes, the president of the assembly will approve and have the laws promulgated. Art. 133. Every law will be promulgated within six working days after its approval and will begin to have effect from its promulgation unless the law itself specifies that it will have effect from another date. Art. 134. The laws may state their reasons for being, and the following formula will precede the text: The National Assembly of Panama decrees: Art. 135. The bills that remain pending during a period of sessions may be considered only as new bills.
TITLE VI
THE EXECUTIVE ORGAN

Chapter 1 President and Vice-President Art. 136. The executive organ is composed of a magistrate who is called President of the Republic, with the indispensable co-operation of the ministers of state. Art. 137. In each particular case, the President and the minister of the respective branch represent the executive organ. Art. 138. The President of the Republic will be elected by direct popular suffrage and by a majority of votes for a period of four years. A First Vice-President and a Second Vice-President, who will replace the President in his absences according to the provisions of Article 149, will be elected along with the President of the Republic in the same manner and for the same period. Art. 139. The citizen who has been elected President of the Republic may not be re-elected for the same office in the two terms immediately following. Art. 140. To be President of the Republic, one is required: (1) To be Panamanian by birth, and (2) To be thirty-five years of age. Art. 141. The President of the Republic will take office before the National Assembly and will take the oath in the following words: "I swear before God and the country to comply faithfully with the Constitution and the laws of the Republic." A citizen who does not have religious faith may omit the invocation to God in his oath. Art. 142. If for any reason the President of the Republic cannot take office before the National Assembly, he will do so before the Supreme Court of Justice and, in default of the latter, before a notary, or in the last resort, before two competent witnesses.



Art. 143. Attributes which the President of the Republic alone may exercise are: (1) To appoint and dismiss ministers of state freely; (2) To watch over the regular functioning of the administration and the preservation of public order; (3) To see to the collection and administration of the national revenues; (4) To watch over the sound administration of the public establishments; (5) To see to it that the National Assembly meets on the day fixed in the Constitution or in the decree by which he may have called it for special sessions; and (6) To present at the beginning of each legislature, on the first day of its regular sessions, a message concerning the matters of the administration. Art. 144. Duties which the President must perform with the cooperation of the respective ministers, the cabinet council, or the permanent legislative commission, as the case may be, are: (1) To approve and promulgate the laws, obey them, and see to their exact fulfillment; (2) To appoint and dismiss freely the governors of the provinces and the commanders and officers of the public forces and the national police corps; (3) To inform the assembly of vacancies occurring in the offices which the latter must fill; (4) To appoint, as provided in Title XII, the persons who must occupy the national offices or posts for which provision is not to be made by any other official or body; (5) To send to the National Assembly within the first ten days of its regular sessions the estimate of revenue and expenditures, the plan for public works for the following fiscal year, and the draft of a law for salaries if deemed necessary, except in the case in which the date of the taking of office by the President of the Republic coincides with the beginning of the said sessions. In such case, the President of the Republic will do this within the first forty-five days of the sessions; (6) To give to the National Assembly the information which it requests; (7) To make administrative contracts for the rendering of services and execution of public works in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and the law and with the obligation to give account thereof to the National Assembly; (8) To direct the foreign relations; to accredit and receive diplomatic and consular agents as well as to make public treaties and conventions, which will be submitted for the consideration of the National Assembly; (9) To grant nationals who so request permission to accept offices of foreign governments in the cases in which such permission is necessary according to the Constitution or the law; (10) To issue naturalization papers according to the procedure that the law designates; (11) To grant commercial and industrial patents, according to the law; (12) To direct, regulate, and inspect the services established in this Constitution; (13) To appoint, subject to the approval of the National Assembly, the chiefs and directors of the autonomous and semi-autonomous public bodies, according to the provisions of the respective laws; (14) To decree amnesty for political offenses; to reduce penalties and grant conditional liberty to ordinary criminals; (15) To confer military ranks in case of war; (16) To command the public forces of the Nation; (17) To issue regulations when required for the better execution of laws, without departing from their text or spirit in any case;



(18) To appoint, by unanimous agreement of the cabinet council and subject to the approval of the National Assembly, the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and their alternates and those of the tribunal of administrative litigation and their alternates; (19) To exercise the precise extraordinary powers mentioned in Article 118, paragraph 25 of this Constitution; and (20) To exercise the other attributes that belong to him according to this Constitution and the law. Art. 145. No act of the President of the Republic, except those mentioned in Article 143, will have any validity or effect whatsoever unless it is countersigned by the minister of state in the respective branch, who thereby becomes responsible for the same. The orders and provisions that a minister of state issues within his branch, stating that he does so by instruction of the President of the Republic, will be obligatory and may be invalidated only by the President himself, provided that they do not transgress the limitations of the powers that belong to the executive according to the Constitution and the law. Art. 146. The President of the Republic may lay aside his duties only by permission, which in no case will exceed six months and will be granted by the National Assembly and, when the latter is in recess, by the permanent legislative commission referred to in Article 122. The President of the Republic may not leave the national territory while he is performing his duties. The infraction of this rule entails loss of the office. In case of resignation, the National Assembly, and when the Assembly is in recess, the Supreme Court of Justice, will take cognizance of it, to accept or refuse it. Art. 147. The emoluments that the law assigns to the President of the Republic may be altered, but the alteration will not take effect until the following presidential term. Art. 148. The President of the Republic is responsible only in the following cases: (1) For exceeding his constitutional powers; (2) For acts of violence or coercion in the course of the electoral process or hindering the meeting of the National Assembly or obstructing it or other public bodies or authorities established by the Constitution in the performance of their functions; and (3) For the crime of high treason. In the first two cases, the penalty will be dismissal and disqualification to hold public office for the period that the law specifies. In the third case the common law will be applied. Art. 149. In the temporary or permanent absence of the President of the Republic, his duties will be performed by one of the Vice-Presidents, in the order in which they were elected. Moreover, it is a duty of the First Vice-President of the Republic to attend, with voice but without vote, the sessions of the cabinet council. Art. 150. When, for any reason, the absences of the President cannot be filled by the Vice-Presidents, one of the ministers of state, who fulfills the requisites necessary for being President of the Republic, and who has been elected therefor by majority vote, will fill the presidency. Art. 151. When the permanent absence of the President and Vice-Presidents happens not less than two years before the expiration of the




presidential period, the person charged with the duties of the presidency will call presidential and vice-presidential elections for a date not later than four months away, so that the citizen elected President may take possession within six months following the call. The respective decree will be issued at the latest eight days after the assumption of the post by the said person in charge. If it is less than two years until the end of the term, the person in charge will perform his duties until the end of the said term. Neither the citizen who has discharged the duties of the presidency within the two years immediately preceding the elections mentioned, nor any of his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity, may be elected President or Vice-President in these elections. Art. 152. The citizen who replaces the President of the Republic will have the same title and rank and will exercise the same attributes as the latter. Art. 153. The following may not be elected President: (1) The citizen who, called to the presidency because of the permanent or temporary absence of the titular President, has held it at any time during the two years immediately preceding the term for which the elections are taking place, and (2) Any relative within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity bf the President elected by popular vote who has performed his functions in the term immediately preceding or of the citizen indicated in paragraph 1 of this article. Art. 154. The following may not be elected Vice-Presidents: (1) The President elected by popular vote who has discharged his functions at any time, when the election of Vice-Presidents is for the term following his own; (2) Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity of the President elected by popular vote for the term following that in which the President exercised power; (3) The citizen who as Vice-President or minister, of state has held the presidency at any time during the two years preceding the period for which the-election is taking place; (4) Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity of the citizen mentioned in the preceding paragraph for the period immediately following that in which he held the presidency; and (5) Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity and second of affinity of the candidate for the presidency of the Republic. Chapter 2 Ministers of State Art. 155. The ministers of state are the chief directors of their respective departments and co-operate with the President of the Republic in the performance of his functions, according to the provisions of this Constitution and the law. Art. 156. Matters will be distributed among the ministers of state, according to the nature of such matters, in conformity with the law. Art. 157. To be a minister of state the same requisites as those for being deputy to the National Assembly are necessary. But a naturalized citizen must have been naturalized at least ten years before the time of his designation.


Art. 158. No person who is a relative of the President of the Republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity may be appointed minister of state. Neither may individuals united among themselves by the stated degrees of relationship be appointed ministers in the same cabinet. Art. 159. The ministers of state will have a voice in the National Assembly. Art. 160. Each minister of state will present to the National Assembly, within the first ten days of each term of regular sessions, a report or memorandum upon the state of affairs of his ministry and upon the reforms that he deems it appropriate to introduce. Chapter 3 Cabinet Council Art. 161. The meeting of the ministers of state under the indispensable presidency of the President of the Republic constitutes the cabinet council. Art. 162. The functions of the cabinet council are: (1) To act as a consultative body in the affairs submitted to it by the President of the Republic and in those in which it should be heard by order of the Constitution or of the law; (2) During recess of the National Assembly, to empower the President of the Republic to settle or submit to arbitration the disputes in which the Nation is involved. For this, the favorable opinion of the attorney general of the Nation, the unanimous vote of the council, and the majority vote of the permanent legislative commission are necessary; (3) To determine, with the President of the Republic and by unanimous of magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of vote, the appointments the tribunal of administrative litigation; (4) To determine, under the joint responsibility of all its members and the President should issue upon the suspension of guarantees the decrees that exercise the permanent legislative commission, or in the members of the of extraordinary powers when he is invested with them; (5) To open, under the collective responsibility of all its members and the
members of the subject permanent legislative commission, supplementary or extraordinary credits, to the provisions of Article 221 of this Constitution and

the prescriptions of the laws decreed in the execution of this precept;

(6) To requestor of desirable the public and corporations the reports that it deems necessary for officials the dispatch of the affairs that it must consider, and to call upon the first named and the representatives of the second

to give verbal reports; (7) To prescribe the rules for its internal operations; and (8) To perform the other functions designated by the Constitution or the law. Art. 163. The secretary general of the presidency will have the rank of minister of state and perform the functions of secretary of the cabinet council.

TITLE VII
THE JUDICIAL ORGAN


Chapter 1 The Administration of Justice Art. 164. The judicial organ consists of a supreme court of justice, the subordinate tribunals, and the courts that the law establishes.

Art. 165.

The Supreme Court of Justice will be composed of five

magistrates appointed according to the provisions of paragraph 18 of Article 144, one every two years for a term of ten that will commence on the first of November. Each magistrate will have an alternate appointed for the same period to replace the principal in his accidental absences, and in permanent absences until the vacancy is filled. In case of permanent absence of any magistrate, a new appointment will be made for the rest of the term. When, at the time to replace a magistrate, the respective alternate is absent, one of the others, who will be selected by lot, will act for him. Art. 166. In order to be magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice, it is required: (a) To be a Panamanian by birth or by naturalization with more than fifteen years of residence in the Republic; (b) To be thirty-five years of age; (c) To be in the full enjoyment of civil rights; (d) To have graduated in law; and, (e) To have completed a ten year term, during which he has practised the profession of law or performed the duties of magistrate, attorney general of the Nation, attorney of a superior tribunal, circuit judge, or professor of law in an official educational establishment. The validity of the credentials of a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice issued before the entrance into effect of this Constitution is recognized. Art. 167. The Supreme Court of Justice is entrusted with the guardianship of the integrity of the Constitution. As a result, in addition to the powers conferred upon it by the Constitution and the laws, it will have that of definitely deciding, after hearing the attorney general of the Nation, upon the validity of the bills to which the executive has objected as unconstitutional for reasons of substance or form and upon the validity of all the laws, decrees, orders, resolutions, and other acts impugned before it by any citizen for the same causes. The court will also decide whether a constitutional amendment is valid when the executive objects to it as not having been adopted in accordance with the standards established in Article 256. Every official charged with dispensing justice, who upon studying any cause considers that the applicable legal or regulatory provision is unconstitutional, shall consult the Supreme Court of Justice, before deciding, so that the latter may resolve the point. The decisions issued by the Supreme Court of Justice in the exercise of the power that this article confers upon it are final, definitive, and obligatory and should be published in the official gazette. Art. 168. The principal magistrates may not discharge any other public duty during the term for which they have been appointed, except that of professor for the teaching of law in an establishment of university education. Art. 169. In the tribunals and courts that the law establishes, the magistrates or judges will be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice or by the tribunal or judge immediately superior in the hierarchy, according to the provisions of Title XII. Art. 170. The magistrates and judges are independent in the performance of their functions and are subject only to the Constitution and




the law. But the inferior ones are obliged to pay deference to and comply with the decisions that their hierarchical superiors issue in revoking or reforming, by virtue of legal recourses, the orders proffered by the former. •Art. 171. The magistrates and judges will not be deposed or suspended from the performance of their duties except in the cases and according to the formalities that the law provides. Art. 172. The duties of the judicial order are incompatible with any other remunerated duty, except that specified in Article 168, with the practice of law or commerce, and with any participation in politics except for the casting of a vote in the elections. Art. 173. The law will designate the remuneration of the magistrates, judges, and other judicial officials and employees, which may be altered at any time; but the alteration shall only have effect two years after being decreed. The salaries and remuneration of the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice will not be lower than those of the ministers of state. All discharges of employees in the judicial branch will take place at the end of the respective term. Art. 174. The magistrates and judges may not be detained or arrested except by virtue of a written order of the judicial authority competent to judge them. Art. 175. Trial by jury is instituted. The law will determine the causes that must be decided by this system. Art. 176. The administration of justice is gratuitous. The law will guarantee the effectiveness of this precept. Chapter 2 The Public Ministry Art. 177. The public ministry will be conducted by the attorney general of the Nation, by the district attorneys and solicitors and by the other officials that the law designates. Each official of the public ministry will have two alternates, who will replace him in their order in temporary absences and in permanent absences until the vacancy is filled. Art. 178. The attributes of the officials of the public ministry are: as the case may be; (2) To promote the fulfillment or the execution of the law, judicial sentences, and administrative provisions; (3) To watch over the official conduct of the public officers and employees and to take care that they all discharge their duties completely; (4) To prosecute crimes and violations of constitutional or legal provisions; and (5) To serve as juridical counsellors to the administrative officials of their jurisdiction. Art. 179. To be attorney general of the Nation the same requisites as those to be magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice are necessary. Art. 180. The term of the attorney general of the Nation will be ten years and the term of the district attorney of the tribunal for administrative litigation will be six. Art. 181. The following are special functions of the attorney general of the Nation:
(1) To defend the interests of the Nation, of the province, or of the district,



(1) To indict before the Supreme Court of Justice officials whose trial belongs to that body; (2) To take care that the other officials of the public ministry discharge their duties faithfully, and to act to the end of their being held responsible for the faults or offenses that they commit; and (3) To appoint and remove freely the employees of his immediate department. Art. 182. The same provisions as those established by Articles 168, 171, 172, and 174 for judicial officials govern with respect to the officials of the public ministry. In addition, the provisions of Article 173 will apply to the attorney general of the Nation. Art. 183. The attorney general of the Nation and his alternates will be elected by the National Assembly. The other officials of the public ministry will be named by the official immediately higher in rank, according to the provisions of Title XII.
TITLE VIII
THE PROVINCES

Art. 184. In each province there will be a governor, whom the executive may freely appoint and remove, as his agent and representative before the municipalities of his area. Art. 185. The provinces will include the number of municipalities that the laws provide.
TITLE IX
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT

Art. 186. The State rests upon a community of autonomous municipalities. The municipality is the political organization of the local community, established in a determined territory by relations of proximity and with economic capacity sufficient to maintain self-government under adequate conditions. The municipal organization will be democratic and will respond to the essentially administrative character of the local government. Art. 187. The municipalities should co-operate with the national government for the realization of social welfare. Art. 188. The municipal authorities have the duty to observe and enforce the Constitution and laws of the Republic, the decrees and orders of the executive, and the orders of the tribunals of ordinary and administrative justice. Art. 189. No municipal official may be suspended or removed by the national administrative authorities. The mayors are excepted when their appointment pertains to the executive organ. Art. 190. It is an obligation of the municipalities to contribute to the promotion and support of education and beautification. The law will designate the share of the municipal revenues that should be assigned for these purposes, which share should be expended in the respective district. Art. 191. The State will supplement the municipal management when the latter is inadequate in cases of epidemic, grave disturbance of




public order, or other reasons of public interest, in the manner that the law determines. Art. 192. The territory to which-the action of the municipality is extended is called a district. In each district there will be a corporation called the municipal council, composed of the number of members that the law determines, who will be elected by direct popular vote for a four year term. Foreigners with four years' continuous residence in the respective district or two years' residence if they are married to nationals or if they have Panamanian children in the district are electors in the elections for councilmen and eligible for the councils. In no case may the representation of the foreign units in the municipal corporations comprise more than one fifth of the total membership. Art. 193. By popular initiative and by means of the vote of the respective councils or commissions, two or more municipalities may request incorporation into one or unite for purposes of common benefit. The law will establish the appropriate procedure. With equal requisites the municipalities of a province may unify their government, establish a common treasury and fiscal administration. In this case, an inter-municipal council or commission, the membership of which the law shall determine, may be established. Art. 194. Councilmen may be relieved of their offices for abandonment of their duties or for bad conduct in the performance of the same. The law will establish the procedure which will be followed in these cases. Art. 195. Citizens have the right of initiative and referendum in the matters entrusted to the councils. Art. 196. When the municipalities so resolve by means of plebiscite, the law will provide that they be governed by the system of commissions, whose members are specialists in the branches of the economic-social activity established by the same. Art. 197. The commissioners will be directly elected by the people for a four-year term and may be re-elected. Art. 198. The commission will exercise all the attributes of the municipal councils and will have the same guarantees and responsibilities established for the latter. Art. 199. There will be in each district a mayor, chief of the municipal administration, and two alternates. The law will decree whether the executive should appoint them or whether they should be elected by direct popular vote. When the election takes place by popular vote, the following rules will be observed: (1) The term will be four years; (2) No one may be elected for more than two consecutive terms; and (3) The relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity of the person who has held the mayorship for one term or part of another consecutively may not be elected for the term immediately following. Art. 200. Mayors will have, besides the duties that Article 188 establishes, the following attributes: (1) To co-operate with the council for the good progress of the municipal administration and to present drafts of orders, especially those relating to budgets of receipts and expenditures;



(2) To arrange the expenditures of the local administration according to the budget and rules of accounting; (3) To appoint and remove freely the municipal employees whose designation does not belong to another authority, subject to the provisions of Title XII on the administrative career; and, (4) To promote the progress of the municipal community and to take care that the municipal employees fulfill their functions efficiently. Art. 201. The mayor as well as the commissioners will receive from the municipal treasury a remuneration that may be changed at any time; but neither an increase nor a decrease will have any effect except after a new election. In order to increase it, it will be indispensable that the municipal revenue shall also have increased during the last two years. Art. 202. The orders, resolutions, and other acts of the municipal council, of the commissions, or of the mayors, when they are elected by popular vote, may be suspended or annulled only by competent tribunals. The pertinent action may be brought by any citizen or official who thinks that the act impugned is contrary to the Constitution or the law. The law will establish the recourses which may be interposed against the acts and resolutions of mayors. Art. 203. The term of the councilmen and mayors will begin the first of September. The elections to the said offices will take place on a date different from those for deputies and Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the Republic. Art. 204. In each district there will be a treasurer, elected by the council, for a term that the law will determine, and who will be the chief of the office or department for collection and disbursement of municipal revenues. The law will provide that in districts the revenues of which reach the amount that it determines, there shall function an auditing office or department headed by an official who will be appointed by the office of the comptroller general of the Republic. Art. 205. The taxes which have no incidence outside the district are municipal, but the law may establish exceptions so that certain taxes will be municipal in spite of such incidence. Aside from this basis, the law will establish the national and municipal revenues and expenditures with due separation. Art. 206. The State may not grant exemptions from municipal dues or taxes. Art. 207. By legal authorization of the National Assembly and prior agreement of the office of the comptroller general of the Republic, the municipalities may contract loans to carry out material works or enterprises of an economic or social welfare nature that can not be financed with the common funds of the treasury. The service of the said debt may not absorb more than twenty per cent of the ordinary revenues of each fiscal year.
TITLE X PUBLIC TREASURY

Art. 208. The following belong to the State: (1) The property in the territory that belonged to the Republic of Colombia by any title;



(2) The rights and shares that the Republic of Colombia possessed as owner, within or without the country, by reason of the sovereignty that it held over the territory of the Isthmus of Panama; (3) The property, real estate revenues, rights, and shares that belonged to the extinguished Department of Panama; (4) Uncultivated and exempt lands; (5) The subsoil, which may be the object of concessions for the exploitation of its riches according to what the law establishes. Mining property granted and not utilized during the period which the law specifies will revert to the State; (6) Salt pits, mines, and deposits of all kinds may not be the object of private appropriation but may be granted to natural or juridical persons in usufruct, according to the law, without prejudice to legally acquired rights; (7) Documents relating to national history. When these belong to private persons, they may be expropriated in the manner that the law specifies; (8) The indigenous treasures, the exploration and utilization of which will be regulated by law. Art. 209. The following belong to the State and are for public use, and, consequently, may not be the object of private appropriation: (1) The territorial sea and the waters of lakes and streams; the beaches and banks of the same and of navigable rivers and ports and inlets. All this property is for free and common benefit, subject to the regulation that the law establishes; (2) The lands and waters designated for public services of all classes of communications; (3) The lands and waters designated or to be designated by the State for public services of irrigation, hydroelectric production, drainage, and aqueducts; (4) The air space and the continental submarine shelf belonging to the national territory; and, (5) The other property which the law designates for public use. In all cases in which private property is converted by legal provision into property for public use the owner will be indemnified. Art. 210. The present owners of the property included in paragraphs 5 and 6 of Article 208, with respect to which there exist property rights legally acquired prior to the time of the entrance into effect of this Constitution, will retain the beneficial possession thereof for twenty years in the terms indicated in the laws under which the acquisition was effected, but such property will revert to the State without indemnification. At the end of the said twenty years the owners will be able to retain the beneficial possession under the conditions that the laws prescribe. Art. 211. Concessions for the exploitation of the subsoil, of the land and the forests, and for the utilization of waters, means of transportation, and other public service enterprises, will be based upon social welfare. Art. 212. Every artistic and historical object in the country, whoever its owner may be, constitutes a part of the cultural treasure of the Nation and will be under the safekeeping of the State, which may prohibit its destruction, transfer, or expropriation, regulate its alienation, and decree the expropriations which it deems opportune for its defense, indemnifying its owners. It is a duty of the State to protect the native artistic patrimony and conserve the tradition of folklore in its diverse artistic and literary expressions by means of action in the schools and research agencies that use scientific methods.



Art. 213. The power to issue money belongs to the State, which may transfer it, with respect to fiduciary money, to official or semi-official banks of issue in the manner that the law determines. Art. 214. There will be no paper money of legal tender in the Republic. Art. 215. The law will create and regulate official or semi-official banks that function as autonomous entities supervised by the State, and will determine the subsidiary responsibilities of the State with respect to the obligations assumed by these banks. Art. 216. So far as possible with due regard for the necessity of raising public funds and protecting the national production, the law will assure that every tax affect the taxpayer in direct proportion to his economic capacity. Art. 217. No indirect tax or increase of the same will become effective until sixty days after the promulgation of the law establishing the tax or the increase thereof. The national government, through the office of price control or the official agency performing the functions of that office, will take, in every case, the appropriate measures so that the application of the preceding article will not result in prejudice to the consumer. Art. 218. Official monopolies over imported articles or articles not produced in the country may be established by the law for purposes of revenue. Upon establishing a monopoly by virtue of which any person is deprived of the operation of a lawful industry or business, the State will compensate in advance the persons or enterprises whose business has been expropriated within the contemplation of this article. Art. 219. No public expenditure that has not been authorized in accordance with the Constitution and the law may be made. Neither may any appropriation be transferred to an object not provided for in the respective budget. Art. 220. All the receipts and disbursements of the public treasuries must be included and authorized in the respective budget of receipts and expenditures. Payments will not be accepted for taxes which the law has not established, and expenditures not provided for in the budget will not be made. Art. 221. When the National Assembly is in recess and it becomes indispensable to make an expenditure for which the budgetary provision turns out to be insufficient or for which no credit was voted, a supplementary or extraordinary credit may be opened at the respective ministry. For such purpose the cabinet council will require the opinion of the comptroller general of the Republic upon the practicability and appropriateness of such credit and will submit the matter to the permanent legislative commission so that it may approve or disapprove it by majority of votes. Those who participate in the matter will be responsible for their action. A report of the action taken in each of these cases will be drawn up and sent to the National Assembly for the legalization of the credit issued. When the assembly disapproves any of them, the matter will pass to the Supreme Court of Justice so that it may decide upon the validity of the credit voted and upon the consequent responsibilities in case of invalidation. Art. 222. The execution or repair of national works, the purchases that are made with funds of the State, of its autonomous or semi-autonomous


entities, or of the municipalities, and the sale or rental of property belonging to the same will be made by public auction, subject to the exceptions that the law specifies. The law will establish the means that assure at every auction the maximum benefit to the State and full justice in the adjudication. Art. 223. There will be an independent department of the executive organ called office of the comptroller general of the Republic, whose mission is to check, regulate, guard, and control the movements of the public treasuries and to examine, verify, review, and audit the accounts of the same. The office of the comptroller will not exercise administrative functions that are not inherent in its internal order. An official who will be called comptroller general of the Republic will direct this department with the assistance of a sub-comptroller general. Both of these officials will be appointed by the National Assembly for a term, commencing the first of November every four years, within which they may not be suspended or removed except by the Supreme Court of Justice for causes defined in the law. The comptroller general as well as the sub-comptroller general will be responsible to the National Assembly. Art. 224. The following are functions of the office of the comptroller general, in addition to those which the law specifies according to the preceding article: (a) To keep the general accounts of the Nation, including those of the internal and external public debts; (b) To establish the methods of accounting for all the national, provincial, and municipal departments, and the manner of rendering accounts of the management employees; (c) To direct and compile the national statistics; (d) To obtain from the respective officials reports upon the official conduct of the national, provincial, municipal, autonomous, and semi-autonomous public entities; (e) To revise and close the accounts of the officials responsible for all the public treasuries and the autonomous and semi-autonomous entities; (f) To appoint the employees of its department according to the law; (g) To inform the executive organ of the financial state of the public administration and to give opinion upon the practicability or appropriateness of the issuance of supplemental or extraordinary credits; and , (h) To give report on its activities to the National Assembly within the first ten days of the sessions of each regular legislature.
TITLE XI
NATIONAL ECONOMY

Art. 225. The conduct of economic activities belongs primarily to private individuals. But the State will orient, direct, regulate, replace, or establish such activities, according to social necessities and within the standards of the present title, for the purpose of increasing the national wealth and assuring its benefits to the largest possible number of the inhabitants of the country. Art. 226. In order to accomplish the purposes stated in the preceding article, the law will provide that the following measures be taken: (a) To establish commissions of technicians or specialists to study the conditions and possibilities of commerce, agriculture, and industries and to formulate recommendations to develop them;



(b) To encourage the establishment of private enterprises that function according to the recommendations mentioned in the preceding paragraph by economic participation in the said enterprises, through autonomous or semiautonomous entities or through prizes and subsidies, only when this is indispensable for supplementing private capital and within the limits and conditions that the law establishes. So long as there do not exist autonomous or semi-autonomous entities dedicated to the specific purposes mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the economic co-operation of the State will be authorized in each particular case by the National Assembly, and when this is in recess, by the executive with the approval of the permanent legislative commission; (c) To establish a council of national economy to advise the legislature and the executive regarding the orientation and development of the national economy; (d) To found credit institutions designed especially to give facilities to small merchants, farmers, and industrialists; and (e) To establish centers of theory and practice for teaching commerce, agriculture, crafts, and arts, including in the last the manual arts, and for the training of specialized industrial workers and directors. Art. 227. The State will intervene in any kind of private enterprises, within the regulations that the Law establishes, exclusively to secure the fulfillment of the purposes of social justice referred to in Chapter 3, Title III of the present Constitution. It will also intervene in the same manner in private enterprises of public utility for the following purposes: (a) To regulate, through special agencies, the charges for services and the prices of articles of prime necessity; (b) To require due efficiency in the services and adequate quality in the articles mentioned in the preceding paragraph; (c) To coordinate the services and the production of articles. The law will define public utility enterprises and articles of prime necessity. Art. 228. The State will establish, through autonomous or semiautonomous entities or by other adequate means, public utility enterprises that private activity has not established. In the same way, it will assume when necessary to the collective welfare, and by expropriation and indemnification, the control of public utility enterprises belonging to private individuals, subject to authorization by law in each case. Art. 229. The promotion and supervision of production and consumption co-operatives are duties of the State, and for such purposes it will establish the necessary institutions. Art. 230. Cultivation of the soil is a duty of the owner to the community and will be regulated by the law so that the utilization of the land will not be impeded or become stagnant. Art. 231. No foreign government and no official or semi-official foreign entity or institution may acquire possession of any part of the national territory. Art. 232. No foreign natural or juridical person and no national juridical person whose capital is foreign may acquire wholly or in part the ownership of national or private lands situated less than ten kilometers from the borders or the ownership of the islands under the jurisdiction of the Republic. Nevertheless, rights acquired before the entrance into effect of this Constitution will be respected; but the respective properties



may be expropriated at any time upon payment of the corresponding indemnity. Art. 233. There will be no property that is not subject to free alienation and no irredeemable obligations except as provided in Article 60. Nevertheless, temporary limitations on the right of alienation and the conditions or terms that suspend or retard the redemption of obligations will be valid up to a maximum period of twenty years. Art. 234. Retail business may be conducted only by: (1) Panamanians by birth; (2) Individuals who upon the entrance into effect of this Constitution are naturalized and married to a Panamanian national or have children by a Panamanian national; (3) Panamanians by naturalization who are not included in the preceding classification, after five years from the date on which they obtained their final papers; (4) Panamanians by naturalization not included in the preceding paragraphs who at the date of the entrance into effect of this Constitution are conducting retail business in accordance with the law, and foreigners who are in the same situation; (5) Juridical persons formed by Panamanians or by foreigners authorized to conduct such business individually in accordance with this article, and also those who, without being constituted in the form here mentioned, are legally engaged in commerce at the moment of the entrance into effect of this Constitution. Foreigners not authorized to conduct retail business may, nevertheless, participate in those companies that sell products manufactured by themselves. Nationals of those States who have in the Isthmus of Panama enterprises or organizations in which Panamanians find facilities to obtain work may conduct retail business, provided that such nationals are legally established in territory under the jurisdiction of the Republic. Conducting retail business means engaging in sales to the consumer or acting as representative or agent of production of mercantile enterprises or any other activity which the law classifies as belonging to such commerce. Cases in which farmers or artificers in manual industries sell their own products are excepted from this rule. The law will establish a system of vigilance and sanctions to prevent those who, according to this article, cannot conduct retail business, from doing so through an intermediary or in any other fraudulent form. Art. 235. Wholesale business is that which is not included in the preceding provision, and may be conducted by any natural or juridical person. The law may, nevertheless, when it is necessary to protect wholesale business conducted by Panamanians, restrict the carrying on of such commerce by foreigners. But the restrictions will not prejudice in any case the foreigners who are legally conducting wholesale business upon the entrance into effect of the pertinent provisions. Upon the restriction of wholesale business, the citizens referred to in the second part of paragraph 5 of the preceding article may continue to conduct it. Art. 236. Every combination, contract, or action whatsoever that tends to restrict or prevent free commerce and competition and which has the effect of monopoly prejudicial to the public is prohibited in commerce and industry.



The operation by a single natural or juridical person of series or chains of retail mercantile establishments in a manner that ruins or tends to eliminate competition of the small merchant or industrialist is included in this classification. Any person may file with the tribunals a complaint charging the formation of any company or syndicate or the making of any combination, contract, or action for the establishment of monopolistic practices. The law will regulate this matter. Art. 237. The law will regulate hunting, fishing, and utilization of the forests, and will take special care to protect and preserve the fauna and flora of the country. Art. 238. Games of luck and chance and wagering activities may be conducted only by the State. The law will regulate such games as well as every wagering activity of any kind. Art. 239. There will be no private monopolies.
TITLE XII
ADMINISTRATIVE CAREER

Chapter 1

Fundamental Provision Art. 240. The public officials and employees will be of Panamanian nationality, except as provided in this Constitution. The appointment and removal of officials and employees is not an absolute and discretionary power of any of the organs of public authority except as provided in this Constitution. The State service should have as its basis the competence and morality of the official or employee and his irremovability, except for a reason specified in the law and declared by the tribunals. Chapter 2 Administrative Career Art. 241. The administrative career is established according to the following principles: (1) Officials are in the service of the State and not of a political party or group; (2) In the places and hours for work, proselyting activity will be illegal and, as such, punished by the law; (3) The law will determine the conditions of entrance into the administration by the method of competitive contest on the basis of antecedents, credits for study accomplished, and examinations in theory and practice, according to the nature of the post in question; the duties of the officials or employees and appeals against the resolutions affecting them. Moreover, rules relating to permanency, promotion, suspension, transfer, retirement, and pensioning will be established. The applicant who, in equal circumstances in regard to competence and integrity, proves that he is in a greater state of economic need will be preferred for the office subject to the contest; (4) No investigation as to irregularities, omissions, and offenses will be considered finished until the accused can present his pleas and state his defense.



Art. 242. The following are not included in the administrative career: (a) Officials whose nomination should be made according to the provisions of this Constitution; (b) Subaltern officials and employees of the presidency of the Republic; (c) Secretaries of the ministries and the personnel directly assigned to the personal offices of the ministers; (d) The chiefs of the diplomatic missions of the Republic; (e) The provincial governors and district mayors; (f) The commanders of the national police corps; (g) The secretary, auxiliary secretaries and reporters of the National Assembly; (h) The chief of the national mails and telegraphs; (i) The administrator general of the internal revenue; CQ) The chiefs of the autonomous and semi-autonomous departments; (k) The lawyers and other technicians who are required for special or temporary services of the ministries and of the autonomous and semi-autonomous institutions; and, (1) The workers in education, the public forces, national or municipal works and other analogous branches that are governed by a special organic statute. Chapter 8 Judicial Career Art. 243. The judicial career is instituted. The law will regulate it according to the principles established for the administrative career in Articles 241 and 242. The office of magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice, which will be provided for in conformity with Article 165, is excepted from this provision. The officials, clerks, and janitors in the service of the magistrates and judges, and who are independently appointed and removed by them, are likewise excepted. Chapter 4 General Provisions Art. 244. The prohibitions that this Constitution establishes for the deputies in Article 117 will apply to the officials with power and jurisdiction in the whole Republic in regard to the department over which they are immediate directors or chiefs. These prohibitions will apply also to the municipal officials within the respective district. Art. 245. There will be in the Republic no office or employment that does not have functions detailed in law or regulations. Art. 246. No public employee may receive two or more salaries paid by the Nation, except in the special cases relating to national education. Art. 247. When in extraordinary cases a general reduction in the salaries of public employees is necessary, the provisions of Articles 116, 147, and 173 of this Constitution will not be applicable.
TITLE XIII
THE PUBLIC FORCES

Art. 248. All Panamanians are obliged to take up arms when public necessities so require for the defense of the national independence and the territorial integrity of the Nation, except as provided in Article 17.


Art. 249. The law will organize the military service and that of the national police separately. Art. 250. The public forces are not deliberative. They may meet only by order of the legitimate authority, and may not resort to petitions except upon matters relating to the service, in accordance with the law. Art. 251. Only the government may possess arms and implements of war. Prior permission of the executive is required for their manufacture, importation, and exportation. The legislature will define the arms that should not be considered as those of war and will regulate their importation, manufacture, and use.
TITLE XIV
JURISDICTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LITIGATION

Art. 252. A tribunal of administrative litigation is established in the capital of the Republic, the jurisdiction of which will include the whole country. This tribunal will function independently of the executive and judicial organs. The jurisdiction of administrative litigation has as its object the reviewing of acts, resolutions, orders, or provisions of all the national, provincial, and municipal officials and those of the autonomous or semiautonomous public entities, in the exercise of their functions or under pretext of such exercise. The review may be demanded by the persons affected by the act, resolution, order, or provision in question and, in the exercise of the right of popular action, by any natural or juridical person, national or foreign, in any case in which the administration has been wrongfully injured. The tribunal will exercise its jurisdiction over the acts specified in this article, and may annul the acts alleged to be illegal, re-establish private rights that have been violated, issue new provisions to replace those complained of, or make a declaration before judgment in regard to the sense and scope of an administrative act or its legal validity. Art. 253. To be a magistrate of the tribunal of administrative litigation the same qualifications are required as for being a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 254. The tribunal of administrative litigation will be composed of three magistrates, one appointed every two years for a term of six, that will begin the first of November. The appointment of magistrates will be made by the executive, as provided in paragraph 18 of Article 144. Each magistrate will have an alternate appointed for the same term, who will replace the principal in his accidental absences and in his permanent absences until the vacancy is filled. In case of permanent absence of any magistrate, an appointment will be made for the rest of the term. When at the time of replacing a magistrate the respective alternate is absent, one of the others, chosen by lot, will act for him. Art. 255. The provisions of Articles 168, 171, 172, 173, 174, and 243 will apply to the magistrates of the tribunal of administrative litigation.

Panama TITLE XV CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT

739

Art. 256. This Constitution may be amended only by a legislative act issued by the National Assembly in regular session, which act should be published and transmitted by the executive to the assembly in the first regular sessions following the elections for the renovation of the assembly, so that it may be debated again and approved by the absolute majority of the deputies of which the assembly is composed. The executive may object to the amendment only when he receives it for its promulgation after the debates of the second regular assembly.
FINAL PROVISIONS

Art. 257. All laws contrary to this Constitution are repealed. All laws, legislative decrees, decrees, regulations, orders, and other provisions in force at the promulgation of this Constitution shall continue to be in force in so far as they are not inconsistent with it or with the laws that may be issued in the future. Art. 258. This Constitution will begin to have effect for the organs of the State from the day on which it is sanctioned and for the Nation fifteen days after its publication in the official gazette. This publication will be effected within three days following the date of sanction.
TEMPORARY PROVISIONS

Art. 259. The National Assembly will issue a labor code based on the principles expressed in this Constitution and in the international conventions that govern the matter. This code will be issued in preference to any other. Art. 260. On the date of the signing of this Constitution the Constituent Assembly will be converted into the Legislative Assembly and will perform the corresponding functions until the thirtieth of September, nineteen hundred forty-eight. The assembly referred to in the preceding paragraph will have a period of regular sessions of ninety working days from the fifteenth of May of the present year, during which it will issue the electoral law, the budget of receipts and expenditures for the interval between the first of July and the thirty-first of December, nineteen hundred forty-six, the law of public works, the labor code and other necessary laws. At the end of the ninety days of regular sessions and until the meeting of the first National Assembly to be elected according to this Constitution, the National Assembly, converted into a legislature, will return to perform the corresponding functions when it is convoked in extraordinary sessions by the executive. Art. 261. The elections for deputies to the National Assembly and for President and Vice-President of the Republic will take place in the year 1948 on the date which the law will specify and which will precede the first of October of the said year by not less than three months. Art. 262. The President of the Republic and the Vice-Presidents elected with provisional status under Resolution Number 2 of the Constituent Assembly of June 15, nineteen hundred forty-five, will continue to perform their functions until the first of October, nineteen hundred

forty-eight, within the terms of this Constitution, to which they will swear on the date of its sanction. Art. 263. The first term of the Supreme Court will begin on the first of November, nineteen hundred forty-six. The appointment of the magistrates and alternates who will enter upon their duties on this date will be made by the executive within the first fifteen days of the month of May, nineteen hundred forty-six, and will be approved or disapproved by the National Assembly within the fifteen days following. The said magistrates and their alternates will serve as follows: The first, ten years; the second, eight years; the third, six years; the fourth, four years; and the fifth, two years. Art. 264. The first term of the attorney general of the Nation and of his alternates will begin the first of November, nineteen hundred forty-six, and the election of the same will be made by the National Assembly on the thirtieth of May of the stated year at the latest. Art. 265. The first elections for municipal councilmen and mayors following the promulgation of this Constitution will take place in the year nineteen hundred forty-eight, not less than three months before the first of September of the said year. In order to integrate the municipal councils that will function until this date, the executive will make the appointments as provided in the administrative code. Art. 266. The mayors for the first of the terms mentioned in Article 199 will be elected by direct popular election. Art. 267. The first term of the comptroller and the sub-comptroller general of the Republic will begin the first of November, nineteen hundred forty-six, and the election of the same will be held within the first fifteen days of the sessions referred, to in paragraph 2 of Article 260. The date of the elections of the said officials for the following terms will be determined by the law, taking care that only one election may be made by the same assemblies. Art. 268. All contracts in force on the date of the issuance of this Constitution, in regard to games of chance and luck and wagering activities, will cease immediately to have effect. Art. 269. Within three months following the promulgation of this Constitution, the executive will designate a commission to organize the civil service with the advice of one or more technicians of recognized competence. Art. 270. The first term of the tribunal of administrative litigation will begin on the first of October, nineteen hundred forty-six. The appointment of the magistrates who take office on that date will be made by the executive within the first fifteen days of the month of May, nineteen hundred forty-six, and will be approved or disapproved by the assembly within the fifteen days following. The said magistrates will serve as follows: the first, six years; the second, four years; the third, two years. Art. 271. The National Constituent Assembly will elect, before closing its sessions, the permanent legislative commission mentioned in Article 122. This commission will serve until the thirtieth of September, nineteen hundred forty-eight, and will be formed on the basis of one principal deputy and one alternate for each of the parties represented in the body.
