CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Paraguay, adopted by the General Congress. Assumption, 12th October,
1813. 

ART. I. The 2 Citizens, Don Fulencio Yegros and Don José Gaspar de Francia, shall alone constitute the Government, with the title of "Consuls of the Republic of Paraguay." They shall have the rank and honours of Brigadier-Generals, and their Commissions as such shall be signed by the President of this Congress. II. They shall wear, as the insignia of their Consular dignity, a hat bound with blue, and the tri-coloured scarf of the Republic. They shall have the like and equal jurisdiction and authority, which they shall exercise uniformly and conjointly. In consequence, all Acts of the Government shall be signed by both. II1. Their first duty shall be the preservation, security, and defence of the Republic, with all the vigilance, judgment, and activity required under-existing circumstances. IV. There shall henceforward be no Presidency. V. All the Forces of the Province shall be under the joint command-in-chief of the 2 Consuls. VI. Nevertheless, all the active and effective Troops of every grade, as well as all the Arms and Ammunition, shall be equally divided, and placed at the disposal, half and half, of each Consul, and each shall have his own separate Barracks and Magazines under his own command. 

VII. There shall be 2 Battalions of Infantry, each to consist of 3 or 4 Companies for the present, or of more if necessary; so that each Consul shall have his separate Battalion, of which he shall be the Chief and Commandant exclusively: he shall also have the command of one of the 2 Companies of Artillery; Consul Yegros shall command the 1st, and Consul Francia the 12nd; the latter shall form his own Battalion, towards which he shall be at liberty to take the 5th part of that commanded by Consul Yegros. VIII. The Officers and Men of these Corps shall be approved of by their respective Chiefs, the said Consuls; but all Officers' Commissions shall be signed by both jointly, though they may be proposed by their own Commanders respectively ; in like manner if it should be necessary to try them for any offence, it shall be before the 2 Consuls jointly. IX. The Consuls shall preside over the Tribunals in turn, for 4 months at a time each, with the title of " Consul in Turn," and not "Consul Presiding," lest that designation should give rise to mistakes. Consul Francia shall take the 1st turn, and in all cases, when the turn comes round, a notice of it, signed by both, shall be 4K2

inserted in a Book, and sent to the Cabildo of the City for their information. X. A Chamber shall be set apart in the Government House for the Tribunal of the Consuls: it shall be open during the hours of Office, and its forms shall be regulated by the Consul in Turn for the time being. XI. The Secretary shall take cognisance of such Cases on which doubts may arise, and which are not hereby provided for. XII. It is left to the will and prudence of the 2 Consuls to regulate by common accord all that may be requisite for the due despatch of the business of the State, in all its branches; as well as to appoint 1 or, if necessary, 2 Secretaries: also to create a Superior Tribunal of Appeal, to determine, according to Law, as a Court of last resort, such Cases as it may be necessary to refer to it. XIII. If either of the 2 Consuls should die or resign, the other shall proceed within a month to call together the General Congress of the Province, which shall consist of 1000 Deputies, chosen, like the present, by popular election; and it shall be a fundamental, general, perpetual, and invariable Law and Rule, that henceforward such General Congress of the Province shall assemble every year convoked in the same manner, and to consist of the aforesaid number of 1000 Representatives; and the day for their meeting shall always be on the 15th of October; and the necessary convocation and summonses shall be issued in consequence by the middle of every month of September, in order that the Province may duly, and at least once a-year, meet as a Free and Sovereign People, to deliberate on what may be most conducive to the general good, to improve, if necessary, its Government, to provide remedies for abuses, and to take all such measures as may be suggested by the wisdom of experience*. XIV. These Rules shall be observed until altered by any future Congress, and shall be copied into the Book of the Resolutions of Government. XV. The Consuls shall immediately appear before the present Sovereign Congress, to swear to observe faithfully, and to cause to be observed, these Rules and Regulations. The same Oath shall be also forthwith administered by their order to all the Officers of the Troops, and by the Officers to the Soldiers, whereof a proper record shall be inserted in the Archives of the Congress ; and whoever shall refuse to take the said Oath, shall be dismissed the service, and punished as though he had broken it.



XVI. The Province adopts the forms of, as well as the number of Representatives assembled in, the actual Congress, and the Governmert shall make no change in either one or the other. Done and signed at Assumption, l2th October, 1813.

