July 10, 1940
The Paraguayan nation, with the aid of God Almighty, Supreme Legislator of the Universe, with the purpose of assuring justice, preserving interior tranquility, providing for the national defense, promoting the well being and progress of the Republic and making the benefits of liberty lasting for its sons, orders, decrees and establishes this Constitution. General Declarations Art. 1. Paraguay is and will always be free and independent, is constituted as a single and indivisible Republic and adopts the democratic representative form for its government. Art. 2. Sovereignty resides essentially in the people, who delegate its exercise to the authorities created by this Constitution. Art. 3. The Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion is the religion of the State, but other cults are tolerated when they are not opposed to morality and the public order. The chief of the Paraguayan Church and the bishops must be native citizens. Art. 4. This Constitution, the laws dictated as a result of it, and treaties with foreign nations are the supreme law of the nation. Art. 5. The City of Asunci6n is the capital of the Republic and the seat of the powers of the State. Art. 6. The principles, guarantees, obligations, and rights proclaimed by this Constitution may not be altered by the laws which regulate their exercise. All laws, decrees, or regulations in opposition to that provided in the Constitution are null and invalid. Art. 7. Equality is the basis of public office. The government provides for the expenses of the State with the product of the taxes, contributions, and levies created by law; the selling and leasing of public lands; the exploitation of mines; profits arising out of public services and monopolies of the State; and loans and other credit operations. Art. 8. Within the territory of the Republic the products of national produce or manufactures will circulate free of charges. The navigation of the rivers of the interior is free for all flags, subject to the regulations issued by the Chamber of Representatives. Art. 9. The government will encourage American and European immigration and will regulate the entry of foreigners into the country. Art. 10. Primary education is obligatory and free. The government will encourage secondary, professional, and university education. Art. 11. The care of the health of the population and social assistance, as well as the moral, spiritual, and physical education of the youth, are fundamental duties of the State.



Art. 12. The government will endeavor to guarantee its relations of peace and commerce with other nations by means of treaties inspired by the national interest and based on principles of public law proclaimed by this Constitution. It will give special attention to the policy of collaboration and solidarity with the American peoples. Art. 13. In no case will private interests prevail over the general interest of the Paraguayan nation. All citizens are obliged to give their collaboration for the good of the State and of the Paraguayan nation. The law will determine in what cases they are obliged to accept public functions in accordance with their conditions of ability. Art. 14. The exploitation of man by man is forbidden. In order to assure to all workers a standard of living compatible with human dignity, the regulation of labor contracts and of social insurance and the conditions of security and hygiene of the establishments will be under the care and supervision of the State. Art. 15. The State will regulate the national economic life. Only it has the power of coining and issuing money, establishing systems of weights and measures and controlling trade marks. Combinations which tend to the monopolization of articles of consumption, the artificial raising or lowering of prices, and impeding free competition are not permitted. The manufacture and traffic of articles damaging to health and good customs are prohibited. The law will establish the penalties for The State may, with indemnification acts which violate these principles., nationalize public service and monopolize the production, circulation, and sale of articles of primary necessity. Art. 16. The Chamber of Representatives may not concede to the executive power extraordinary powers outside the provisions of this Constitution, or grant supreme authority by which the life, honor, and property of Paraguayans rest at the mercy of the government or any person whatever. Art. 17. All superior authorities, functionaries, and public employees are individually responsible for the faults and crimes they commit in the exercise of their functions, without prejudice to the indirect responsibility of the State, which may be established in the law. In no case may they exercise powers alien to their jurisdiction and their acts must always be in accordance with the law. Strikes of public functionaries are prohibited, as well as collective abandonment of their offices. Art. 18. The custody and defense of order and sovereignty, of territorial integrity and the honor of the Republic, as well as the defense of this Constitution, are confided to the armed forces of the nation. The President of the Republic is their commander in chief, but he may delegate the effective command of the troops to a general officer. The armed forces of the nation are organized in a permanent manner. Rights, Obligations, and Guarantees Art. 19. All inhabitants of the Republic enjoy the following rights, in accordance with the laws which regulate their exercise: to choose a profession; to work and exercise any legal commerce and industry, excepting the limitations imposed by the law for social and economic reasons of national interest; to meet peacefully; to petition the authorities; to publish their ideas in the press without previous censure, provided they refer to matters of general interest; to dispose of their property; to associate for legal reasons; to profess freely their religion; to learn and to teach.


Art. 20. The law will determine what professions need titles for their exercise, the conditions which must be fulfilled to obtain said titles, and the authority which mist issue them. The regulation and inspection of education are in charge of the State. Art. 21. The Constitution guarantees private property, the content and limits thereof to be fixed by law, in view of its social function. No one may be deprived of his property except in virtue of a sentence founded in the law. The ownership of all kinds of property may be transformed juridically by means of expropriation for reasons of social profit defined by the law, which will also determine the manner of indemnification. The law may fix the maximum extension of lands of which one single individual or legally constituted society may be master, and the excess must be sold at public auction or expropriated by the State for distribution. Art. 22. All inhabitants of the Republic are obliged to earn their living with their lawful work. Every Paraguayan home must be situate on a piece of its own land. Art. 23. The civil rights of women are regulated in the law, considering the unity of the family, the equality of women and men, and the diversity of their respective functions in society. Art. 24. No personal service is requirable except by virtue of a law. Every author or inventor is the owner of his work, invention, or discovery for the period accorded by law. Art. 25. In no case may the penalty of death or confiscation of property be applied for political causes. Art. 26. No law will have a retroactive effect. No inhabitant may be punished without previous trial founded on some law antedating the subject of the process, or judged by special tribunals. No one may be obliged to testify against himself, nor be arrested except by virtue of the written order of a competent authority, or detained for more than twenty-four hours without being informed of the reason for his detention, or detained except in his own house or in public places destined for this purpose. The recourse of habeas corpus is guaranteed to all inhabitants. The law considers innocent those who have not been declared guilty or legally suspicious of being so by the act of a competent judge. The crime or dishonor incurred by persons does not affect their relatives. Art. 27. Defense in the judgment of a person or rights is inviolable. Also inviolable are the domicile, epistolary correspondence, and private papers. The law will determine in what cases the inviolability of the domicile and correspondence may be suspended. Art. 28. Jails must be healthy and clean. The use of any tortures or whipping is prohibited. Art. 29. Excessive bail will not be required nor excessive fines imposed. Art. 30. Private acts which in no way offend the public order and morals or prejudice third persons are exempt from the authority of magistrates. No inhabitant may be obliged to do that not required by the law or deprived of doing that which it does not forbid. The law may authorize the executive power or determined administrative authorities to dictate general police regulations and to impose the corresponding sanctions within the subjects and limits fixed by the same law. Art. 31. The issuance and publication of books, pamphlets and periodicals will be regulated by law. Anonymous printing is not permitted.



Art. 32. The State will supervise and regulate the organization, functioning, and activities of groups or bodies of a public character. Art. 33. The Paraguayan nation does not admit prerogatives of birth; in it there are no personal jurisdictions or titles of nobility. All the inhabitants of the Republic are equal before the law. Nationals are admissible to any employment without other condition than ability, and aliens are subject to the limitations established by the laws. In the Republic of Paraguay there are no slaves. Art. 34. No person may take justice into his own hands or use violence to reclaim his right. The people do not deliberate or govern except by means of their representatives and authorities created by this Constitution. Any armed force or meeting of persons attributing to itself the rights of the people and petitioning in their name commits the crime of sedition. Art. 35. The liberties which this Constitution guarantees are all of a social character. The requirements of public order limit their use for the purpose and in the manner established by the laws. It is not permitted to preach hate among Paraguayans or class struggle. Art. 36. Aliens enjoy the civil rights of citizens within the territory of the Republic, in accordance with the laws regulating their exercise; they may exercise their industry, commerce, or profession, own landed rights, make wills and marry. If they violate the security of the Republic or alter the public order, the government may provide for their expulsion from the country, in accordance with the regulating laws. Foreigners are not obliged to become citizens. Art. 37. Anyone who joins the enemies of the country by taking arms or assisting them, or in any manner violates the independence and security of the Republic of Paraguay commits treason to the country. Nationality and Citizenship Art. 38. The following are Paraguayans: (1) those born in Paraguayan territory; (2) children of Paraguayans born in foreign territory, if the mother or father is in the service of the Republic; and (3) children of a Paraguayan father or mother, born abroad, by the act of becoming domiciled in Paraguay and residing there for ten years in succession. Military service is obligatory for citizens, who are also obliged to take arms in defense of the country and of this Constitution. Art. 39. All citizens, without the disqualifications of the following Article, have the duty of voting from the age of eighteen years. Art. 40. A citizen's vote is suspended: (1) for physical or moral disability which impedes acting freely and reflectively; (2) for being a soldier, a corporal, or sergeant of line troops, a national guard or policeman, under whatever name is used; (3) for being tried as a criminal meriting corporal punishment. Art. 41. Citizenship is lost: (1) for a fraudulent bankruptcy; (2) for taking subsidies and pensions or using the distinctions of a foreign government without the permission of the executive power; (3) for directly violating or participating in any violation of the independence and security of the Republic; (4) for having become naturalized in a foreign country. Those who have lost their citizenship for any of the reasons -mentioned, with the exception of that stated under number (4), may obtain their rehabilitation from the Chamber of Representatives.



Art. 42.. Foreigners may obtain letters of naturalization before the courts of the Republic if they prove having resided for five consecutive years in Paraguay, possess some settled property and capital in business, or profess some science, art, or industry. Naturalization papers are lost by absenting oneself from the country for two consecutive years. Naturalized citizens may exercise all public offices two years after having obtained naturalization papers, excepting those of President of the Republic, minister, councillor of state, representative, member of the Supreme Court of Justice and chief of the army and navy. Art. 43. The Chamber of Representatives, at the proposal of the executive power, may concede honorary citizenship to foreigners who have given important services to the Republic. Art. 44. The State guarantees freedom of suffrage. Voting is secret and obligatory. The law will determine the system of elections. Persons who preach or proclaim electoral abstention lose their rights of citizens, without prejudice to their obligations. The Executive Power power will be discharged by a citizen with the executive The Art. 45. title of President of the Republic of Paraguay. Art. 46. The President of the Republic must be a native citizen, have reached forty years of age, profess the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion, and meet the moral and intellectual conditions which make him worthy to exercise the office. Art. 47. The President of the Republic will have a term of five years in office and may be re-elected for one more term. He ceases in power on the day that the term expires and no occurrence whatever may be a reason for ending the term later. He enjoys a salary paid by the treasury of the nation, unchangeable during the term of his functions, and for the duration of his functions he may not exercise any other employment nor receive any other emolument. Art. 48. The President of the Republic will reside in the house of government. Art. 49. The President of the Republic will be elected by general direct election, six months before taking possession of the mandate. Art. 50. Upon taking possession of- his office, the President of the Republic will take the oath from the hands of the president of the Chamber of Representatives, the representatives, councillors of state and members of the Supreme Court of Justice being met together, in the following terms: I, (name), swear before God and the country to discharge faithfully and patriotically the office of President of the Republic of Paraguay and to observe and enforce the faithful observance of the Constitution. If I do not so do, God and the country may demand it of me. Art. 51. The President of the Republic has the following powers: (1) He is the supreme Chief of the State and has in his charge the general administration of the country. (2) He issues instructions and regulations which are necessary for the execution of the laws. (3) He participates in the formation of the laws in accordance with the Constitution, sanctions them and promulgates them.



(4) He is charged with the management of the foreign relations of the Republic. (5) He appoints the members of the Supreme Court in agreement with the council of state, of the tribunal of accounts and other functionaries of the administration of justice, in agreement with the Supreme Court. (6) He may commute penalties, in accordance with a regulating law. (7) He appoints diplomatic agents, in agreement with the council of state, and alone appoints and removes the ministers, secretaries of state, and other functionaries of the administration, whose appointment is not otherwise regulated by the law. (8) He exercises the rights of national patronage of the Republic in the presentation of archbishops and bishops, on proposals of lists of three by the council of state, in agreement with the ecclesiastical senate or the national clergy met together; he recognizes or retains the decrees of the councils, and the bulls, apostolic briefs, and rescripts of the Sovereign Pontiff, in agreement with the council of state and Chamber of Representatives. (9) He inaugurates annually the sessions of the Chamber of Representatives, in which act he will give account of the measures realized by his government; he prorogues the sessions of the Chamber of Representatives or convokes it in extraordinary sessions, in which case the chamber will only treat those matters submitted to its consideration by the executive power. (10) He provides for the collection of the revenues of the Republic and decrees their investment in accordance with the law or the general budget. (11) He negotiates and signs treaties of peace, commerce, navigation, alliance, boundaries, and neutrality, concordats and other international agreements, being obliged to submit them to the council of state and the Chamber of Representatives for their approval. (12) He alone provides the military ranks of the Republic up to the rank of lieutenant colonel, and in accordance with the council of state and the Chamber of Representatives, in the superior ranks; he disposes of the armed forces of the nation and determines their organization and distribution in accordance with the necessities of the Republic. (13) He declares war and re-establishes peace with the judgment of the council of state and the authorization of the Chamber of Representatives. (14) He dictates military regulations. Art. 52. If any grave threat occurs of interior disturbance or exterior conflict which could endanger the exercise of this Constitution and the authorities created by it, the President of the Republic will declare a part or all of the territory of the Republic in a state of siege, with the obligation of giving an account to the Chamber of Representatives. During the state of siege, the President of the Republic may order the arrest of suspected persons. He may also transfer them from one point of the Republic to another, unless they prefer to leave the country. A law will regulate the application of the state of siege for the defense of order and the security of the Republic. Art. 53. The President of the Republic may dissolve the Chamber of Representatives and remove the councillors of state, with the obligation, in the first case, of convoking elections within the term of two months. Art. 54. The projects issued by the executive power to the Chamber of Representatives must be considered and dispatched within the course of sessions of that year. In case they are not dispatched within the term above said, they will be considered converted into laws. During the parliamentary recess, the executive power has the power of dictating decrees with the force of laws, with the opinion of the council of state and with the

obligation of submitting them to the approval of the Chamber of Representatives in the following ordinary period of sessions. Art. 55. Only to the executive power belongs the initiative in matters of expenses and of recruiting and mobilization of troops. Art. 56. The executive power will adopt plans of redistribution of present populations, for economic, social, public health, or national defense reasons. Art. 57. In case of international war, all the authority necessary to assure the national defense is concentrated in the President of the Republic. Art. 58. In case of the resignation, inability, or death of the President of the Republic, the minister of the interior will immediately convoke the council of state and the Chamber of Representatives as a full National Assembly to appoint the minister or functionary who should exercise the presidency until the end of the term, unless the resignation, inability, or death occurs within the first two years of the presidential period, in which circumstance the provisional President will convoke the people to elections within a period of two months. If the inability is temporary, the National Assembly will appoint one of the ministers provisionally to exercise the presidency of the Republic. Ministers of the Executive Power Art. 59. The carrying out of the business of the Republic is in charge of the ministers, secretaries of state, who countersign and legalize the acts of the President by means of their signature, without which requirement they lack efficacy. The law will determine the number and functions of the ministers, who in no case may be less than five. Art. 60. In order to occupy the office of minister, it is necessary to be a native citizen, to have reached the age of thirty years and to enjoy a well known reputation of integrity and to be well-informed in public matters. Art. 61. Each minister is responsible for the acts which he legalizes, and jointly for those to which he agrees with his colleagues. The ministers must present to the President of the Republic an annual report of their conduct, which will be widely publicized. They will enjoy a salary established by the law for their services, which may not be altered either in favor or to the prejudice of those in office. The Council of State Art. 62. There will be a council of state of which the following will form part the ministers of the executive power, the rector of the national university, the Archbishop of Paraguay, a representative of commerce, two representatives of the agriculture and cattle-raising industries, one representative of the electrical industries, the president of the Bank of the Republic, and two members of the military institutions, one of the army and the other of the navy, with the rank of colonel at least, retired. The form of appointment of the councillors who are not so by position will be determined by the law. The members of the first council of state will be appointed by the President of the Republic. Art. 63. The following will be powers of the council of state: (1) To judge regarding projects of decrees with the force of laws; (2) To judge regarding matters of international policy submitted to its consideration by the executive power;




(3) To give its agreement to the appointment of the members of the Supreme Court and of diplomatic agents to foreign countries; (4) To give its agreement to military promotions from the rank of colonel; (5) To judge matters of a financial and economic order, for which purpose it may take the advice of technical commissions. Art. 64. Councillors of state who are not functionaries must be native citizens, have reached the age of thirty years and meet the conditions of preparation and integrity that are publicly recognized. With the exception of the ministers, the councillors of state will enjoy a daily salary for the sessions. Art. 65. The council of state will form itself into a tribunal for the purpose of judging members of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 66. The council of state will appoint its president and will rely on the personnel fixed in the general budget of expenses. Its members enjoy parliamentary immunities. The Chamber of Representatives Art. 67. The Chamber of Representatives is composed of members directly elected by the people, in accordance with the electoral law which will immediately be issued, on a basis of one for each twenty-five thousand inhabitants. In the same electoral act, one-third of the total number of representatives will be elected to act as substitutes in case of death, resignation, or disablement of members, until the completion of the term. The substitute will also replace the member in case the latter takes a post in the public administration and during the time the member remains in said office. Art. 68. In order to be a representative or substitute, it is necessary to have reached the age of twenty-five years and be a native citizen. Art. 69. No representative may form part of enterprises which exploit public services or have concessions of the State or exercise the representation of them. Art. 70. Representatives will have a term of office of five years. The chamber will meet in ordinary sessions every year, from the first of April until the thirty-first of August. The chamber will be renewed entirely every five years. Art. 71. The chamber is exclusive judge of the election, rights, and titles of its members. It may, with two-thirds of the votes, correct any of its members for disorderly conduct in the exercise of his functions or remove any for physical or moral disability and exclude them from its membership; but a majority will be sufficient to decide on resignations from office that are made voluntarily. The chamber opens its sessions with the presence of an absolute majority of its members, but a smaller number may compel the absent members to attend the sessions under the penalty which the law will establish. Art. 72. The chamber will constitute its authorities, make its own regulations and appoint its employees. Art. 73. The Chamber of Representatives may request information by a written request to the executive power on matters of public interest. Art. 74. No representative may be accused, judicially interrogated, or molested for opinions that he gives in the discharge of his office of legislator. From the day of his election until the end of his term, he may

not be arrested, except in case of being surprised in flagrante delicto. When a suit is instituted before ordinary justice against any representative and there are grounds for issuing an act of preventive imprisonment against the same, the chamber, with a two-thirds vote, may suspend the accused from his functions and place him at the disposition of justice for trial. Art. 75. Representatives will, at the time of their incorporation, take the oath to duly discharge their office, in accordance with that prescribed by this Constitution, and they will enjoy a remuneration indicated by law. No minister may exercise the representation while he forms part of the executive power. Neither may any ecclesiastic, military man in active service or employ paid by the Republic, under whatever title, exercise the representation, excepting professors or teachers. Art. 76. The following belongs to the Chamber of Representatives: (1) To legislate on municipal organization; (2) To legislate regarding taxes, levies, and contributions in general; (3) To authorize contracting loans and legislate on the banking system; (4) To dictate annually the law of the budget of expenses of the nation at the initiative of the executive power, and approve or reject the accounts of investments; (5) To regulate river and air navigation; (6) To legislate regarding monetary questions, at the initiative of the executive power; (7) To revise the general legislation, consulting the present needs of the country; (8) To consider international treaties and authorize the executive power to make war or negotiate peace; (9) To consider projects of temporary concessions prepared by the executive power for the establishment of industries; (10) To concede general amnesties, at the initiative of the executive power; (11) To dictate military ordinances and the law of organization of tribunals of military discipline, at the proposal of the executive power; (12) To legislate on administrative conflicts; (13) To permit the entry of foreign troops to the territory of the Republic and the exit of national troops out of it. The Formation and Sanctioning of Laws Art. 77. All laws whose initiative does not expressly correspond to the executive power by order of this Constitution may have their origin in the Chamber of Representatives by means of projects presented by any of its members. Art. 78. Once a project of law is approved by the Chamber of Representatives, it will be submitted to the consideration of the executive power, with whose approval it will be converted into law. All projects of law not objected to by the executive power within a term of ten days, will be considered approved. Art. 79. A bill completely rejected by the executive power, may not again be considered by the Chamber of Representatives in the course of sessions of that year. If the veto of the executive power only falls on one part of the project, this will return to the Chamber of Representatives. If the chamber ratifies it in its first vote by two-thirds of the votes, at two readings separated by an interval of three days each, the project will become law.



Art. 80. The judicial power of the Republic will be exercised by a Supreme Court composed of three members and the tribunal of accounts and other lower tribunals and courts established by law. Art. 81. In order to be a member of the Supreme Court, it is required to be a native citizen, to have reached the age of thirty-five years, to have a university degree of doctor in law, and to have an irreproachable public and private life. Art. 82. The members of the Supreme Court and other judges and magistrates of the judicial power will discharge their offices for five years, but the law will establish the conditions and requirements for permanence of the judicial magistrates. Art. 83. The members of the Supreme Court may be removed in a political trial by the Chamber of Representatives before the council of state, for badly discharging their functions and for constituting a danger for the honest administration of justice. Members of the tribunal of accounts and the magistrates of the lower tribunals and courts may be judged before the Supreme Court for breach of trust, badly discharging their functions, and dishonesty. Art. 84. The members of the Supreme Court will be appointed by the executive power in agreement with the council of state. The other magistrates and judges of the judicial power will be appointed by the executive power in agreement with the Supreme Court. Art. 85. The tribunal of accounts will hear trials of administrative litigation and of the examination and approval of the accounts of investment of the public money. Members of the tribunal of accounts will be appointed by the executive power in agreement with the Supreme Court. Art. 86. In order to be a member of the tribunal of accounts it is required to be a Paraguayan citizen, to have reached thirty years of age, and to have a university degree, or have been minister or chief of the financial administration. The law will establish the form of giving permanence to members of the tribunal of accounts. Art. 87. The independence of the judicial power is guaranteed. Only it may hear and decide acts of a litigious character; its power is exclusive in such acts, although the law may establish judges of the first instance as administrative authorities for administrative litigation. In no case may the President of the Republic or the ministers or other functionaries arrogate to themselves judicial powers, or revive closed proceedings, or paralyze those in action, or intervene in any manner in trials. Acts of this kind are always null. No judicial magistrate may be molested for decisions given in the exercise of his functions, or arrested except in case of being taken in flagrante delicto. Any complaint or accusation against them should be ventilated exclusively before the Supreme Court. Those who violate the independence of the judicial magistrates, or arrest them, besides suffering the penalties fixed by the penal code, will also be disqualified for the exercise of any public function for a period of five years. Art. 88. The Supreme Court is the high chamber of justice of the Republic and in that capacity exercises the superintendence of all the lower tribunals and courts. Art. 89. The Supreme Court takes cognizance of conflicts of jurisdiction between judges, and between these and functionaries of the executive power.



Art. 90. Defense before the courts of the Republic is free. Challenging of the courts and judges without cause is prohibited. Art. 91. All judicial sentences must be founded on this Constitution and on law. Art. 92. The members of the Supreme Court will take the oath from the hands of the President of the Republic faithfully to discharge their obligations, and the magistrates and judges will do so before the Supreme Court. Art. 93. The Supreme Court will dictate its own regulations and employ and discharge all the employees subordinate to the judicial power. It will present annually a memorandum to the President of the Republic regarding the measures accomplished and the estate and needs of national justice. Amendment of the Constitution Art. 94. No total amendment of this Constitution may be made until ten years after its promulgation. The need of amendment must be declared by the National Assembly with two-thirds of the votes of its members. With the same number of votes the Assembly may, however, declare the need of introducing partial reforms suggested by experience, and if it does so, will submit them to a plebiscite which should coincide with the elections for the renewal of the present presidential term. The present presidential term will end August 15, 1943. Given in the City of Asuncidn, Capital of the Republic of Paraguay, on the tenth day of July of the year of Our Lord One Thousand Nine Hundred and Forty.
756

Constitutii of Natms

vidual rights and would, at the same time, assure the supremacy of the general interest over particular interests. The then present reform concerned the organization more than the content; we were to continue being a democratic and representative republic, in accordance with our true tradition. The reform was not directed to the creation of a totalitarian state, but rather to the perfecting of the democratic regime, since sovereignty would continue to reside essentially in the people, from whose vote authority must come. Individual rights were to be respected within the social whole and the dignity of man was to be guarded without sacrificing the rights on altars of absolutist concepts. The situation created by the war of the Chaco and world problems, required that our country organize itself juridically to meet advantageously the difficulties that might arise, in order to avoid anarchy and to accelerate the rhythm of its progress, which was retarded in the economic, social and cultural aspects. Paraguay needed a constitution more genuinely its own, without detriment to the cardinal principles of American democracy stated in the Constitution of Philadelphia and the Argentine Constitution of 1853, and adopted by our country in the Constitution of 1870, which arose out of a great disaster. The new form, on the other hand, arose in an atmosphere strengthened by a great victory. It was a revision necessary to the national status. The new charter gave to the administrative power a greater breadth of functions for the benefit of the general good and not for the benefit of persons, parties, or any social class. It looked to a strong but not despotic executive power; greater responsibility should involve greater ability to meet it. The strengthening of the state juridical powers did not seek to create a dictatorial system, since dictatorship consists essentially in the discretional exercise of functions, but it sought rather to defend more ably our society and to broaden the radius of action of the State in that which refers to its intervention in social and economic life, by which the discarded concept of a neutral and indifferent State is abandoned. The modern State cannot be simply a policeman. The struggle between capital and labor, the interests of trade unions, the existence of powerful economic forces, the diversity of conflicting doctrines, require that the modern State assume at certain times a supremacy within juridical limits sufficient to make it respectable and efficient. In countries of primitive development, where private initiative is weak and where problems exist greater than the capacity of individuals, the State may not practice the doctrine of laissez faire without compromising progress. The State must assume representation of the vital interests of the nation in that which concerns its independence, its future, and the historical orientation which characterizes each South American republic. In the place of precarious and violent dictatorships which are at times called to overcome anarchy or to meet great national or international crises, it is juridically preferable to provide and equip the State with the mechanism necessary to fulfill its present and historic function. . .. We must march toward a perfecting of Paraguayan democracy, not toward its suppression. We tried to incorporate other concepts and other forms in the life of the State which, without being essentially political, form an equal part of the national life. One of the faults of our Senate consisted in the fact that that body was in reality nothing but the Chamber of Deputies reduced in number, when other representatives should have formed part of it with other powers, which would have differentiated the Senate from the popular Chamber. In federal countries like the United States and Argentina, the Senate has another characteristic; it represents the States or provinces. But in a unitary republic it is not appropriate to give it this function. In consequence, an institution should be looked for with a different counterbalance, which would give equilibrium but not destroy the legislative power of the Chamber of Representatives. The creation of the council of state met this need; it was made up of ministers and representatives of different sectors of opinion as members by right. The simple reading of the powers given to the council of state justifies its creation. It was to be an organ of counsel and direct assistance for the President of the Republic. It was not to be precisely a legislative arm, although it would be called to pronounce on questions of public interest, but it would participate in parliamentary life by deliberation and authority. The council of state was to be a counterbalance, and at the same time an intermediary institution between the Chamber of Representatives and the President of the nation .. By the new Constitution, general elections must occur every five years, which would be true plebiscites, for the appointment of the highest authorities of the nation and to facilitate the formation of governments supported by a strong majority. Thus, then, the lengthening of the parliamentary period and the diminishing of the number of elections, responded to the thought of avoiding bossism and contributing to the formation of a healthy public opinion that would pronounce its verdict each five years with the greatest independence and serenity. The activity of citizens in our time may also be exercised in other fields, such as culture, economy, organization, even sports, which are as interesting as mere political activity, in such a manner that the infrequency of elections does not imply enervation of the civic spirit. For the same considerations, the appointment of substitutes was established to fill vacancies in the Chamber of Representatives in order to avoid special elections to Congress. Numerous details and powers indicated by the Constitution of 1870, for the executive power as well as for the Congress, were suppressed in the new charter; some because unnecessary; others because superfluous or even anachronistic, in order to choose a system of general and basic concepts most suitable to a constitution. For the rigidity of the old charter were substituted the wide concepts of the new one, which leaves adequate regulation to the care of the law. For this reason the new statute is less long than the previous one, in spite of covering a greater number of functions. The new Constitution contemplates the reform of the Paraguayan State in order to make it more efficient, to bring it nearer to the vital problems of the country and to give it the juridical instruments to guarantee the peace, to work for the general well being, to orient the national economy, and to realize the aspirations of progress hoped for in all the Republic.

 757 1950


758

Constitutions of Nations

The new State must be a pure nationalism, gifted with greater capacity to realize social justice and to serve as a regulator of national life, without sacrificing the individual and political rights that are the essence of the democratic representative system. Seventy years after the promulgation of the previous Constitution, we adopted another, which signified a progress in the organization of a greater nationalism and which better considered the national reality, without sacrificing liberty or derogating the institutions which have become meat and tradition. A Constitution has two fundamental parts: the organization of the State and the fixing of the individual rights. Occidental civilization has formed a collection of rights and guarantees which can be considered as definitely consolidated, and they are those which refer to the sogial rights of man. These rights are those of forming a family, owning property, working, exercising any lawful industry, traveling freely, adopting a profession, teaching, and learning; and, more specifically, some political rights belong to citizens, such as concurring in the formation of the State as a voter or one elected, stating ideas by the press, etc. In this order of ideas, the new Constitution must necessarily consecrate the rights that constitute the patrimony of continental civilization, since America must be, by its social conditions, republican and democratic. But such rights may not be "previous and superior to society" but rather should develop within the natural limits indicated by three fundamental elements in every State: the right of third persons, public order, and morality. Therefore, the readaptation of the old Constitution had to be made to look for a greater equilibrium between the rights of individuals and the rights of society. It was not a question of suppressing individual rights as done in absolutist States, but of improving them, of placing them on a new plane, so that there would be equilibrium in the legal functioning of those rights, so as not to fall into anarchy nor into instability, to evils that afflict the countries of the New World with sufficient frequency and which conspire against their progress. It is in the political organization that a radical and profound reform was most urgently needed. The purely individualistic State must be readapted to the new conditions of the place and time. In a country of rudimentary economy, in which private initiative is weak or nonexistent, in which the culture has not yet reached a sufficient extension or profundity, the State may not be neutral nor leave many sections of social life essential to progress simply to private initiative. The reform which had to be realized in the country was the reform of the State, without impairing the basic principles of democracy or suppressing individual and political rights. ... The new Constitution tended to separate the judicial power even more from political life. And one of the methods was to give life tenure to its members and broaden their juridical functions, granting to the judge a greater breadth of powers, for the benefit of a more strict justice and one with a greater guaranty for society. A necessary complement to the judicial power is the creation of a tribunal of administrative mediation, a new subject of modern law, not

 758 1950


Paraguay

759

provided for in the previous Constitution. The tribunal of accounts must discharge this function, without prejudice to the examination of the investment of the public money, which is its present purpose. By the reform, then, the judicial department gained in power. What could be called the undivided estate of the juridical civilization of the nation was turned over to it, which should remain the same in spite of political changes. A nation can suffer political crises but should not suffer crises of justice, because the essential factors of an organized society depend on justice. As regards the executive and legislative powers, the specialization of functions made it desirable to give the executive power a wide range, which would cover all that related to the administration of the country, the regulation of its economy, the intervention of governmental direction in conflicts of private interests; and to give to Congress the function of providing the general standards. Congress would thus be a true legislative power, it should be said, specializing in the adoption of general rules of conduct indispensable to a society. One of the characteristics of legislation should be its stability, its permanence as a guarantee of social tranquility, a characteristic which does not fit the complexity and character of administrative affairs, which should only receive broad directive laws for their development. The crisis of parliamentarianism has arisen out of the excess of functions which have been attributed to Congress, to the point of turning over to a legislative assembly the mission of governing, when this should belong to the administrative power. Parliament had been inefficient, in many cases, because its radius of action included all sectors of society. It did not occupy itself only with the ratification of laws but also with their execution. Parliament would be the gainer when its functions are defined as of the legislative arm, the debate of general rules of law and confiding the task of governing, of acting, to the administrative power. It has been said that the executive power should be given all possible power, but within the law. And that is what a modern constitution should do. Amplify the functions of the executive power, giving it standards so as to avoid arbitrariness and abuse. The organization of contemporary society demands a strong, expeditious executive power that can immediately resolve many of the questions which daily arise in social life. ... Therefore, before giving Congress the power of balancing the action of the executive power with interpellation or with political trial, it is preferable to indicate concretely its function of dictating general standards, with the power to demand complete information on what has been acted on. In our time the juridical powers should add to themselves the vigorous influence of public opinion, the press, the radio, as factors of government. The administrative power has extended itself because of the character of contemporary society, which demands more execution, in contrast to the customary and lengthy negotiation characteristic of our past bureaucratic r6gimes. This amplification of powers is not dictatorship, because these powers are based on the rule of law. They are not created for the benefit of one man or one party, but rather respond to a change of system necessary in the organization of the modern State. For the State-policeman is substituted the State-public servant, who today assumes the character of

regulator of social and economic life. Returning to absolutism by it was not our consideration, but the better organization of social life. It should not be forgotten that the Constitution and contemporary political organization charge the executive power with two fundamental functions which demand execution: internal order and the defense of the national sovereignty. These functions do not permit an excess of deliberation. We must defend our liberties, our civilization, our independence itself, on the basis of order and discipline. Without disciplined and systematic order national defense cannot be faced. In short, the reform was to signify a perfectioning of Paraguayan democracy and not its suppression or substitution. Reform should respond to the conditions of the medium and time, which are the co-ordinates of a constitution. A superficial examination of our medium tells us that we are a country thinly populated, of a race somewhat individualistic, of insufficient culture and embryonic economy; a country that needs to progress in order to guarantee its independence and encourage the vital forces of nationality. As regards the time, we can say that, as a result of the war of the Chaco and other political circumstances, there had occurred an anarchy dangerous to the national existence, and ideas had overcome all legal precepts, to such a point that the existing electoral law, which established the forced representation of the minority, had not achieved anything and Parliament was made up of one single party. The electoral law had become a mere declaration, because hates were greater than the principles which inspired its adoption. In order to overcome the two factors of the medium and the time, it was advisable to realize the reform of the Paraguayan State in such a manner that it be made more able, more adequate for the fulfillment of its functions of accomplishing justice, of achieving general well-being and assuring the benefits of liberty for us and for our posterity. The new charter responded not only to the needs of the historic time in which the world was living, but also to the situation and conditions of Paraguay itself. It was no longer the adoption of a foreign charter; it was the harvest of an experience of one hundred and thirty years of independent life, seventy of them lived under democratic, individualistic rule. None of the fundamental guarantees enjoyed by the citizen were suppressed by it; by it the State was reorganized for the fulfillment of its historic mission, in order to bring it closer to all the life of the nation. Because of its inland situation and its destiny, Paraguay must count on institutions that make it competent for its defense and progress. In this sense the new Constitution was more nationalist than the previous one. Josik F. ESTIGARRIBIA, President of the Republic of Paraguay.

