CHAPTER 1.-Of the Nation.
ALT. 1. The Peruvian nation is the political association of all Peruvians. 2. The nation is free and independent, and may not enter into 

any compact which is opposed to its independence or integrity, or which in any manner affects its sovereignty. 3. The sovereignty resides in the nation, and the exercise thereof is intrusted to the officers established by this Constitution.
CHAPTER

Ii.-Of the Religion.

4. The nation professes the Catholic Apostolic Roman religion; the State protects it, and does not permit the public exercise of any other.
CHAPTFR

III.-National Guarantees.

5. No person may arrogate the title of Sovereign; he who should do so commits high treason. 6. In the Republic neither hereditary offices and privileges nor personal charters (" fueros ") shall be recognized. Entails are prohibited, And all property may be disposed of in the manner determined by law. 7. National property may only be disposed of in the cases and manner prescribed by law, and for the objects designated by the same. 8. No contributions may be imposed except by virtue of a law, in proportion with the means of the contributor and for the public service. 9. The law determines the revenues and expenditure of the nation. The responsibility for any sum exacted or applied contrary to the express tenour thereof will rest with the person who orders the exaction of such undue expenditure, and with the person who executes it, unless he shall prove his innocence. 10. The acts of those who usurp public functions are null, as also offices conferred without the requisites designated by the Constitution and the laws. 11. Any person who exercises any public office is directly and immediately responsible for the actions performed by him in the discharge of his duties. The law shall determine the manner in which such responsibility shall be made effective. The law officers ("fiscales") are responsible by public action if they do not enforce the fulfilment of the provisions of this Article. 12. No person may exercise the public functions designated by this Constitution unless sworn to comply with it. 13. Every Peruvian is authorized to bring forward remonstrances before Congress, the Executive Power, or any other competent authority, against infractions of the Constitution.


 Chapter IV.-Individual Guarantees.

14. No person is obliged to do that which is not ordered by the law, or prevented from doing that which is not prohibited by it. 15. No law has retroactive force or effect. 16. The law protects honour and life against any unjust agression. The death penalty may not be imposed except for the crime of murder. 17. There are not, nor may there be, any slaves in the Republic. 18. No person may be arrested without the written warrant of a competent Magistrate or of the authorities charged with the preservation of public order, except in flagrante delicto; in every case the person arrested must be brought before the proper Tribunal within 24 hours. The persons who execute the said warrant shall be obliged to produce a copy thereof whenever called upon to do so. 19. The prisons are places of security, not of punishment. All severity not necessary for the custody of the prisoner is prohibited. 20. No person may be expelled from the Republic or from his place of residence, except under legal sentence. 21. All persons may make use of the press for the publication of their writings without previous censorship, but subject to the responsibility determined by law. 22. The secrecy of letters is inviolable; such as may have been abstracted shall have no legal effect. 23. Any employment, industry, or profession may be freely exercised, if not opposed to public morality, health, or security. 24. The nation guarantees the existence and diffusion of free primary education, and the establishment of public institutions for sciences, arts, charity, and benevolence. 25. All those who can produce certificates of ability and morality, as prescribed by law, may- freely engage in teaching and direct educational establishments under the inspection of the authorities. 26. Property is inviolable, whether material, intellectual, literary, or artistic. No person may be deprived of his own, except on account of public utility, legally proved, and with previous equitable compensation. 27. Useful inventions are the exclusive property of their authors, unless the latter voluntarily agree to dispose of the secret, or in the event of forced expropriation. Those persons who merely introduce similar inventions shall enjoy the same advantages as the inventors for such limited period as may be conceded to them in conformity with the law. 28. Any foreigner may, in accordance with law, acquire real property in the territory of the Republic, and in all that relates to 

the said property shall be subject to the same obligations and enjoy the same rights as a Peruvian. 29. All citizens have the right of peaceable aspembly, whether public or private, provided there is no breach of public order. 30. The right of petition may be exercised individually or collectively. 31. The domicile is inviolable. No person may enter therein without previously exhibiting a written warrant of a Magistrate or of the authority intrusted with the maintenance of public order. Those persons who execute such a warrant shall be obliged to furnish a copy of it whenever required to do so. 32. The laws protect and impose obligations upon all. Special laws may be established should the nature of the objects require them, but not for the difference of persons only. CHAPTER V.-Of the Peruvian. 38. Peruvians are such either by birth or by naturalization. 34. Peruvians by birth are(1.) Those born in the territory of the Republic; (2.) The children of a Peruvian father or mother born abroad, and whose names have been inscribed in the Civic Register by the wish of their parents during their minority, or in the proper place by themselves upon their attaining their majority, or upon emancipation; (3.) Natives of Spanish America or Spaniards who were in Peru at the time its independence was proclaimed or sworn, and who have since continued to reside therein. 35. Peruvians by naturalization are Foreigners, above 21 years of age, residing in Peru, who follow any employment, industry, or profession, and who have inscribed their names in the Civic Register in the manner determined by law. 36. Every Peruvian is obliged to serve the Republic, both with his person and property, in such manner and proportion as may be signified by law. CHAPTER VI.-Of citizenship. 37. Citizens de facto are those Peruvians who are above 21 years of age, as well as those who are married, even if they have not reached such age. 38. All citizens who can read and write may exercise the right of suffrage, also those who are masters of manufactories, who possess real property, or pay any contribution to the Public Treasury. The exercise of this right will be regulated by law.


39. Any citizen is eligible for any public situation, provided that he possesses the qualifications -required by law. 40. The exercise of citizenship is suspended(1.) For incapacity in accordance with law; (2.) For having submitted to proceedings in bankruptcy; (3.) For having been criminally prosecuted, with committal to prison; (4.) For being a notorious vagrant, gambler, or drunkard, or for having been divorced by reason of his own guilt. 41. The right of citizenship is lost(1.) By judicial sentence to that effect; (2.) By fraudulent bankruptcy, judicially declared; (3.) By obtaining and exercising citizenship in another State; (4.) By accepting from any foreign Government any employment, title, or decoration, without permission of Congress; (5.) By being a member of a monastic order; but reacquisition may be obtained if free from the cloister; (6.) By slave-dealing, wherever carried on.
CHAPTER

VII.-Of the Form of Government.

42. The Government of Peru is Republican, democratic, representative, and founded on unity. 43. Public functions are exercised by those charged with the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial Powers. None of these shall be able to exceed the limits prescribed by this Constitution.
CHAPTR VIII.-Of the Legislative Power.

44. The Legislative Power is exercised by Congress in the form prescribed by this Constitution. Congress is composed of two Chambers-one of Senators, the other of Deputies. 45. The election of Senators and Deputies shall take place in conformity with law. 46. One Deputy (" Diputado proprietario ") and one substitute (" suplente") shall be elected for every 30,000 inhabitants, or for any number exceeding 15,000; as also for every province, even when the population thereof does not amount to the latter number. The number of Deputies for each province, in accordance with this Article, shall be fixed by a law, and shall not be augmented without the previous authority of Congress. 47. To be a Deputy, it is necessary(1.) To be a Peruvian by birth; (2.) A citizen de facto;




(8.) 25 years of age; (4.) A native of the department to which the province belongs, or to have resided therein for the space of three years; (5.) To have an income of 500 pesos, or to be a professor of some science. 48. Four Senators (" proprietarios ") and four substitutes (" suplentes") shall be elected for each department having more than eight provinces. Three Senators and three substitutes for each department having less than eight and more than four provinces. Two Senators and two substitutes for each department having less than five provinces and more than one. One Senator and one substitute for each department having one province only or for each littoral province. 49. To be a Senator, it is necessary(1.) To be a Peruvian by birth; (2.) To be citizen de facto; (3.) To be 85 years of age; (4.) To have an annual income of 1,000 pesos, or to be a professor of some science. 50. The following cannot be elected Senators for any department, or Deputies for any province of the Republic:(1.) The President of the Republic, the Vice - Presidents, Ministers of State, Prefects, Sub-Prefects, and Governors, unless they have relinquished the duties of their office two months anterior to the election; (2.) The voting members ("vocales") and law officers ("fiscales") of the Supreme Court of Justice. 51. Neither may be elected(1.) The Archbishops, Bishops, Ecclesiastical Governors, Capitulary Vicars or Vicars-General for the departments or provinces of their respective dioceses; (2.) Priests for the provinces belonging to their parishes; (3.) Voting members and law officers of the Superior Courts for the departments and provinces in which they exercise jurisdiction; (4.) Judges of First Instance for their judicial districts; (5.) Military officers for the provinces in their command or in which they may be quartered at the time of the election. 52. Congress will ordinarily assemble biennially,* on the 28th July, with or without decree of convocation; and extraordinarily whenever it may be convoked by the Executive. The duration of Congress shall ordinarily be 100 working days;


the extraordinary shell terminate when the object for which it was convoked has been fulfilled, but in no case may it continue to act for more than 100 working days. 53. The opening of Congress cannot take place unless two-thirds of the representatives of each Chamber are present. 54. Senators and Deputies are inviolable in the exercise of their functions. 55. Senators and Deputies may neither be accused nor arrested without previous authorization of Congress, and, in its recess, of the Permanent Commission, during the period comprised between one month before the opening of the Session and one month after its close, except in cases of flagrante delicto, when they must be immediately placed at the disposal of the respective Chamber, or of the Permanent Commission during the recess of Congress. 56. The position of Senator or Deputy becomes vacant upon the person filling it being admitted to any employment, post, or benefice the nomination to or presentation of which rests exclusively with the Executive Power. 57. The Chambers shall be renewed by a third part of their number every two years on the termination of the ordinary Legislature. 58. Deputies and Senators may be re-elected, and in this case only may they renounce the duties intrusted to them. 59. The attributes of Congress are(1.) To pass new laws, and to interpret, modify, and abrogate those existing; (2.) To open and close its Sessions at the time designated by law, and to prolong their duration to the extent of 50 days; (3.) To designate the place of its Sessions, and to determine whether or not there shall be an armed force, to what number, and at what distance; (4.) To examine, in the first place, infractions of the Constitution, and to order what may be necessary to make effective the responsibility of the offenders; (5.) To impose contributions subject to the dispositions of Article 8; to abolish those in existence; to sanction the Estimates; and to approve or disapprove of the account of expenditure presented by the Executive Power in accordance with Article 102; (6.) To authorize the Executive Power to negotiate loans, pledging the national exchequer, and designating the funds for its redemption; (7.) To recognize the National Debt, and to determine the means
for its consolidation and redemption;

(8.) To create or abolish public employments, and to assign thereto the proper emoluments;




(9.) To determine the alloy, weight, type, and denomination of the coinage, also the weights and measures; (10.) To proclaim the election of the President and the Vice-Presidents of the Republic, and to elect them when they may not have been elected according to law; (11.) To accept or not the resignation of the head of the Executive Power; (12.) To resolve any doubts which may occur as to the incapacity of the President as indicated in Article 88, section 1; (13.) To approve or disapprove of the appointments, subject to law, proposed to be made by the Executive Power, of Generals and Colonels in the army, and Admirals and Captains in the navy; (14.) To give or refuse consent to the entry of foreign troops into the territory of the Republic ; (15.) To declare war on the petition and with the previous concurrence of the Executive Power, and to require him, when necessary, to enter into negotiations for peace; (16.) To approve or disapprove Treaties of Peace, Concordats, or other Conventions concluded with foreign Governments; , (17.) To dictate the necessary regulations for the exercise of the. right of patronage; (18.) To rehabilitate those who have lost their citizenship; (19.) To grant amnesties and pardons: (20.) To declare when the country is in danger, and to suspend, for a limited period, the guarantees established by Articles 18, 20, and 29; (21.) To decide in each ordinary Session of the Legislature, and in the extraordinary Sessions when necessary, the land and sea forces to be maintained by the State; (22.) To establish the division and demarcation of the national territory ; (23.) To grant rewards to towns, corporations, or persons, for eminent services performed in the interest of the nation; (24.) To examine, on the termination of each constitutional term, the administrative acts of the Chief of the Executive Power, and to approve them if they shall be in conformity with the Constitution and the laws. In the contrary case, the Chamber of Deputies will lay before the Senate the corresponding impeachment.
CHAPTER IX.-the Legislative

Chambers.

60. In each Chamber Bills will be initiated, discussed, and voted conformably with its internal regulations. 61 Each Chamber has the right to appoint its Secretary, name




its officers, draw up its estimates, and regulate its internal management and police. 62. The Chambers shall meet together(1.) To exercise the attributes contained in sections 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 20, and 24 of Article 59. (2.) To discuss and vote the matters about which there may be dispute between the Chambers. In this case a majority of two-thirds of votes will be necessary in order to pass the Bill. 63. The presidency of Congress shall alternate between the Presidents of the two Chambers, in conformity with the internal regulations of the latter. 64. The Chamber of Deputies is charged with the impeachment before the Senate of the President of the Republic, of the members of both Chambers, of. the Ministers of State, of the members of the Permanent Commission of the Legislative Body, and of the voting members (" vocales") of the Supreme Court, for infractions of the Constitution, and for all offences committed in the exercise of their functions, when such offences entails personal restraint. 65. The President of the Republic cannot be impeached during his period of office, except in cases of treason, of having conspired against the form of government, of having dissolved Congress, hindered its meeting, or suspended its functions. 66. It devolves upon the Chamber of Senators(1.) To declare whether or not there be sufficient ground for the
accusations made by the Chamber of Deputies; suspending the

accused, in the former case, from the exercise of his office, and putting him upon trial in accordance with law; (2.) To settle the contentions which arise between the Superior Courts and the Supreme Court, and between the latter and the Executive Power.
CHAPTER X.-Of the Formation and

Promulgation of the Laws.

67. The following have the right of initiative in the formation of laws:(1.) Senators and Deputies; (2.) The Executive Power; (3.) The Supreme Court, in judicial matters. 68. Upon a Bill being approved in either of the Chambers it will pass to the other for convenient discussion, and put to the vote. If the revising Chamber should make additions to it, such additions shall be subjected to the same procedure as the Bill itself. 69. Upon the approval of a law by Congress it shall be passed on to the Executive, who shall cause it to be promulgated and executed. Should the Executive have observations to make, he



must place them before Congress within the space of 10 days at the most.
70. A law reconsidered in both Chambers, together with the observations of the Executive, shall, if it be approved notwithstanding such observations, be sanctioned, and its promulgation and execution ordered. If it should not be approved, it may not be again taken into consideration until the following Session. 71. If the Executive should not order the law to be promulgated and executed, or should not make any observations on it within the period fixed in Article 69, it shall be considered sanctioned, and shall be promulgated and its execution ordered by the Executive. In the contrary case, the promulgation shall be made by the President of Congress, who shall order its insertion for fulfilment in the " Gazette." 72. The Executive shall not be able to make observations on the resolutions or laws dictated by Congress in the exercise of its attributes Nos. 2, 3, and 10 (see Article 59). 73. The Sessions of Congress and those of the Chambers shall be public. They can only be secret in the cases specified in the regulations, and with the previous formalities thereby required. 74. The voting in any matter directly affecting the national revenues shall be by name. 75. For the interpretation, modification, or repeal of laws the same procedure shall be necessary as in their formation. 76. Congress in enacting laws shall make use of the following formula: "The Congress of the Republic of Peru [here follows the preamble] has passed the following law: [Here follows the text.] "Let it be communicated to the Executive Power, in order that the necessary steps may be taken for its execution." 77. The Executive on promulgating or ordering the execution of laws shall make use of the following formula: "The President of the Republic: "Whereas Congress has passed the following law: [Here follows the law.] "Therefore I order it to be printed, published, and circulated and that it be duly executed." CHAPTER XI.-Of the Executive Power. 78, The Chief of the Executive Power shall have the title of "President of the Republic." 79. To be President of the Republic it is necessary to be-




(1.) A Peruvian by birth; (2.) A citizen de facto; (3.) 35 years of age, and to have resided for 10 years in the Republic. 80. The President of the Republic shall be popularly elected in the f6rm prescribed by law. 81. Congress shall have the duty of opening the electoral documents, of verifying them, of scrutinizing the votes, and of proclaiming as President him who shall have obtained an absolute majority. 82. If the said majority shall not result from the scrutiny, Congress shall elect between the two who have obtained the greatest number of votes. If two or more should have an equal number of votes, Congress shall elect among them. 83. If the votes cast by Congress in accordance with the preceding Article should result in an equality, the election shall be decided by lot. 84. When the election of the President shall fall to Congress, the question must be indispensably settled in one single sitting. 85. The President shall remain in office for four years, and may not be re-elected as President, or elected as Vice-President, until after the expiration of a like period. 86. The President of the Republic, on the termination of his tenure of office, shall give an account to Congress of his administrative acts, in accordance with the attribute described in Article 59, section 24. 87. The emoluments of the President cannot be increased during his term of office. 88. The Presidency of the Republic becomes vacant in the event of death, as also (1.) By the lasting incapacity, moral or physical, of the President; (2.) By the acceptance of his resignation; (3.) By judicial sentence declaring him guilty of the offences described in Article 65; (4.) By the termination of the period for which he was elected. 89. There shall be two Vice-Presidents of the Republic, styled respectively first and second. They shall be elected at the same time, with the same qualifications, and for the same period as the President. 90. In the case of a vacancy occurring for any of the reasons indicated in Article 88, except the last, the first Vice-President will continue the Presidential period until its termination. In the cases described in Article 93, he shall take charge of affairs for the period during which the President is suspended,




91. In default of the President and of the first Vice-President, the second will assume supreme charge until the person summoned by law shall present himself. In the case of a vacancy, he shall issue, within three days, the orders necessary for the election of a President and first Vice-President of the Republic, and shall convoke Congress for the purposes indicated in Article 81 and those which follow it. 92. The Vice-Presidents of the Republic cannot be candidates for the Presidency or for the Vice-Presidency during their exercise of the supreme authority. The same rule applies to the Ministers of State and the Commander-in-chief of the army. 93. The exercise of the Presidency is suspended(L) By the President taking command in person of the public forces; (2.) By temporary illness; (3.) By having submitted to trial in the cases mentioned in Article 65. 94. The attributes of the President of the Republic are(I.) To preserve the internal order and the external security of the Republic without contravention of the laws; (2.) To convoke the ordinary Congress without prejudice to the provisions of the first part of Article 52, and extraordinarily when necessary; (3.) To attend the opening of Congress, presenting a Message respecting the condition of the Republic, and on the reforms and improvements which he considers expedient; (4.) To take part in the formation of laws conformably with this Constitution; (5.) To promulgate and put into execution the laws and other resolutions of Congress; and to issue decrees, orders, regulations, and instructions for the better fulfilment of the same; (6.) To give the necessary orders for the collection and application of the public revenue in accordance with law; (7.) To require from the Judges and Courts the prompt and impartial administration of justice; (8.) To cause the sentences of the Tribunals and Courts of Law to be executed; (9.) To organize the land and sea forces, and to distribute and dispose of them for the service of the Republic; (10.) To distribute the National Guard in the respective provinces, but without the power of removing them from thence, except in case of sedition in those adjoining or in the event of a foreign war; (11.) To direct diplomatic negotiations, and to conclude Treaties, with the express condition that they shall be submitted to Congress for the purposes indicated in Article 59, section 16;




(12.) To receive foreign Ministers and to admit Consuls; (13.) To appoint and remove Ministers of State and Diplomatic Agents; (14.) To decree licences and pensions according to law; (15.) To exercise patronage in accordance with law and existing practice ; (16.) To present, with the approval of Congress, the Archbishops and Bishops legally elected; (17.) To present to the dignities and canonries of the cathedrals, and to the curacies and other ecclesiastical benefices, conformably with the law and existing practice; (18.) To conclude Concordats with the Apostolic See a6cording to the instructions given by Congress ; (19.) To grant or refuse the pass to Conciliar Decrees, Pontifical Bulls, Briefs, and Rescripts, with the assent of Congress; the Supreme Court of Justice having been previously consulted if they should relate to contentious matters; (20.) To fill up vacant offices, the appointments to which have been intrusted to him by the Constitution and by special laws. 95. The President may not quit the territory of the Republic during his period of office without the consent of Congress, and, in its recess, of the Permanent Commission; nor at the termination of the said period if he has to submit to the trial referred to in Article 66. 96. The President may not take command of the army in person without permission of Congress, and, in its recess, of the Permanent Commission. In the event of his taking such command, he shall only have the power of Commander-in-chief, and shall be subject to the military laws and ordinances, and responsible in accordance therewith.
CHAPTEP

XII.-Of the Ministers of State.

97. The dispatch of the business of the public administration rests with the Ministers of State, whose number, as well as the branches to be comprised in each Ministry, shall be determined by law. 98. To be a Minister of State it is necessary to be a Peruvian by birth, and a citizen defacto. 99. The Orders and Decrees of the President shall be signed by each Minister in his respective department, without which requisite they are not to be obeyed. 100. The Ministers of State in assembly will form the Council of Ministers, whose organization and functions will be specified by a law.




101. Each Minister shall present to the ordinary Congress, at
the time of its installation, a memorandum showing the state of the several branches of his office, and at any other time when a report may be called for. 1062. The Minister of Finance shall also present' a general account of the previous biennial period, and the estimates for that following. 103. The Ministers may present to Congress at any time such Bills as they may consider expedient, and may also take part in the debates in Congress or in either of the Chambers; they must, however, retire previous to the voting. They must likewise attend the discussions whenever they may be called upon by Congress or either of the Chambers, and in both cases must reply to the interpellations put to them. 104. The Ministers are, collectively, responsible for the Resolutions dictated in Council, unless they withhold their votes; and, individually, for the proceedings appertaining to their Departments. XIII.-The Permanent Commission of the Legislative

CHAPTER

Body.* 105. The Permanent Commission of the Legislative Body is
composed of seven Senators and eight Deputies, elected by the Chambers jointly at the close of each ordinary Legislature. Three Senators and four Deputies will be elected as substitutes (" suplentes "). 106. Persons who are related one to another within the fourth civil degree shall not be members of this Commission. 107. The attributes of the Permanent Commission, besides those specified by other Articles of the Constitution, are(1.) To supervise the fulfilment of the Constitution and the laws, giving directions to the Executive Power in successive Administrations, in order that any infraction thereof which may have been committed may be corrected, or that the subordinate officials, if they should have been the offenders, may be proceeded against; (2.) To report to Congress, and to require the Chamber of Deputies to put forward the proper accusation of the responsible Minister or Ministers, in cases where the representations devolving upon them by virtue of the preceding attribute have been disregarded; (3.) To declare whether or not there are grounds for the trial of, and .to place at the disposition of the competent Judge, the Senators



or Deputies in the case treated of in. Article .55 of this Constitution; (4.) To resolve the contentions-which. may arise between the Superior Courts and the Supreme Court, or between the latter and the Executive Power; (5.) To authorize the Executive to negotiate loans, specifying the amount, and to augment the public forces up to a number also determined upon, in the event of the disturbance of public order or the invasion of the national territory. An absolute majority of votes in favour of such authorization shall not be sufficient, a majority of two-thirds being indispensable. (6.) To give the President the permission referred to in Articles 95 and 96, in the same cases as those mentioned in the preceding attribute. 108. The Senators and Deputies who form this Commission shall undertake the duties imposed by their respective Chambers in the formation and revision of the laws, with the obligation of making a report from time to time. 109. The Commission is responsible to Congress for any omission in the discharge of the duties prescribed in attributes 1 and 2, Article 107, and, besides, for the improper use of the attribute 5. 110. The Commission shall elect amongst its own members a President, Vice-President, and Secretary, and shall draw up its own regulations and estimates.

CHApTeR XIV.-Of

the Internal Government of the Republic.

111. The Republic is divided into departments and littoral provinces. The departments are divided into provinces, and the latter into districts. 112. The division of the departments, provinces, and districts, and the demarcation of their respective boundaries, shall be the subject of a law. 113. For the execution of the laws, the execution of judicial sentences, and the maintenance of public order, there shall be Prefects in the departments and littoral provinces, Sub-Prefects in the provinces, and Governors wherever such may be necessary. 114. The Prefects shall be under the immediate authority of the Executive Power; the Sub-Prefects under that of the Prefects; and the Governors under the Sub-Prefects. 115. The Prefects and Sub-Prefects shall be appointed by the Executive Power; the Governors by the Prefects from a ternary list submitted by the Sub-Prefects; and the Lieutenant-Governors from a ternary list submitted by the Governors.




The Executive Power may remove the Prefects and Sub-Prefects in accordance with law. 116. The attributes of these officials and the duration of their functions shall be fixed by a law. 117. The officials intrusted with the police of security and public order are under the immediate authority of the Executive Power, who shall appoint or remove them in accordance with law.
CHAPTER XV.-Of Municipalities.

118. There shall be municipalities in the places designated by law, which shall also determine their functions, responsibilities, the qualifications of their members, and the mode of their election.
CHAPTER XVI.-Of the Public Forces.

119. The object of the public forces is to secure the rights of the nation abroad, and the enforcement of the laws and preservation of order at home. Military discipline shall be regulated by the laws and military ordinances. 120. The public forces are composed of the National Guard, the army, and the navy, and shall be organized in accordance with law. The strength of the public forces and the number of Generals and Colonels shall be fixed by a law. 121. The National Guard shall remain organized in the proportion determined by law. 122. There shall be no general territorial Commandants nor military Commandants in time of peace. 123. The public forces can be neither augmented nor renewed except in conformity with law. Recruiting is an offence, and gives to all the right to take action before the Courts and Congress against the person ordering it. chapter

XVIL-Of the JudicialPower.

124. Justice will be administered by the Tribunals and Courts in the manner and form determined by law. 125. There shall be in the capital of the Republic one Supreme Court of Justice; in the capitals of the departments, according to the judgment of Congress, Superior Courts; in those of the provinces, Courts of First Instance; and in each town, a Police Court (" Juzgado de Paz "). The number of Courts of First Instance in the provinces and of Police Courts in the towns shall be determined by law.




126. The voting members (" vocales") and law officers ("'fiseales ") of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by Congress from the double ternary list submitted by the Executive Power. The voting members and law officers of the Superior Courts shall be appointed by the Executive from the double ternary list submitted by the Supreme Court; and the Judges of First Instance and attorneys (" agentes fiscales") from the double ternary list submitted by the respective Superior Courts. Should any vacancy occur in the Supreme Court during the recess of Congress the Permanent Commission of the Legislative Body shall temporarily fill up the post from the ternary list submitted by the Executive Power. 127. Publicity is essential in trials. The Courts may deliberate in secret, but the voting must be done openly and publicly. The reasons for sentences shall be given, and the laws and grounds on which they are based stated. 128. Every trial by commission is prohibited. 129. No power or authority may remove to itself causes pending before another power or authority, or advance them, or revive lawsuits already decided. 130. The following justify popular action against Magistrates and Judges(1.) Prevarication; (2.) Bribery; (3.) Abbreviation or suspension of judicial forms; (4.) Illegal proceedings against individual guarantees. CHAPTER XVIII.-Of the Reform of the Constitution. 131. The reform of one or more of the Articles of the Constitution will be sanctioned by the ordinary Congress, the same procedure being previously observed as in the case of Bills. No effect shall, however, be given to such reforms unless they be ratified in a similar manner by the ordinary Legislature following. CHAPTR XIX.-Transitory Dispositions.

132. The renewal of the Congress in the Legislatures of 1862 and 1864 will be effected by lot. 133. The Senators corresponding to each department or littoral province will be elected on this occasion by Congress from amongst the Deputies representing those territorial divisions. The members of Congress who may not be elected Senators will form the Chamber of Deputies. 134. In order to establish upon a firmer basis the relations


existing between the Church and the State, and in order to remove the obstacles which hinder the exact fulfilment of Article 6 on account of ecclesiastical jurisdiction (" fuero "), a Concordat will be concluded as soon as possible. 135. Articles 34 and 35 cannot take away the rights of a Peruvian by birth or naturalization from those individuals who legally possess either of those qualifications. 136. Private Courts and Tribunals, as well as their special codes, shall continue to exist, until the laws have made in them the necessary reforms. 137. The election of the second Vice-President of the Republic, who will supply the place of the President and first Vice-President during their term of office, shall be effected by the towns in such a place as may be proclaimed in the electoral law ; the scrutiny and proclamation being made by the Permanent Commission of the Legislative Body during the recess of Congress. 138. This Constitution shall be in force in the Republic from the date of its promulgation without the necessity of swearing to it. Given in the Hall of Sessions at Lima, November 2, 1860. Wherefore I order that it be printed, promulgated, and duly fulfilled. Given at Government House, Lima, November 13, 1860. RAMON CASTILLA.
