


THE Citizen Jose de la Mar,-President of the Republic. The Congress has decreed the following Political Constitution of the Peruvian Republic. In the name of Almighty God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Supreme Author and Legislator of Society. The General Constituent Congress of Peru, in the performance of its duty, decrees the following Constitution. TITLE I.-Of the Nation and its Religion. ART.I. The Peruvian Nation is the Political Association of all the Citizens of Peru. II. The Peruvian Nation is for ever free and independent of every Foreign Power It shall never be the patrimony of any Person or Family, nor form, with any other State, a Union or Federation which may be opposed to its independence. III. Its Religion is the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman. The Nation protects this Religion, by all means conformable with the spirit of the Gospel: and will not permit the exercise of any other.
TITLE II.-Of Citizenship.

IV. Are Citizens of the Peruvian Nation : 1. All Free Men born in the Territory of the Republic. 2. The Sons of a Peruvian Father or Mother, born out of the Territory, from the time that they legally manifest their wish to settle in Peru. 3. Foreigners who have served, or shall serve, in the Army and Navy of the Republic. 4. Foreigners who were settled in the Republic previous to 1820, the first year of Independence; provided they prove, as is required by the Law, that they have lived in it peaceably, and that they inscribe their names in the National Register. 5. Foreigners established subsequently in the Republic; or who shall establish themselves, and obtain a Letter of Citizenship agreeably to the Law. 6. Citizens of the other States of America, who were established in Peru prior to the year 1820, shall enjoy the rights of Citizenship, provided they inscribe their names in the National Register; and those who shall henceforward establish themselves, in conformity with the Reciprocal Conventions which may be concluded. V. The exercise of the rights of Citizenship is lost: 1. By a sentence inflicting any punishment attended with infamy, unless the Party obtain such a restoration of those rights as the Law requires.




2. By accepting employments, or titles, or any favour whatever, from another Nation, without permission of the Congress. 3. By engaging in foreign Slave Trade. 4. By having made the solemn vows of Religion. VI. It is suspended 1. By being unmarried, or under the age of 21. 2. By mental alienation. 3. By naturalization in another State. 4. By being subject to a Criminal Prosecution, and under arrest in consequence of a Judicial Warrant legally issued. 5. By Bankruptcy, or being a Debtor to the Public Treasury, and not paying after having been legally summoned. 6. By being a notorious Vagrant, Gambler, or Drunkard, or having wantonly deserted a lawful Wife, or having been divorced in consequence of criminal conduct.
TITLE

III.-Of the Form of Government.

VII. The Peruvian Nation adopts for its Government the Popular Representative form, consolidated in unity. VIII. It delegates the exercise of its Government to the three Powers, the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial, into which its principal functions are divided. IX. Neither of the three powers shall be permitted to exceed the functions prescribed by this Constitution.
TITLE

IV.-Of the Legislative Power.

X. The Legislative Power is exercised by a Congress, composed of two Chambers, one of Deputies, the other of Senators. Chamber of Deputies. XI. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of Representatives, elected by means of Electoral Colleges, Parochial and Provincial. XII. The Parochial Electoral Colleges are formed of all the Inhabitants resident in the Parish, and actually in the exercise of the rights of Citizenship, assembled according to Law. XIII. For every 200 Individuals in a Parish, there shall be elected l Parochial Elector, who must possess the following qualifications 1. He must be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 2. He must be an Inhabitant of the Parish. 3. He must have a Landed Property, or a Capital, producing 300 dollars a year, or be of some art or trade, or a professor of some science. 4. He must be able to read and write; which qualification, however, shall not, for the present, extend to the Natives, agreeably to the provisions of the Law of Elections.



XIV. The Provincial Electoral Colleges shall be formed by the union of the Parochial Electors, according to Law. XV. These Electoral Colleges shall elect the Deputies, in the ratio of 1 for every 20,000 Inhabitants, or for a fraction above 10,000. XVI. Although a Province have a Population short of 10,000 Inhabitants, it shall, nevertheless, name a Deputy. XVII. They shall elect in like manner, a Substitute for every 2 Deputies. If there should happen to be 3 Deputies, they shall elect 2 Substitutes; if 5,-3, and so on progressively ; and if 1 only, they shall also elect a Substitute. XVIII. The Election of Deputies by reason of birth, shall have preference over that made by reason of residence. XIX. To be a Deputy it is requisite: 1. To be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 2. To be 26 years of age. 3. To be possessed of a Landed Property which produces 500 dollars a year, or of a Capital producing that sum annually, or of an equal amount of income, or to be a public professor of some science. 4. To have been born in the Province, or in the Department to which it belongs; or to have been established in the Province 7 years, and born in the territory of Peru. 5. To be qualified for the Office of Deputy, the Sons of a Peruvian Father or Mother, not born in Peru, besides having resided 10 years, must be married Men, or Widowers, or Ecclesiastics; and must possess a Landed Property of the value of 12,000 dollars, or a Capital producing 1,000 Dollars a year. XX. The following cannot be Deputies: 1. The principal Functionaries of the Executive Power in the Capital of the Republic, or in that of the Departments and Provinces. 2. The Members of the Supreme Court of Justice. 3. The Persons employed in the Treasury, and Accountant General's Office of the Republic. 4. The Military Commanders, for the places at which they are in garrison. 5. The very Reverend the Archbishops, the Reverend the Bishops, their Provisors and Vicars-General, and the Ecclesiastical Governors. XXI. To the Chamber of Deputies belongs, exclusively, the initiative in matters concerning Taxation, the negotiation of Loans, and the liquidation of the Public Debt; the Senate being vested with the power of admitting, refusing, or objecting to them. XXII. To that Chamber also belongs, the duty of accusing, before the Senate,-the President and Vice President, the Members of both Chambers, the Ministers of State, and the Members of the Supreme Court of Justice, for acts of treason, attempts against the public safety, abuse of power, infractions of the Constitution, and for every offence committed


in the exercise of their functions, and to which an infamous punishment is attached. XXIII. One half of the Chamber of Deputies shall be renewed every 2 years. The Deputies who are to go out at the expiration of the first 2 years, shall be determined by lot. Chamber of Senators. XXIV. The Senate shall be composed of 3 Senators for each Department; of which number not more than one shall be a Secular Ecclesiastic. XXV. Their Election shall be conducted in the following manner: 1. The Provincial Electoral Colleges shall each form a list of 2 Individuals for each Senator, one half of whom shall, invariably, consist of Citizens who are either Natives, or Inhabitants, of the other Provinces of the Department. 2. These Lists shall be transmitted to the respective Departmental Junta (for the first time to the Congress, or, during its recess, to the Commission which it may appoint for the purpose,) which shall elect from them, at the rate of 3 Senators for each Department. XXVI. There shall be also 2 Substitute Senators for each Department, elected in the same manner as the Senators. A Law shall prescribe the regulations to which these Elections shall be subject. XXVII. If the same Citizen be chosen a Senator and a Deputy, he shall give the preference to the election as Senator. XXVIII. Article XVIII shall also apply to the Election of Senators. XXIX. To be a Senator, it is requisite: 1. That he be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 2. That he have completed the age of 40 years. 3. That he possess either Landed Property yielding a clear revenue of-l,000 dollars a year, a Capital producing annually 1,000 dollars, or a yearly income of that amount, or be a public professor of some science. 4. That he have not been convicted judicially of any crime meriting corporal or infamous punishment. XXX. None can be Senators who are not qualified for Deputies. XXXI. It is the especial duty of the Senate, to determine whether there be ground for instituting proceedings, in accusations brought by the Chamber of Deputies; and the votes of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators shall be necessary, in order to the passing of a Sentence. XXXII. The Sentence of the Senate, in such cases, shall have only the effect of suspending the accused from his office, who shall still remain liable to legal prosecution. XXXIII. One third of the Senate shall be renewed every 2 years. The Senators, the third on the Lists, shall retire at the end of the



first 2 years; those named in the second place, at the end of the second 2 years, and thenceforward, those who have been longest' in office. Duties to be performed by the 2 Chambers in common. XXXIV. The 2 Chambers shall assemble on the 29th of July in each year, whether summoned or not. Their sittings shall be continued without intermission for 90 days, reckoning only those on which business is actually transacted, to which may be added 30 more, if the Congress shall so decide. XXXV. Each Chamber shall inquire into the merits of the Elections of its respective Members, resolving any doubts which may exist concerning them. XXXVI. Each Chamber shall conform to the Regulations which the Congress shall, from time to time, prescribe, for its internal arrangements, without prejudice to the reforms which experience may suggest, if both Chambers concur in their adoption. XXXVII. Each Chamber has the exclusive right of police within the house of its Sittings, and of regulating whatever has reference to the free exercise of its functions, out of it. XXXVIII. No sittings can be held in either of the 2 Chambers, unless two-thirds of the whole number of their respective Members be present, but those who are present may compel the absent to attend, to perform their duties. XXXIX. The sittings shall be public, and those affairs only shall be transacted in secret, which by their nature may require it. XL. Every Senator and Deputy, before he enters upon the exercise of his office, shall take an Oath, before the President of his respective Chamber, to discharge his duties faithfully, and to act in every thing agreeably to the Constitution. XLI. Any Member of the 2 Chambers may, in his own Chamber, present Projects of Law in writing, or make such propositions as he may think proper, with the exception of those which, agreeably to Article XXI, belong exclusively to the Chamber of Deputies. XLII. The Deputies and Senators shall not be molested on account of their opinions, and shall not be prosecuted for those which they may have expressed in the performance of their duty. XLII . During the sittings of Congress, the Deputies and Senators shall not be liable to civil process, nor shall they be arrested for debt. Criminal accusations against any Member of the Chambers, from the day of his election until 2 months after his functions have ceased, can only be instituted agreeably to Article XXXI. XLIV. The powers of the Deputies and Senators cannot be revoked during the time of their office, except for an offence tried and determined conformably to Articles XXXI and XXXII. XLV. No Member of the 2 Chambers can obtain for himself, during



his period of office, any promotion other than that by advancement in his own profession. XLVI. Every Senator and Deputy may be re-elected, and in the case only of re-election shall they be allowed to excuse themselves from undertaking the trust. XLVII. The salary of the Deputies and Senators shall be determined by a Law. Duties of Congress. XLVIII. The duties of Congress are: 1. To frame Laws; and to interpret, modify, or repeal those existing. 2. To approve the regulations of all National Bodies or Establishments. 3. To appoint the Military and Naval Forces, in time of peace and of war, and to make Ordinances or Regulations for their organisation and employment. 4. To declare War, after hearing the Executive Power, and to require the Executive to negotiate for Peace. 5. To approve Treaties of Peace, and other Conventions, relating to Foreign relations. 6. To give instructions for the conclusion of Concordates with the Apostolic See, to approve them by its Ratification, and to regulate the exercise of the right of presenting to Benefices. 7. To give or refuse its consent to the entrance of Foreign Troops, and to the stationing of Squadrons in the Territory and Ports of the Republic. 8. To fix the general Expenditure, impose the necessary Contributions to provide for it, regulate their collection, determine their application, and require the Accounts, annually, from the Executive Power. 9. To contract Loans, within and without the Republic, on the faith of the National Credit, and to determine the guarantees for the fulfilment of them. 10. To recognize the National Debt, and to fix the means for its consolidation and redemption. 11. To determine the weight, alloy, type, and denomination of the current coin, and to render uniform the weights and measures. 12. To regulate domestic and foreign commerce. 13. To settle the privileges which every Port is to enjoy. 14. To verify the election of the President and Vice President of the Republic, made by the Electoral Colleges, or to order a new election if they be not elected according to Law. 15. To create or suppress Public Employments, and to assign to them the corresponding salaries. 16. To grant Letters of Citizenship. 17. To establish Charitable Institutions. 


18. To form general plans of public Education and Instruction; and to promote the advancement of the arts and sciences. 19. To grant Patents for a determinate time, to the authors or proprietors of any invention or improvement, useful to the Republic. 20. To adjust the territorial division and demarkation, having previously heard the Juntas of Departments. 21. To grant rewards to Corporate Bodies, or persons who may have rendered eminent services to the Nation; and to decree honours to the memory of great men. .2. To grant amnesties and general pardons, when the public good may require it. 23. To give extraordinary authority to the Executive Power, but only for the time necessary, in the case of invasion by the Enemy, or of sedition, if the public security shall require it: on which occasions, it shall be necessary, that two-thirds of both Chambers concur in the measure, and that the Executive Power shall state, circumstantially, the reasons which induce it to make the proposition. 24. To transfer to some other place the residence of the three Supreme Powers, when required by weighty circumstances, and sanctioned by two-thirds of the existing Members of the Congress. Enactment and Promulgation of the Laws. XLIX. The initiative of Laws may take place in either of the two Chambers, excepting those which, by Article XXI.., appertain exclusively to the Chamber of Deputies. L. Are initiatives of Law : 1. Projects presented by Senators or Deputies. 2. Projects presented by the Executive Power through the medium of its Ministers. LI. All Projects of Law, without exception, shall be discussed under an observance of the forms, intervals, and mode of procedure, in the discussions and manner of voting, prescribed in the Regulations concerning the Debates. LII. When a Project has been approved in the Chamber where it originates, it shall be carried to the other, in order that after being discussed there, it may be either approved or rejected. LIII. When a Project has been approved by an absolute majority in each Chamber, it shall be laid before the Executive Power, which shall sign and publish it immediately, unless it have any observations to make thereupon. LIV. If the Executive Power have any observations to make, it shall return the Project with them to the Chamber of its origin, within 10 days of actual sitting. LV. When the Project, together with the observations of the Executive Power, shall have been reconsidered in both Chambers, if it be


approved by two-thirds of the Members present, of that Chamber in which it had its origin, and by an absolute majority of the other, it shall be considered as sanctioned, and be carried into effect; but if it do not obtain the votes just mentioned, it cannot be taken into consideration until the following Session, when it may be proposed anew. LVI. If the Executive Power do not return it, at the expiration of the 10 days of actual sitting, the Project shall be considered as passed, and shall be promulgated; unless within that period the Congress shall close its sittings, in which case the return may be made within the first 8 days of the ensuing Session. LVII. If a Project be rejected by the revising Chamber, it shall be carried to the Executive Power, which shall return it to the same Chamber, with its observations, within 10 days of actual sitting. LVIII. If the observations of the Executive Power coincide with those of the Chamber which rejects it, the Project cannot be again presented until the following Session. LIX. If the Executive Power agree with the Chamber which approves a Project, it shall be reconsidered by that which rejects it; and if the latter continue inflexible, it shall be in like manner deferred until the next Session ; but if it approve, the Law shall be deemed to be sanctioned. LX. If a part only of a Project of Law be rejected by the Chamber which revises it, the same course shall be pursued respecting it as if the whole were rejected. LXI. In the case of additions being made to a Project by the Chamber which revises it, the forms observed with regard to the Project, shall also be observed with regard to the additions. LXII. In the interpretation, modification, or repeal of existing Laws, the same forms shall be observed as in their enactment. LXII[. The Resolutions of Congress shall be communicated to the President of the Republic, signed by the Presidents of the two Chambers, and their Secretaries. LXIV. Congress, in promulgating its Laws, shall make use of the following form: " The Congress of the Peruvian Republic has enacted the following Law: [insert the Law.] Let it be communicated to the Executive Power, in order that it may provide what is necessary for its fulfilment, and for its being printed, published, and circulated." LXV. The Executive Power shall cause the Laws to be executed, observed, and fulfilled, commencing and concluding them in the following form: , President of the Republic. Whereas the " The Citizen Congress has passed the following Law: [insert the Law.] Therefore I order that it be printed, published, circulated, and duly executed."



Departmental Juntas. LXVI. In the Capital of each Department there shall be a Junta, composed of 2 Individuals for each Province. LXVII. The object of these Juntas is to promote the interests of the Department in general, and of the Provinces in particular. LXVIII. The election of their Members shall be made in the same form as that of the Deputies, according to the Law; in like manner a Substitute shall be named for each Province. LXIX. To be a Member of the Departmental Junta, the same qualifications are required, as for a Deputy to the Chamber of Representatives of the Nation; but with the indispensable condition of having resided 7 years in the Province. LXX. The Prefect of the Department, and his Secretary, the Sub-prefects of the Provinces, and the other Civil Officers paid by the Public Treasury, the Commanders of the Army, the Reverend the Bishops, their Provisors, the Diocesan Governors, the Canons, and Ecclesiastics who have the cure of souls, cannot be Members of this Junta. LXXI. It is the duty of the Juntas to try the Elections of their Members, and to resolve the doubts which may occur respecting them. LXXII. The Members of the Departmental Juntas shall enjoy the same prerogative, as by Article XLII. is granted to the Deputies and Senators. LXXIII. The Departmental Juntas shall open their Session every year, whether summoned or not, on the 1st day of June. They shall be public, and shall continue until the 31st of August; being governed in their internal proceedings by such regulations as the Congress shall prescribe for them. LXXIV. The Prefect of the Departments shall annually open the Session of the Juntas, and shall communicate to them a written Report on the state of the Public Affairs, and of the measures which he may consider necessary for the benefit of the Department. LXXV. The Duties of these Juntas are: 1. To propose, discuss, and decide upon, the means of encouraging Agriculture, Mining, and the other branches of industry, in their respective Provinces. 2. To promote Public Education and Instruction, agreeably to the plans approved by Congress. 3. To promote and superintend Charitable Institutions, and, in general, whatever regards the internal police of the Department, excepting the Public Security. 4. To make a repartition of the Taxes payable by the Department, and, in case of complaint, to take cognizance of those which may respectively be imposed by the Municipalities of Towns. 5. To apportion the contingent of Men to be provided by the Department, for the Army and Navy.


6. To take care that the Chiefs of the National Militia maintain the full number of their respective Corps disposable, and in the best possible state of military discipline. 7. To see that the Municipalities fulfil their Duties, and to inform the Prefect of the abuses they may observe. 8. To examine the Accounts which the Municipalities shall render annually of the particular Funds of the Towns. 9. To draw up, every 5 years, Statistical Tables of the Department. 10. To endeavour to reclaim and civilize the Tribes of Indians, contiguous to the Department, and to attract them into society by pacific means. 11. To examine the Statements of the Receipts and Expenditures of the Department, and to transmit their observations upon them to the Administration of Finance. 12. To give an account to Congress of infractions of the Constitution. 13. To elect Senators from the Lists prepared by the Provincial Electoral Colleges. 14. To present to the Chief of the Executive Power 2 Lists, each containing the names of 3 Candidates for the Prefecture of the Department, one half of whom shall be neither Natives nor Residents of the Department. 15. To present to the Chief of the Executive Power, double Lists for the Sub-prefectures, each List to contain 3 Candidates ; one List, however, not to include either Natives or Inhabitants of the respective Provinces, but of the other Provinces of the Department. 16. To present to the Prefect, a List of 3 Candidates, for the Governors of Districts. 17. To form double Lists, of 3 Individuals each, from whom the Senate is to chuse 3, in order to select therefrom, respectively, the Member of the Department for the Supreme Court of Justice, which latter List may consist of Jurisconsults who are Citizens of any of the Departments. 18. To present double Lists, each of 3 Individuals, for Members of the Superior Tribunal of the Department, half of them to be of the Legal Profession, but neither Natives nor Inhabitants of the Department. 19. To present to the Superior Court, double Lists of 3 Persons each, for Judges of the First Instance. .20. To elect 6 Individuals, from the List which the Ecclesiastical Chapter shall form, for the Diocesan Bishop, according to the Law, one half of whom shall be from without the Diocese, but born in the Republic, or shall have served 20 years in the Peruvian Church, and have been naturalized in one of the new Republics of America.
 
The act of Election shall be transmitted, by the proper Officer, to the Senate, or, during its recess, to the Council of State. 21. To inform the President of.the Republic. of the Persons whom they may judge most fit for all the Civil Employments of the Department, and for the Prebends of the Diocese. 22. To examine the Foreigners comprehended in Article IV. Section 4, and to inform Congress regarding others who may merit Letters of Citizenship. LXXVI. The funds, of which, for the present, the Juntas shall be at liberty to dispose, are the Bridge and Road Tolls, the Communal Estates and the rents of Natives, which may be intended for their use, and the Funds of the Municipalities, after deduction of the attendant expences. LXXVII. They shall also propose to the Congress such plans as they may deem practicable, for the increase of their funds. LXXVIII. The Propositions of the Juntas, concerning the first of their duties (Article LXXV.) shall be sent, through the medium of the Prefect, and accompanied with his observations, to the Executive Power; which shall lay them before Congress, where they may be sanctioned after one discussion in each Chamber. LXXIX. If Congress be not assembled, the Executive Power, after hearing the Council of State, may order the Propositions to be put in execution provisionally, should the urgency of them demand an immediate decision. The Executive Power must report all such decisions to Congress as soon as it assembles. LXXX. One half of the Departmental Juntas shall be renewed every 2 years. Those named in the second place shall retire at the end of the first 2 years, and those afterwards who have been longest in Office. LXXXI. The Members of these Juritas shall have the salary which a Law will assign to them.
TITLE V.-Executive Power.

LXXXII. The Supreme Executive Power shall be exercised by a Citizen, under the denomination of President of the Republic. LXXXIII. There shall also be a Vice-President, to supply the place of the President in the event of his physical or mental incapacity, or of his taking the command of the Army ; and in the absence of both, the office shall be exercised, provisionally, by the President of the Senate, his functions as Senator being, for the time, suspended. LXXXIV. The exercise of the Executive Power cannot be for life, nor can it be hereditary. The duration of the office of President of the Republic shall be for 4 years: to which the same Individual may be immediately re-elected once, but, subsequently, not until after an interval of the same period. LXXXV. To be eligible for the office of President or Vice-President of the Republic, the Individual must have been born in the Territory of Peru, be 30 years of age, and possess the other qualifications required by this Constitution for a Senator. LXXXVI. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the Provincial Electoral Colleges, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Law, which shall be founded upon the following bases: 1. Each Provincial Electoral College shall elect, by an absolute majority of votes, 2 Citizens, of whom 1 at least, must not be a native nor a resident of the Department, and it shall transmit the Act of the Election to the President of the Senate. 2. The opening of the Acts, and their verification and scrutiny, shall belong to the Congress. 3. He who shall obtain an absolute majority of the votes of all the Electors of the Provincial Colleges, shall be the President. 4. If 2 Individuals obtain the said majority, he shall be the President who has the greatest number of votes. If the number be equal. the Congress shall elect one of them, by an absolute plurality of votes, the other being the Vice-President. 5. When no one obtains an absolute majority, the Congress shall elect the President from the 3 who have obtained the greatest or an equal number of suffrages ; and from the 2 that remain, it shall elect the Vice- President. 6. The election of the President and Vice-President in these cases, must be concluded in a single sitting, and there must be present at least two-thirds of the whole of the Members of each Chamber. LXXXVII. The President and Vice-President, in order to exercise their office, shall take the following Oath, in the presence of the Congress. I, N. N. Swear by God and the Holy Evangelists, that I will exercise faithfully the Office of President (or Vice-President), which the Republic has intrusted to me: that 1 will protect the Religion of the State, preserve the integrity and Independence of the Nation, and faithfully observe, and cause to be observed, its Constitution and Laws. LXXXVIII. The President is responsible for the acts of his Administration. LXXXIX. The Salaries of the President and Vice-President shall be determined by a Law; and shall not be augmented or diminished during the time of their being in Office. XC. The duties of the Executive Power are: 1. The President is Chief of the General Administration of the Republic. 2. He issues the requisite orders for proceeding to the popular Elections, at the time, and in the manner and form, prescribed by Law. 3. He convokes Congress at the time fixed by the Constitution, and, extraordinarily, when important circumstances require it. 4. He opens the Session of Congress annually, presenting a Message on the state of the Republic, and on the improvements, or reforms, which he may consider expedient.


5. He publishes, circulates, and causes to be executed, the Laws of Congress. 6. He issues Decrees and Orders, for the better observance of the Constitution and Laws. 7. He makes observations on the Projects of Law transmitted to him by Congress. 8. He watches over the prompt administration of Justice in the Tribunals and Courts, and the execution of the Sentences which they pronounce. 9. He is the Commander in Chief of the Naval and Military Forces, and disposes of them for the internal and external security of the Republic. 10. He declares War, in pursuance of the resolution of Congress. 11. He grants Licenses for Privateers. 12. He disposes of the National Militia for internal security, within the limits of his Department, and out of it, with the consent of Congress, and, during its recess, with that of the Council of State. 13. He concludes Treaties of Peace, Amity, Alliance, and other Conventions respecting Foreign Relations, with the approbation of Congress. 14. He receives the Foreign Ministers. 15. He appoints the Diplomatic Envoys and Consuls, and the Colonels and other Superior Officers of the Army and Navy, with the approbation of the Senate, and, during its recess, with that of the Council of State. 16. He appoints the other Persons employed in the Army and Navy, in conformity with the Laws. 17. He gives discharges, grants furloughs, and regulates the retiring allowances of the Military, in conformity with the Laws. 18. He watches over the collection and appropriation of the Taxes, and other Revenues of the Public Treasury. 19. He nominates and removes, at pleasure, the Ministers of State. 20. He nominates the Members of the Supreme and Superior Courts of Justice, from a List prepared by the Senate of 3 Individuals; and the other Judges and Persons, or dependents of those Tribunals, from a list of 3 Persons presented by the respective Courts. 21. He nominates the Persons to be employed in the Finance Department, according to Law. 22. He nominates the Prefects and Sub-prefects, from a double list of 3 Persons each, presented by the Departmental Juntas. 23. He concludes Concordates with the Apostolic See, in conformity with the Instructions of the Congress. 24. He confirms or rejects Counciliary Decrees, and Pontifical Bulls, Briefs and Rescripts, with the consent of Congress, if they contain general dispositions; with that of the Senate, and, during its recess, of the Council of State, if they relate to Private Individuals; and


after hearing the Supreme Court of Justice, if they relate to matters of litigation. 25. He elects and presents to Archbishopricks and Bishopricks, from a list of 3 Individuals submitted to him by the Senate, or, during its recess, by the Council of State. 26. He elects and presents to the Dignitaries, Canonries, Prebendaries, Curacies, and other Ecclesiastical Benefices belonging to the Church, conformably to the Laws. 27. He appoints to all Employments not interdicted to him by the Constitution. 28. He has the chief superintendence of all branches of the Police and Public Establishments, which are maintained at the expense of the State, under their respective Laws and Ordinances. 29. He grants Letters of Citizenship. 30. He may commute capital punishments to Criminals, after receiving information from the Tribunal or Judge who tried the Cause, when weighty and powerful motives require it, and in the cases not excepted by the Law. 31. He decides, conformably to the Ordinance, and in the cases therein specified, upon the Reports addressed to him, respecting Sentences pronounced by Courts Martial. 32. He suspends to the extent of 3 months, those Functionaries under his direction, who commit any infraction of his Decrees and Orders, if they be not contrary to Law, and he deprives them of half of their salary on sufficient grounds; and when he is of opinion that they ought to be prosecuted, he transmits the particulars of the case to the respective Tribunal. XCI. The restrictions of the Executive Power are 1. The President can neither delay nor suspend, under any circumstances, the Constitutional Elections, nor the meetings of Congress. 2. He cannot, without permission of Congress, quit the Territory of the Republic whilst in office, nor during 6 months afterwards. 3. He cannot command the Armed Force in person, without the consent of Congress, or, during its recess, of the Council of State; and, when he shall so command it, the Vice-President shall take charge of the Government. 4. He cannot take cognizance of any judicial matter. 5. He cannot deprive any one of personal liberty; but, in case the Public security require it, he may issue an order of arrest; being bound, however, to place the Person detained, at the disposal of the respective Judge, within 48 hours. Of the Council of State. XCII. During the recess of Congress, a Council of State shall assemble, composed of 10 Senators, elected by an absolute majority of both Chambers.

XCIII. The Vice-President of the Republic is the President of this Council, and, in his absence, the President of the Senate. XCIV. The Duties of this Council are: 1. To watch over the observance of the Constitution and Laws, drawing up a Report of any infringement thereof, in order to its being laid before Congress. 2. To give their opinion to the President of the Republic in important matters of Government. 3. To summon, of their own accord, or on the proposition -of the President of the Republic, an extraordinary meeting of Congress; but it shall be necessary, in either case, that two-thirds of the Councillors .present concur in the measure. 4. To discharge the functions of the Senate, described in the 12th, 15th, 24th, and 25th, Paragraphs of Article XC. and in the 3rd .Restriction of Article XCI. 5. To administer the oath to the President of the Senate, when the case occurs of his exercising the Executive Power, according to Article LXXXIII. 6. During the recess of Congress, the Council of State shall discharge the duty of the Senate described in Article XXXI.; the Fiscal of the Supreme Court acting as the accuser of any Member of the Chambers or of the Supreme Court, in offences of Treason, attempts .against the public safety, or others which merit corporal punishment. Ministers of State. XCV. The affairs of the Government of the Republic shall be transacted by the Ministers of State, the number of whom shall be fixed by Law. XCVI. The same qualifications are required for a Minister of State -as for the President of the Republic. XCVII. The Ministers shall sign the Decrees and Orders of the * President, each in his respective Department, without which requisite they shall not be obeyed. XCVIII. They shall render an account to each Chamber at the opening of the Session, of the state of their respective Department, and shall also make the Reports which may be demanded of them. XCIX. The Minister of Finance shall present, annually, to the Chamber of Deputies, a general Statement of the Receipts and Disbursements of the National Treasury, and, at the same time, a general Estimate of all the Public Expences, and of the Contributions and National Revenues, for the ensuing year. C. The Ministers are responsible for any acts of the President which they may authorize by their signatures, and which may be contrary to the Constitution and Laws. CI. They shall prepare Regulations for the internal arrangement of their Departments, for the approbation of Congress.


CII. The Salaries of the Ministers shall be determined by Law, and shall not be augmented or diminished during the time of their being in office. TITLE VI.-Judicial Power. CIII. The Judicial Power is independent, and shall be exercised by the Tribunals and Judges. CIV. The office of Judge is permanent, and the Judges cannot be dismissed except after a legal Trial and Sentence. CV. A Supreme Court of Justice shall be established in the Capital of the Republic, composed of one Member, elected for each of the Departments. CVI. Superior Courts shall be established in the Departmental Capitals, and Tribunals of First Instance in the Provinces; on the previous petition of the Departmental Juntas, for the establishment of both or either. CVII. Special Tribunals of Commerce and Mining shall be established. The Law shall determine the places where they are to be established and their peculiar attributes.
-

Supreme Court of Justice.

CVIII. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of 7 Members and a Fiscal (Attorney-General, or Procurator), it being competent to Congress to augment their number as it may see fit. CIX. The President of the Supreme Court shall be elected by the Members of it, from their own body, and shall continue in Office one year. CX. To be a Member of the Supreme Court of Justice it is requisite : 1. That he be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 2. That he be 40 years of age, have been born in the Republic, or in some other State of America, and have served 10 years in the Superior Tribunals of Peru. 3. That he have been a Member of one of the Superior Courts; or, until the organization of the Judicial Power agreeably to this Constitution, that he have exercised the profession of Advocate, for 20 years, with good repute. CXI. The duties of the Supreme Court of Justice are: 1. To take cognizance of criminal proceedings instituted against the President, or Vice-President of the Republic, the Members of the two Chambers, and the Ministers of State, agreeably to Articles XXXI, and XXXI I. 2. Of matters in dispute between Individuals of the Diplomatic Body and the Consuls resident in the Republic, and of offences against the law of Nations.
 
3. Of complaints relative to Contracts entered into by the Supreme Government or its Agents. 4. Of questions of right between the Departments and Provinces, and between the Towns of different Departments. 5. Of Appeals of Nullity against sentences, in the Last Instance, by the Superior Courts, in the mode and form laid down by the Law. 6. Of the official conduct of the Prefects, in the Second and Third Instance. 7. Of the official conduct of such other Persons holding public employments, as by the Laws are subject to such enquiry, in tile Third Instance ;-and 8. Of the causes relating to Prizes, Forfeitures, and Contrabands, and of all litigated matters of Finance, in the Third Instance, agreeably to the. Law. 9. To render effective the responsibility of the Superior Courts. 10. To accommodate all differences among the Superior Courts, and between them and the other Tribunals. 11. To give their opinion as to the propriety of confirming or rejecting such Pontifical Bulls, Briefs, and Rescripts, as concern matters in dispute. 12. To propose to Congress, annually, whatever may be conducive to the due administration of Justice. 13. To hear the doubts of the other Tribunals and Courts upon' the meaning of any Law, and to lay before Congress their opinion, together with the reasons on which it is founded. 14. To watch over the prompt disposal of the Causes pending in the Superior Courts. CXII. In order to render effective the responsibility of the Supreme Court, or of any of its Members, the Congress shall appoint, within the first month of the ordinary Sittings of each 2 years, a Tribunal, consisting of 7 Judges, and a Fiscal, to be drawn by lot from a List of double that number, and whom it shall elect, by an absolute majority of votes, from Lawyers who are not Members of Congress. Superior Courts of Justice. CXIII. The Superior Courts of Justice shall be composed of the number of Members and Fiscals which the Law may appoint. Their President shall be chosen in the same manner as the President of the Supreme Court (Article CIX.). CXIV. To be a Member of a Superior Court it is requisite: 1. That he be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 2. That he be 30 years of age. 3. That he have been a Judge of the First Instance, a Reporter, a Sub- Fiscal, or, until such time as the Judicial Power, according to this Constitution, shall be organized, that he have exercised the profession of the Law for 10 years, with good repute


CXV. The Duties of the Superior Courts are: 1. To take cognizance, in the Second and Third Instance, of all Civil Causes of Common Law, and of Commerce and Mining, assisted by a Coadjutor of each of those professions, respectively. 2. Of Criminal Causes, until Trial by Jury be established; 3. Of Causes regarding the succession to Church Preferments or Ecclesiastical Chaplaincies; 4. Of Appeals against violence. 5. In the First Instance, of those Causes, whereof, in the Second, cognizance is taken by the Supreme Court (Section 6, Article CXI.) 6. In the Second Instance, of those, whereof, in the Third, cognizance is taken by the Supreme Court with the respective Coadjutor. (Section 7 and 8, Article CXI.) 7. To adjust differences between the Inferior Tribunals. 8. To watch over the prompt decision of the Causes in the Tribunals of the First Instance. Tribunals of the First Instance. CXVI. To be a Judge of the First Instance it is requisite: 1. That he be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights. 2. That he be 25 years of age. 3. That he be an Advocate admitted to practice in some Tribunal of the Republic, and have exercised the profession for 3 years, at least, with good repute. CXVII. The duties of these Judges are: 1. To take cognizance, in the First Instance, of the Civil Causes of their District, and of the Criminal ones, according to the existing form, until Juries be established, and, when they shall have been established, to apply the Law. 2. To take cognizance, in the First Instance, of Causes respecting the succession to Church Preferment and Ecclesiastical Chaplaincies. CXVIII. The Judges of the First Instance are responsible for their conduct to the Superior Courts. Administration of Justice. CXIX. Justice shall be administered in the name of the Republic. CXX. Justices of the Peace shall be established in every Town, in order to conciliation, without which, or the having attempted it, no Civil or Criminal Action for Injuries shall be instituted, with the exception of the Fiscal Actions and others which the Law may except. CXXI. The matters of which these Justices of Peace may take cognizance by oral testimony, and the form of procedure, shall be determined by the Law. CXXII. Civil Trials shall be public; the Judges shall deliberate in secret; they shall explain the grounds for their Sentences, and the latter shall be pronounced in open Court.


CXXIII. Criminal Causes shall be decided by Juries, the institution of which shall form the subject of a distinct Law. In the mean time the Judges shall decide, giving publicity to their Sentences, and assigning reasons for them. CXXIV. There shall not be more than Three Instances in trials, the third being limited to the Causes which the Law may designate. The appeal against notorious injustice is abolished. CXXV. All trial by commission is prohibited. CXXVI. No Tribunal or Judge can, in any case, abridge or suspend the judicial forms. CXXVII. No one can be taken into custody, without previous information of the fact for which he may deserve corporal punishment, .and a written order of the competent Judge ; but a Criminal, taken in the act, may be arrested by any person, and conducted before the Judge. A criminal may also be arrested, without previous information, in the cases contemplated in Article XCI. (Restriction 5.) The examination of the Prisoner can in no case be delayed more than 48 hours. CXXVIII. A Law shall determine the cases wherein Arrest for Debt may be permitted. CXXIX. Are abolished; 1. The administering of Oaths, in every examination and confession in a Criminal Cause, respecting a person's own act. 2. Confiscation of property. 3. Torture. 4. Every cruel punishment, or punishment of extreme infamy. 5. Capital punishment shall be limited by the Criminal Code (which the Congress is forming) to the cases which exclusively deserve it. 6. Seizure of property shall be confined solely to the cases in which there appears to be pecuniary responsibility ; and shall be in proportion only to the amount to which this may extend. CXXX. Prevarication, bribery, departure from, or suspension of, the judicial forms and illegal proceedings against personal liberty and the security of domicile, afford grounds for public accusation against the Judges. CXXXI. All Laws which are not opposed to this Constitution shall remain in vigour and force until the organization of the Codes.
TITLE

VII.-Interior Government of the Republic.

CXXXIl. The superior political Government of the Departments shall be exercised by a Citizen, denominated Prefect, under the immediate authority of the President of the Republic. C XXXIII. That of each Province, by a Citizen denominated Sub-Prefect, under that of the Prefect. CXXXIV. That of the Districts, by a Citizen denominated Governor, under that of the Sub-Prefect.



CXXXV. The duration of the Offices of Prefect and Sub-Prefect shall be for 4 years: that of the Governors for 2 years, who shall, however, be removable sooner if their conduct render it necessary, in" conformity with the Laws. CXXXVI. To be a Prefect, Sub-Prefect, or Governor, it is required:-that he be a Citizen in the exercise of his rights, 30 years of age, and of undoubted character. CXXXV It. The duties of those Functionaries are: 1. To maintain order and public security within their respective Districts. 2. To cause the Constitution, the Laws of Congress, and the Decrees and Orders of the Executive Power, to be carried into effect. 3. To cause the Sentences of the Tribunals and Courts to be duly executed. 4. To take care that the Functionaries under their controul, discharge their duties, faithfully. CXXXVIII. The Prefects have also the economical superintendence of the Public Revenue of the Department. A Law shall determine minutely the duties of these Authorities. CXXXIX. They are restricted ; 1. From obstructing in any manner, or interfering in, the Popular Elections. 2. From preventing the assembling, and free deliberations, of the Departmental Juntas. 3. From performing the functions of Judges: but, if the public tranquillity furnish just ground for the apprehension of any individual, they may order the same immediately,-placing the person arrested at the disposal of the Judge, within 48 hours, and transmitting to him a statement of the accusation. Municipalities. CXL. In every Town which, according to the Census, ought to have a parochial College, there shall be a Council of Citizens, denominated the Municipality. CXLI. The Municipalities have the direction of the local interests: the regulations which they may make, in respect of them, are subject to the, approbation of the Departmental Juntas, and cannot be contrary to the Laws, or to the general interest. CXLII. The Municipalities have no representative character whatever, and cannot, in any case, or under any pretext, take part, or interfere, in matters which relate to the general interests ; and which appertain to any of the three powers of the Republic. Their applications to the Authorities must be confined exclusively to the immediate concerns of the Towns. CXLIII. The number of Municipals, the rules of their Election, and their peculiar attributes, shall be determined by a Law. 
 
TITLE VIII.-Public Force.

CXLIV. The Public Force is composed of the Army, National Militia, and Navy. CXLV. The object of the Public Force is, to defend the State against external enemies, to secure internal order, and to support the execution of the Laws. CXLVI. The Public Force is essentially obedient; it cannot deliberate. CXLVII. The National Militia shall be composed of the Civic Corps, which are to be formed in all the Provinces. CXLVIII. Congress shall enact the Ordinances for the regulation of the Army, National Militia, and Navy; those which are now in force being, in the mean time, observed.
TITLE IX.-General Dispositions.

CXLIX. The Constitution guarantees Civil Liberty, personal Security, Equality before the Law, and the property of Citizens, in the following manner: CL. No Peruvian is obliged to do what the Law does not command, nor is he prevented from doing what it does not prohibit. CLI. No Law can have a retrospective effect. CLII. No one is born a Slave in the Republic, nor can any one enter it without being immediately free. CLIII. All may communicate their thoughts verbally, or in writing, and publish them by means of the Press, without previous censorship, but under the responsibility which the Law may determine. CLIV. Every Peruvian may remain in or depart from the Territory of the Republic, according as it may suit him, and may carry with him his property, without prejudice to the right of any third party, and he must also observe the regulations of the Police. CLV. The house of every Peruvian is an inviolable asylum; forcible entrance shall be permitted only in the cases and manner which the Law may determine. CLVI. The secrecy of Letters is inviolable ; the Administration of the Posts is responsible for this guarantee. CLVIL All Peruvians are equal before the Law, whether it reward or punish. CLVIII. All Citizens are admissible to Public Employments, without any other difference than that of their talents and virtues. CLIX. The Taxes shall be levied, proportionably, on the Citizens, without any exception or privilege whatever. CLX. The Constitution does not recognize hereditary employments or privileges, nor any lay entails. All properties are alienable, to

 
whatever object they may belong. The Law shall determine the mode and form of making these alienations. CIXI. The preservation of the independence of the Judicial Power is the right of all Citizens. No Authority can remove pending Causes to its own jurisdiction, institute proceedings concerning them, or revive Processes which have been concluded. CLXII. No Peruvian can be deprived of the right of terminating his differences by means of Arbitrators. CLXIII. The Prisons are places of security, and not of punishment; all severity not necessary to the custody of the Prisoners is prohibited. CLXIV. Every Citizen has a right to be considered of good repute, so long as he is not declared a delinquent by the Laws. CLXV. The right of Property is inviolable. If the welfare of the State, under the sanction of the Law, require the property of any Citizen, he shall be previously indemnified to the full value thereof. CLXVI. Every kind of labour, industry, or trade, is free, provided it be not opposed to the habits, or to the security and health, of the Citizens. CLXVII. Those who invent, improve, or introduce any new means of promoting industry, have an exclusive property in their discoveries or productions ; the Law secures to them either the necessary patent, or a compensation for the loss which they may suffer in the case of their being made public. CLXVIII. All Citizens have the right of presenting Petitions to Congress, or to the Executive Power, provided they be subscribed with their names, individually. None but Bodies legally constituted possess the privilege of presenting Petitions, signed collectively, for objects connected with the discharge of their duties. CLXIX. No Individual, or assemblage of Individuals, or Body legally constituted, can present Petitions in the name of the People, or arrogate to itself the title of the "Sovereign People." The violation of this and the preceding Article is an outrage against the Public Security. CLXX. The Constitution guaranties the Public Debt, domestic and foreign: its consolidation and redemption merit the especial consideration of Congress. CLXXI. It also guarantees gratuitous primary instruction to all Citizens ; the Institutions in which may be taught the Sciences, Literature, and the Arts; the inviolability of literary property ; and the Establishments of piety and charity. CLXXII. The protection of the political and civil rights of the Citizens demands of every Member of Society the duty of contributing towards the support of that protection by means of Arms and Contributions, in proportion to his strength and property.



TITLE X.-Observance and Revision of the Constitution. CLXXIII. Congress, immediately after the opening of its Session,

shall examine whether the Constitution has been exactly observed, and shall take such steps as may be proper in regard to any infringements of it. CLXXIV. Every Peruvian may remonstrate before Congress, or the Executive Power, against infringements of the Constitution. CLXXV. Every Public Functionary, whatever may be his duties, shall, on receiving possession of office, take the oath of fidelity to the Constitution. CLXXVI. This Constitution shall be observed, without alteration or amendment, for 5 years from the date of its publication. CLXXVII. A National Convention, authorized to examine and reform this Constitution, in whole or in part, shall be assembled in the month of July 1833. CLXXVIII. If before the period fixed, very weighty circumstances should require the alteration or amendment referred to in the preceding Article, Congress may anticipate the time at which the National Convention shall be assembled. CLXXIX. In order thereto, the proposition, which may originate in either of the 2 Chambers, must be supported by the fourth part of its Members, and be read 3 times, at an interval of 6 days between each reading. CLXXX. After the third reading, it shall be discussed in the usual manner, two-thirds of the votes in the 2 Chambers being necessary to determine whether the National Convention shall be assembled or not; in the event of the affirmative being voted, the Resolution shall be communicated to the Executive Power, which, if it consent to it, shall proceed immediately to issue the summons. CLXXXI. If the Executive Power return it with observations, the matter shall be reconsidered in the 2 Chambers, and the concurrence of three-fourths of the votes in each shall be necessary to sanction the summons, which shall then be immediately issued. CLXXXII. Congress shall fix the number of Representatives to be deputed to the National Convention, and the rules by which their Elections are to be governed. Given in the Hall of Congress, in Lima, the l8th of March, 1828. [89 signatures of Deputies.] Therefore I order that it be printed, published, circulated, and duly executed. Given in the Government House in Lima, the 18th March, 1828. JOSE DE LA MAR. For His Excellency, the Minister of Government and Foreign Relations, FRANCISCO XAVIER MARIATEGUI.
