



TITLE I.
OF THE NATIon.

CHAPTER I.-Of the Peruvian Nation. I. The Nation of Peru is the union of all Peruvians. II. Peru is, and ever shall be, independent of all Foreign Dominion; and cannot be the Patrimony of any Person or Family. CHAPTER

1.-Of the Territory.

III. The Territory of the Peruvian Republic comprehends the Departments of La Libertad, Junin, Lima, Arequipa, Cuzco, Ayacucho, and Puno. IV. It is divided into Departments, Provinces, and Cantons. V. A Law shall render the division more convenient; and another shall determine its limits, by agreement with the adjoining States. TITLE II.
OF THE RELIGION.

VI. The Religion of Peru is the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman. TITLE III.
OF THE GOVERNMENT.

CHAPTER I.-Form of the Government. VII. The Government of Peru is Popular Representative. VIII. The Sovereignty emanates from the People, and its exercise resides in the Powers which this Constitution establishes. IX. The Supreme Power is divided for its exercise into Four Sections :-The Electoral, Legislative, Executive, and Judicial.



X. Each Power shall exercise the Attributes assigned to it by the Constitution, without exceeding its respective limits.
CHAPTER

II.-Of Peruvians.

XI. Are Peruvians: 1. All who are born in the Territory of the Republic. 2. The Children of a Peruvian Father or Mother, born out of the Territory, so soon as they legally manifest their wishes to domicile in Peru. 3. The Liberators of the Republic, declared as such by the Law of the 12th of February, 1825. 4. Foreigners, who obtain Letters of Naturalization, or who have resided 3 years in the Territory of the Republic. XII. It is the duty of every Peruvian: 1. To live in submission to the Constitution and Laws. 2. To respect and obey the Constituted Authorities. 3. To contribute to the public Expenses. 4. To sacrifice his property, and even life, should the safety of the Republic demand it. 5. To watch over the preservation of public Liberty. XIII. Peruvians who are deprived of the exercise of the Electoral Power, may enjoy all the civil rights conceded to Citizens. XIV. In order to be a Citizen it is necessary: 1. To be a Peruvian. 2. To be married, or more than 25 years of age. 3. To be able to read and write. 4. To have some employment or mode of livelihood; or to profess some art or science, without being subject to another Person in the capacity of domestic Servant. XV. Are Citizens: 1. The Liberators of the Republic. (Art. XI. 3.) 2. Foreigners who have obtained Letters of Citizenship. 3. Foreigners, married to Peruvians, subject to the conditions, 3d and 4th, of Article XIV. XVI. Citizens of the Nations of America, formerly Spanish, shall enjoy the rights of Citizenship in Peru, according to the Treaties which may be made with those Nations. XVII. Those only who are in the exercise of Citizenship, can obtain public Offices and Employments. XVIII. The exercise of Citizenship is suspended: 1. By insanity. 2. By the stigma of being a fraudulent Debtor. 3. By being criminally prosecuted. 4. By being a notorious drunkard, gambler, or mendicant.



5. By purchasing or selling suffrages in the Elections, or by disturbing the order of Election. XIX. The right of Citizenship is lost 1. By treason to the public Cause. 2. By naturalization in a Foreign Country. 3. By having suffered infamous or corporeal punishment, in consequence of a Judicial condemnation. TITLE IV.
OF THE ELECTORAL POWER.

CHAPTER

.- Of the Elections.

XX. The Electoral Power shall be directly exercised by those who are actually Citizens, one Elector being chosen for every 100. XXI. The exercise of the Electoral Power can never be suspended; and the Civil Magistrates, without waiting any order, shall convoke the People precisely at the period prescribed by the Law. XXII. A special Law shall detail the regulations for Elections.
Charter

II.-Of the Electoral Body.

XXIII. The Electoral Body is composed of the Electors named by the Suffrages of the Citizens. XXIV. The Electors being assembled in the Capital of the Province, shall name, by a plurality of votes, a President, 2 Scrutineers, and a Secretary, from their own Body; these shall exercise their functions during the continuance of the Electoral Body. XXV. Each Electoral Body shall continue 4 years; at the termination of which it shall cease, after the installation of that which is to succeed it. XXVI. The Electors shall assemble every Year, on the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, and 6th days of January, in order to exercise the following attributes: 1. To qualify the Citizens who enter upon the exercise of their rights, and to suspend those who may fall under the Provisions of Articles XVIII. and XIX. 2. To name the Members of the Chambers of the first Assembly. 3. To propose a List of Candidates :-lst. To the respective Chambers, of the Members who are to supply the vacancies.-2d. To the Executive Power, of meritorious Individuals to be the Prefect of the Department, the Governor of the Province, and the Corregidors of the Cantons and Towns.-3d. To the Prefect of the Department, the Alcades and Justices of the Peace, who ought to be appointed. -4th. To the Senate, the Members of the Courts, of the Judicial District to which they belong, and the Judges of First Instance.



4. To receive the returns of the popular Elections; to examine the identity of the Persons newly elected, and to declare them Constitutionally appointed. 5. To ask from the Chambers whatever they may deem conducive to the welfare of the Citizens : and to complain of any grievance or injustice which they may have experienced from the Constituted Authorities. TITLE V.
OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER.

CHAPTER

I.-Of the Division, Attributes, and Restrictions, of this Power.

XXVII. The Legislative Power emanates directly from the Electoral Bodies appointed by the people. Its exercise resides in the 3 Chambers; 1st of Tribunes, 2d of Senators, 3d of Censors. XXVIII. Each Chamber shall consist of 24 Members during the first 20 Years. XXIX. On the 20th day of the month of September of each year, the Legislative Body shall assemble of its own accord, without waiting for convocation. XXX. The particular attributes of each Chamber shall be detailed in their proper place. They are, generally: 1. To appoint the President of the Republic, for the first time, and to confirm the nomination of his Successors. 2. To approve of the Vice-President, on the proposal of the President. 3. To select a Place for the residence of the Government, and to transfer it to another, when important circumstances render it necessary, and when two-thirds of the Members, who compose the 3 Chambers, shall have declared it expedient. 4. To decide by a National Judgment, (Juicio Nacional) whether or not a necessity exist, for a legal procedure against the Members of the Chambers, the Vice-President, and the Secretaries of State. 5. To invest the President of the Republic, in time of War or extraordinary danger, with such powers as they may deem indispensable to the salvation of the State. 6. To select from amongst the 3 Candidates whom the Electoral bodies may present, the Members for the vacancies in each Chamber. 7. To make regulations for their interior government, and to punish the Members who infringe them. XXXI. The Members of the Legislative Body shall be eligible to the Offices of Vice-President of the Republic, or Secretaries of State, relinquishing their seats in their respective Chamber. XXXII. No Individual of the Legislative Body shall be arrested


during the period of his Office, unless by order of his respective chamber; or unless he be detected in the commission of a crime which merits capital punishment. XXXIII. The Members of the Legislative Body, shall not be responsible for the opinions which they deliver within their Chamber, in the exercise of their functions. XXXIV. Each Legislature shall continue 4 Years, and each Annual Session 2 months. The opening and closing of the 3 Chambers shall take place at the same time. XXXV. The opening of the Session shall take place annually, in the presence of the President of the Republic, the Vice-President, and the Secretaries of State. XXXVI. The Sittings shall be public, and those questions of State only, which require secrecy, shall be discussed with closed doors. XXXVII. The Questions in each Chamber shall be determined by an absolute majority of the Votes of the Members present. XXXVIII. Persons in Office, who are appointed to be Deputies to the Legislative Body, shall be temporarily relieved from the discharge of their duties by other Individuals. XXXIX. The Restrictions upon the Legislative Body are as follows ; 1. No Sitting can be held of either of the Chambers without the presence of one more than the half of the respective Individuals which compose it; but they may compel the absent Members to attend to their duty. 2. Neither of the Chambers can originate a Project of Law, relative to subjects which the Constitution has entrusted to another Chamber, but it may invite the others to take into consideration such Resolutions as it may submit to them. 3. No Member of the Chambers can obtain for himself, during the period of his Office, any other promotion than that in the regular course of preferment. XL. The Chambers shall be united: 1. At the opening and closing of the Session. 2. For the purpose of inquiring into the conduct of the Ministry, when it be impeached by the Chamber of Censors. 3. For the purpose of revising the Laws, which are returned by the Executive Power. 4. Whenever it be demanded on sufficient grounds, by one of the Chambers, in the case provided for by Article XXX, Attribute 3d. 5. In order to confirm the Vice-President in the exercise of the Office of President. XLI. When the Chambers are united, one of their Presidents shall preside in rotation.

PERU.

CHAPTER II.-Of the Chamber of Tribunes. XLII. In order to be a Tribune, it is necessary: 1. To be an actual Citizen. 2. To be 25 Years of Age. 3. To have never been condemned in a Criminal Cause. XLIII. The Chamber of Tribunes shall have the initiative: 1. Concerning the arrangement of the Territorial Division of the Republic. 2. Respecting the Annual Contributions and public Expenses. 3. In authorizing the Executive Power to negotiate Loans, and adopt means for extinguishing the public Debt. 4. Respecting the value, type, standard, weight, and denomination of money, and the regulation of weights and measures. 5. Concerning the establishment of Ports of every description. 6. Concerning the construction of roads, causeways, bridges, public buildings, and the improvement of the Police, and branches of industry. 7. Concerning the Salaries of public Functionaries. 8. Concerning the reforms which they may deem necessary in the Departments of Finance and War. 9. In making War or Peace, on the proposition of the Government. 10. Concerning Alliances. 11. In permitting a passage to Foreign Troops. 12. Concerning the Naval and Land Forces for the Year, on the proposition of the Government. 13. In giving Ordinances to the Marine, Army, and National Militia, on the proposition of the Government. 14. Concerning Foreign Affairs. 15. In granting Letters of Naturalization and Citizenship. 16. In granting general Pardons. XLIV. The Chamber of Tribunes shall be renewed by halves, every 2 Years, and shall have 4 Years duration. In the first Legislature, the half which is to retire at the expiration of 2 Years, shall be determined by lot. XLV. Tribunes may be re-elected. CHAPTER III.-Of the Chamber of Senators. XLVI. To be a Senator, it is necessary: 1. To have the qualifications requisite for an Elector. 2. To be 35 Years of age. 3. To have never been condemned in a Criminal Cause. XLVII. The Attributes of the Senate are; 1. To form the Civil and Criminal Codes, those of Procedure and Commerce, and the Ecclesiastical regulations. 2. To originate all Laws relative to judicial reforms


3. To watch over the prompt administration of justice' in Civil and Criminal Causes. 4. To originate Laws to prevent infringements of the Constitution and Laws, by Magistrates, Judges, and Ecclesiastics. 5. To exact responsibility from the superior Tribunals of Justice, the Prefects, Magistrates, and Inferior Judges. 6. To propose to the Executive Power, a List of Candidates for the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, the Archbishops, Bishops, Dignitaries, Canons, and Prebends of Cathedrals. 7. To approve or reject the Prefects, Governors, and Corregidors, which the Government may select from the List presented by the Electoral Bodies. 8. To select, from the List which the Electoral Bodies may present, the District Judges, and the Subalterns of every Department of Justice. 9. To regulate the Church preferment, and to propose Projects of Law relative to all Ecclesiastical matters which have relation to the Government. 10. To examine Counciliary Decisions, Bulls, Rescripts, and Pontifical Briefs, in order to their approval or non-approval. XLVIII. The duration of Members of the Senate shall be 8 Years, and they shall be renewed by one half every 4 Years; the half of the first Legislature which is to retire, being determined by lot. XLIX. Members of the Senate may be re-elected.
CHAPTER

IV.-Of the Chamber of Censors.

L. To be a Censor it is necessary: 1. To possess the qualifications requisite for a Senator. 2. To be 40 Years of age. 3. To have never been condemned even for trifling Offences. LI. The Attributes of the Chamber of Censors are: 1. To see that the Government fulfills, and causes to be fulfilled, the Constitution, Laws, and public Treaties. 2. To accuse the Executive, before the Senate, of infringements of the Constitution, Laws, and public Treaties. 3. To demand from the Senate the suspension of the Vice.-President and Secretaries of State, should the safety of the Republic urgently demand it. LII. It belongs exclusively to the Chamber of Censors to impeach, before the Senate, the Vice-President and Secretaries of State, in cases of treason, peculation, or manifest violation of the fundamental Laws of the State. LIII. If the Senate shall deem the accusation by the Chamber of Censors to be well founded, resort shall be had to a National Judgment; but if the Senate decide in the negative, the accusation shall pass to the Chamber of Tribunes. LIV. If 2 Chambers agree, recourse shall be had to the National Judgment. LV. The 3 Chambers shall then be united, and the Documents which the Chamber of Censors may have presented, having been examined, it shall be decided by an absolute majority of Votes, whether or not there be cause for the impeachment of the 'Vice-President or Secretaries of State. LVI. When the National Judgment shall have decreed that there is ground for the impeachment of the Vice-President or Secretaries of State, they shall be immediately suspended from the exercise of their functions, and the Chamber shall transmit all their proceedings to the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, which shall take exclusive cognizance of the Cause, and the sentence which it may pronounce shall be executed without appeal. LVII. When the Chambers have declared that there exist grounds for the impeachment of the Vice-President and Secretaries of State, the President of the Republic shall present to the united Chambers a Candidate for the Vice-Presidency, ad interim, and shall nominate, ad interim, the Secretaries of State. If the first Candidate be rejected, by an absolute majority of the Legislative Body, the President shall present a second, and if he be rejected, he shall present a third Candidate, and if he be also rejected, then the Chambers shall elect, by an absolute majority of Votes, within the period of 24 hours, one of the 3 Candidates proposed by the President. LVIII. The Vice-President, ad interim, shall exercise his functions from the time of his appointment, until the result of the Proceedings against the Accused. LIX. By a Law, which shall originate in the Chamber of Censors, the Cases shall be specified, in which the Vice-President and Secretaries of State are collectively or individually responsible. LX. It belongs, moreover, to the Chamber of Censors: 1. To choose from the 3 Persons presented by the Executive Power, the Individuals who are to form the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, and those who are to be presented to the Archbishopricks, Bishopricks, Canonries, and vacant Prebends. 2. To execute the Laws relative to the Press, interior Government, regulation of Studies, and method of public Education. 3. To protect the Liberty of the Press, and to appoint the Judges who are to decide, in the last instance, upon the Judgments respecting it. 4. To propose Regulations for encouraging the Arts and Sciences. 5. To grant Rewards and National Recompenses to those who may have merited them by their services to the Republic.




6. To decree public Honours to the memory of great Men, and to the virtues and services of Citizens. 7. To condemn to everlasting disgrace the Usurpers of the public Authority, and distinguished Traitors and Criminals. LXI. The Censors shall be appointed for life.
CHAPTER

V.-Of the Formation and Promulgation of Laws.

LXII. The Government may present to the Chambers such Projects of Law as it may deem expedient. LXIII. The Vice-President and the Secretaries of State may attend the Sittings, and bear a part in the discussion of Laws and other subjects; but have no right to vote. LXIV. When the Chamber of Tribunes adopt a Project of Law, it shall be transmitted to the Senate, in the following form: "The Chamber of Tribunes transmits to the Chamber of Senators the annexed Project of Law: and believes that there is occasion for it." LXV. If the Chamber of Senators approve the Project of Law, it shall return it to the Chamber of Tribunes, in the following form: "The Senate returns to the Chamber of Tribunes the Project of Law (with or without Amendment), and is of opinion that it ought to be transmitted to the Executive for promulgation." LXVI. Each of the Chambers, in similar cases, shall observe the same form. LXVII. If one Chamber do not approve the Amendments or additions of another, and the proposing Chamber be, nevertheless, of opinion that the Project, as originally proposed, is most advantageous, it shall invite, by a Deputation of 3 Members, a meeting of the two Chambers, in order to discuss the Project, or the Amendment, or Negative, which it may have received. This meeting of the Chambers shall have no other object than that of coming to a mutual understanding, and each shall resume the business which it may deem expedient. LXVIII. The Project being adopted by two Chambers, two Copies thereof shall be sent to the President of the Republic, signed by the President and Secretaries of the Chamber which originated the Law, in the following form: " The Chamber of , with the approbation of the Chamber of , sends to the Executive Power the Law respecting ,in order that it may be promulgated." LXIX. If the Chamber of Senators refuse to adopt the Project of the Chamber of Tribunes, it shall be sent to the Chamber of Censors, in the following form: " The Chamber of Senators transmits to the Chamber of Censors the annexed Project, which it does not deem expedient."



After which, the determination of the Chamber of Censors shall be definitive. LXX. If the President of the Republic consider the Law inexpedient, he shall, within the period of 10 days, return it to the Chamber which originated it, together with his observations, in the following form: " It is the opinion of the Executive that this Law should be reconsidered." LXXI. The Laws which may be passed within the last 10 days of the Session, may be retained by the Executive Power, until the succeeding Session, and shall then be returned, with its observations thereupon. LXXII. When the Executive Power returns to the Chambers a Law, with its observations, the Chambers shall be united, and whatever they determine by a majority of Votes, shall be fulfilled, without further discussion or observation. LXXIII. If the Executive Power have no observations to make, relative to the Law, it shall order it to be published, in the following form: "Let it be promulgated." LXXIV. The Laws shall be promulgated in the following form: N. of N. President of the Peruvian Republic. We make known to all Peruvians, that the Legislative Body has decreed, and that we publish the following Law: (Here follows the Law.) We therefore command all the Authorities of the Republic to fulfil it, and to cause it to be fulfilled. "The Vice-President shall cause this to be printed and published, and circulated to all whom it may concern." And it shall be signed by the President, the Vice-President, and the respective Secretary of State. LXXV. A Project of Law which originates in the Senate, shall pass to the Chamber of Censors, and, if there approved, shall have the force of a Law. If the Censors do not approve the Project of Law, it shall be sent to the Chamber of Tribunes, whose decision shall be definitive, as has been said with respect to the Chamber of Censors. LXXVI. A Project of Law which originates in the Chamber of Censors, shall pass to the Senate; and, if it receive its sanction, it shall have the force of a Law. But in case it should refuse its assent to the Project, it shall be sent to the Chamber of Tribunes, which shall give or refuse its sanction, as in the case of the preceding Article. TITLE VI.
OF THE Executive POWER.

LXXVII. The exercise of the Executive Power resides in a President for life, a Vice-President, and 4 Secretaries of State.


CHARTER I.--Of the President. LXXVIII. The President of the Republic shall be chosen, for the first time, by an absolute majority of the Legislative Body. LXXIX. In order to be eligible as President of the Republic, it is necessary: 1. To be an actual Citizen and a Native of Peru. 2. To be upwards of 30 years of age. 3. To have rendered important services to the Republic. 4. To possess known talents for the Administration of the State. 5. To have never been condemned by the Tribunals, even for slight offences. LXXX. The President of the Republic is the Chief of the Administration of the State, without responsibility for the acts of the said Administration. LXXXI. In the event of the resignation, death, infirmity, or absence of the President of the Republic, the Vice-President succeeds to his Station. LXXXII. In default of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State shall be charged with the Administration, ad interim, the eldest in Office presiding, until the assembling of the Legislative Body. LXXXIII. The Attributes of the President of the Republic, are: 1. To open the Sessions of the Chambers, and to lay before them a Message respecting the state of the Republic. 2. To propose to the Chambers the Vice-President; and to appoint the Secretaries of State. 3. To change the Vice-President and Secretaries of State, whenever he may deem it expedient. 4. To order the Laws to be published, circulated, and fulfilled. 5. To authorize Regulations and Orders for the better fulfilment of the Constitution, Laws, and public Treaties. 6. To order and enforce the fulfilment of the Sentences of the Tribunals of Justice. 7. To demand of the Legislative Body the prorogation of its Ordinary Session, for the period of 30 days. 8. To convoke the Legislative Body in an Extraordinary Session, when such convocation is absolutely necessary. 9. To dispose of the permanent Military and Naval Forces, for the external defence of the Republic. 10. To command in Person the Armies of the Republic, in Peace and War. When the President is absent from the Capital, the Vice-President shall be charged with the Government of the Republic. 11. To reside in any part of the Territory occupied by the National Armies, when he directs the War in Person.



12. To dispose of the National Militia, for internal security, within the limits of its respective Department, and beyond the same, with the consent of the Legislative Body. 13. To appoint all Officers of the Army and Navy. 14. To establish Military and Naval Schools. 15. To order Military Hospitals, and Houses for the reception of Invalids, to be established. 16. To grant furloughs and retirements. To grant the Pensions of the Military, and of their Families, according to Law, and to regulate, in conformity with the Laws, every thing relating to this branch. 17. To declare War in the name of the Republic, previously decreed by the Legislative Body. 18. To grant Letters of Marque. 19. To superintend the collection and distribution of the public Revenue according to Law. 20. To appoint the Officers of Finance. 21. To direct diplomatic Negotiations, and to conclude Treaties of Peace, Friendship, Confederation, Alliance, Armistice, Armed Neutrality, Commerce, and any others; with the previous approbation, however, of the Legislative Body. 22. To appoint public Ministers, Consuls, and Subalterns, of the Department of Foreign Affairs. 23. To receive Foreign Ministers. 24. To confirm or to suspend Counciliary Decisions, Pontifical Bulls, Briefs, and Rescripts, with the consent of the Power to which they relate. 25. To propose to the Chamber of Censors, three Individuals, for the Supreme Tribunal of Justice; and for Archbishopricks, Bishops, Canons, and Prebendaries. 26. To present to the Senate, for its approbation, one of the 3 Candidates, proposed by the Electoral Body, for Prefects, Governors, and Corregidors. 27. To select one of the three Candidates, proposed for the Ecclesiastical Government, as Curates and Vicars of Provinces. 28. To suspend Functionaries for the period of three months, whenever there may be cause for such suspension. 29. To commute Capital Punishments decreed by the Tribunals against Criminals. 30. To expedite, in the name of the Republic, the Commissions and Appointments of all Functionaries. LXXXIV. The restrictions on the President of the Republic are: 1. He cannot deprive any Peruvian of his liberty, or impose, of his own will, any punishment whatsoever. 2. When the safety of the Republic demands the arrest of one or more Citizens, he cannot permit more than 48 hours to elapse,


 
before the Accused be placed at the disposal of the competent Tribunal or Judge. 3. He cannot deprive any Individual of his property, unless the public interest urgently demand it; and a just indemnification shall, in such case, be made to the Proprietor. 4. He cannot impede the Elections, nor other Functions which the Laws have confided to the Powers of the Republic. 5. He cannot absent himself from the Territory of the Republic, nor from the Capital, without the permission of the Legislative Body.
CHAPTER

II.-Of the Vice-President.

LXXXV. The Vice-President is nominated by the President of the Republic, and approved by the Legislative Body, in the mode prescribed in Article LVII. LXXXVI. The mode of succession shall be determined by a Special Law, comprehending all cases which can occur. LXXXVII. To be Vice-President, the same qualifications are requisite as for President. LXXXVIII. The Vice-President of the Republic is the Chief of the Ministry. LXXXIX. He shall be responsible, together with the Secretary of State of the respective Department, for the administration of the State. XC. He shall despatch and sign, in the name of the Republic and of the President, all the Affairs of the Administration, together with the Secretary of State of the respective Department. XCI. He shall not absent himself from the Territory of the Republic, nor from the Capital, without the permission of the Legislative Body. CHAPTER III.-Of the Secretaries of State. XCII. There shall be Four Secretaries of State, who shall act under the immediate Orders of the Vice-President. XCIII. No Tribunal nor public Authority shall fulfil the Orders of the Executive, which are not signed by the Vice-President, and the Secretary of State of the Department to which they relate. XCIV. The Secretaries of State shall be responsible, with the Vice-President, for all Orders which they may authorize, contrary to the Constitution, Laws, and public Treaties. XCV. They shall make out the Annual Estimates of the Expenses, which may be necessary for their respective Departments, and shall render an Account of those which may have been incurred in the preceding Year. XCVI. To be a Secretary of State, it is necessary: 1. To be an actual Citizen. 2. To be 30 Years of age. 3. To have never been condemned in a Criminal Cause.




TITLE VII.
OF THE JUDICIAL POWER. CHAPTER

I.-Of the Attributes of this Power.

XCVII. The Tribunals and Courts of Justice shall exercise no other Functions than those of applying the existing Laws. XCVIII. The Magistrates and Judges shall hold their Offices during good behaviour. XCIX. The Magistrates and Judges cannot be suspended from their Offices, unless in the cases determined by Law ; the application of which, in regard to the former, appertains to the Chambers of Senators ; and, as respects the latter, to the District Courts, with the previous cognizance of the Government. C. Every serious Offence, which the Magistrates and Judges commit, in the discharge of their respective duties, may be prosecuted by popular accusation, and be commenced within the period of a Year, through the medium of the Electoral Body. CI. Justice shall be administered in the name of the Nation, and the Judgments and Orders of the Superior Tribunals shall be issued in that form.
CHAPTER

II.-Of the Supreme Court.

CII. The highest judicial Magistracy of the State shall reside in the Supreme Court of Justice. CIII. It shall be composed of a President, 6 Members, and a Fiscal, divided into the requisite Chambers. CIV. To be a Member of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, it is necessary: 1. To be 35 Years of age. 2. To be an actual Citizen. 3. To have been a Member of one of the Judicial District Courts. CV. The Attributes of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice are: 1. To take cognizance of Criminal Accusations against the Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State, and the Members of the Chambers, whenever the Legislative Body shall decree that there is ground for a prosecution. 2. To take cognizance of all contentious Causes relating to National Church Preferment. 3. To examine Bulls, Briefs, and Rescripts, when they relate to Civil matters. 4. To take cognizance of contentious Causes respecting Ambassadors, Resident Ministers, Consuls, and Diplomatic Agents. 5. To take cognizance of Cases of the removal of Magistrates from the Judicial District Courts, and Departmental Prefects. 

 
6. To settle Controversies between the Courts of Justice, and between them and other Authorities. 7. To take cognizance, in the third instance, of Accusations against public Functionaries. 8. To hear the doubts of other Tribunals respecting the meaning of any Law; and to consult with the Executive as to the proceedings to be had, in relation thereto, in the Chambers. 9. To take cognizance of Appeals of Nullity brought against Sentences pronounced, in the last instance, by the Courts of Justice. 10. To examine the state and progress of Civil and Criminal Causes pending in the District Courts, in the manner established by Law. 11. To exercise the high directional, interior, and correctional control over the Tribunals and Courts of Justice of the Nation. CHA TER III.-Of Judicial District Courts. CVI. In order to be a Member of these Courts, it is necessary: 1. To be 30 Years of age. 2. To be an actual Citizen. 3. To have been a Law Judge, or a respectable Advocate for 5 Years. CVII. The Attributes of the Judicial District Courts are: 1. To take cognizance, in the second and third instance, of all Civil Causes, of Common Law, public Finance, Commerce, Mining, Seizures, and Confiscations, aided by an Individual of those branches, respectively, in the capacity of Assistant Judge. 2. To take cognizance of Controversies between the inferior Justices of their Judicial District. 3. To take cognizance of Charges of Violence, brought before them by the Ecclesiastical Tribunals and Authorities within its Territory.
CHAPTER IV.-Of Judicial County Courts.

CVIII. Judicial County Courts shall be established in the Provinces, in equal proportions; and, in each Capital of a County, there shall be a Law Judge, with a Court of Justice, as determined by Law. CIX. The cognizance of these Courts shall be limited to litigious Causes, and they can determine, without appeal, in Civil Cases not exceeding 200 dollars. CX. To be a Law Judge it is necessary: 1. To be 28 Years of age. 2. To be an actual Citizen.


3. To have been admitted as an Advocate in a Tribunal of the Republic. 4. To have exercised the Profession for 4 Years, with credit. CXI. The Law Judges are personally responsible for their conduct to the Judicial District Courts, as are the Members of the latter to the Supreme Tribunal of Justice.
CHAPTER

V.-

Of the Administration of Justice.

CXII. There shall be Justices of the Peace in each Town, who shall act as Conciliators; and no Civil or Criminal Cause shall be commenced, which shall not have been previously submitted to them. CXIII. The duty of these Conciliators shall be limited to the hearing the statements of the Parties, to the informing them of their rights, and to the effecting between them a satisfactory accommodation. CXIV. Fiscal Prosecutions shall not be submitted for conciliation. CXV. Judgments in 3 instances only are recognised. CXVI. Recourse to notorious injustice is abolished. CXVII. No Peruvian shall be arrested without previous information, for crimes meriting corporal punishment, nor without a written Order from the Judge before whom he is to appear: excepting in the Cases mentioned in Articles LXXXIV. (Restriction 2d,) CXXIII. and CXXXIII. CXVIII. At this stage of the Proceedings, if possible, the information shall be taken even without oath, but this formality shall not be deferred in any case, for a longer period than 48 hours. CXIX. Any Person detected in the commission of a Crime, may be arrested by any Individual, and taken before the Judge. CXX. In Criminal Causes, the Proceedings shall be public; the crime being recognized and declared by Juries, (when they are established) and the Law applied by the Judges. CXXI. The use of torture, and forced confession, shall be abolished for ever. CXXII. The confiscation of goods, and all cruel punishments, and those of descending infamy, shall be abolished. The Criminal Code shall restrict, as far as possible, the application of Capital Punishment. CXXIII. If, under any extraordinary circumstances, the security of the Republic should require the suspension of any of the formalities prescribed in this Chapter, the Chambers may decree such suspension. And, should they not be assembled, the Executive may exercise such function, as a provisional measure, and shall render an account of the same at the succeeding opening of the Chambers; it being responsible for any abuses which may have been committed. 



TITLE VIII.
OF THE INTERIOR GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC.

Only Chapter. CXXIV. The superior Political Government of each Department shall reside in a Prefect. CXXV. That of each Province in a Sub-Prefect. CXXVI That of the Cantons in a Governor. CXXVII. In each Town, the Inhabitants of which amount to 100 Souls, including those within its boundary, there shall be a Justice of the Peace. CXXVIII. Where the population of a Town and its vicinity amounts to 1000 Souls, there shall be (besides a Justice of the Peace for each .200) an Alcalde; and where the number of Souls exceeds 1000, there shall also be a Justice of the Peace for every 500, and an Alcalde for every 2000. CXXIX. The duties of Alcaldes and Justices of the Peace consist in giving counsel; and no Citizen, without just cause, shall be exempted from fulfilling them. CXXX. The Prefects, Sub-Prefects, and Governors, shall continue in the exercise of their Functions for the period of 4 Years; but may be re-elected. CXXXI. The Alcaldes and Justices of the Peace shall be renewed every 2 Years; but may be re-elected. CXXXII. The Attributes of the Prefects, Sub-Prefects, Governors, and Alcaldes, shall be limited by Law, to the maintenance of public order and security, with due subordination to the Supreme Government. CXXXIII. They are prohibited from all judicial authority; but, should the public tranquillity demand the arrest of any Individual, and circumstances not permit them to apprize the respective Judge, they may immediately order the same, rendering an account thereof, within 48 hours, to the competent Court of Justice. Whatever excess these Magistrates commit, relative to Individual security, or domicile, will render them liable to popular accusation. TITLE IX.
OF THE ARMED FORCE.

Only Chapter. CXXXIV. There shall be a permanent Armed Force in the Republic. CXXXV. The Armed Force shall be composed of the Army of the Line, and a Squadron. CXXXVI. In each Province there shall be Bodies of National Militia, composed of its Inhabitants.



CXXXVII. There shall be also a Military Guard, whose chief duty it shall be to prevent all illegal Commerce. TITLE X.
OF THE REFORM OF THE CONSTITUTION.

Only Chapter. CXXXVIII. If, at the expiration of 4 Years, after the Constitution shall have been sworn to, it should be deemed expedient to reform any of its Articles ; a Proposition to that effect shall be made in writing, signed by at least 8 Members of the Chamber of Tribunes, and supported by two-thirds of the Members present in the Chamber. CXXXIX. The Proposition shall be read 3 times, with an interval of 6 days between each reading; and after the 3d reading, the Chamber of Tribunes shall determine whether or not the Proposition shall be admitted to discussion; and any further proceedings thereupon shall be similar to those for the formation of Laws. CXL. The discussion being admitted, and the Chambers having decided upon the necessity of reforming the Constitution, a Law shall be passed, desiring the Electoral Bodies to invest the Deputies of the 3 Chambers with Special Powers, to alter or reform the Constitution, and indicating the basis upon which such reform is to be made. CXLI. In the first Session of the Legislature, subsequent to that in which the Motion to alter or reform the Constitution shall have been made, the subject shall be proposed and discussed; and whatever the Chambers resolve upon shall be fulfilled; the Executive Power being consulted respecting the expediency of such Reform. TITLE XI.
OF GUARANTEES.

Only Chapter. CXLII. Civil liberty, individual security, property, and legal equality, are guaranteed to the Citizens by the Constitution. CXLIII. Every Person may communicate his thoughts, verbally or in writing, and publish them through the medium of the Press, without previous censorship; but under the responsibility which the Law may determine. CXLIV. Every Peruvian may continue in, or quit the Territory of the Republic, as he may think proper, and carry with him his property; observing, however, the Regulations of the Police, and the rights of other Parties. CXLV. The House of every Peruvian is an inviolable asylum. It cannot be entered by night, unless by his consent; and by day,

 
only in those cases, and under the restrictions, which the Law may determine. CXLVI. Contributions shall be proportionably levied, without exception or privilege. CXLVII. All hereditary Offices, Privileges, and Entails, are abolished; and property of every description is alienable, notwithstanding that it belongs to pious or religious Institutions, or other objects. CXLVIII. No article of workmanship, industry, or commerce, shall be prohibited, if it be not incompatible with public habits, or the safety and health of Peruvians. CXLIX. Every Inventor shall have a property in his discoveries and productions. The Law shall secure to him an exclusive temporary privilege, or a compensation for his loss, in the case of its being made public. CL. The Constitutional Powers cannot suspend the Constitution, nor the rights belonging to Peruvians, excepting in the cases, and under the circumstances, expressed in the Constitution itself; on which occasions it is indispensable that the period for which such suspension is to continue shall be specified. 
