Generalissimo of the Land and Sea Forces, and Provisional President of the Republic, &c., &c., &c., Whereas the General Congress has issued the following Constitution. The General Congress of Peru, convoked for the purpose of enacting whatever it might deem expedient for the regulation and happiness of the country, having declared in virtue of the full exercise of its sovereignty, that the fundamental Charter given by the Convention in the year 1834 is void, gives the following: POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF PERU,

In the name of God in Trinity and Unity, Author and Supreme Legislator of Society. TITLE I.-Of the Nation. ART. I. The Peruvian Nation is the Political Association of all Peruvians. II. The Peruvian Nation is free and independent: it cannot be the patrimony of any person or family, nor form, with any other State, any pact which may be opposed to its independence and unity.
TITLE II.-Of Religion. III. Its religion is the Roman Catholic Apostolic, which it professes without permitting the public exercise of any other.

TITLE III.- Of Peruvians.

IV. Peruvians are either so by birth or by naturalization. V. Are Peruvians by birth. 1. All free men born in the territory of Peru. 2. Those born in a foreign country of Peruvian fathers who may be in the service of the nation. 3. The sons of a Peruvian father or mother born in a foreign country, when, from the place of their residence, they send their names to be inscribed on the Civic Roll of the capital of the Republic. VI. Are Peruvians by naturalization. 1. Foreigners admitted into the service of the Republic in conformity to the LXXXVIIIth Article, Restriction 5, of this Constitution. 2. Foreigners who have served faithfully in the Army or Navy. 3. Foreigners settled in the territory previous to the year 1820, who shall be inscribed on the Civic Roll. 4. Foreigners since settled, who, being professors of any science, art, or trade, and who having resided 4 years, shall inscribe their names on the Civic Roll, or shall marry with Peruvians. 5. Spaniards, whenever they express their wish to domiciliate in the country, and shall inscribe their names on the Civic Register.



6. Those who are citizens by birth in the other Spanish American Republics upon inscribing their names on the Civic Register.
TITLE IV.-Of Citizenship.

VII. The Peruvians mentioned in the 2 previous Articles are citizens. VIII. To be a citizen in the exercise of the privileges of citizenship, it requires, 1. To be married, or to be more than 25 years of age. 2. To know how to read and write; excepting the Indians and people of colour until the year 1844, in the towns where there are no Schools of First Instruction. 3. To pay some contribution, not being exempt therefrom by law. IX. The exercise of the rights of citizenship is suspended, 1. By physical or mental incapacity, which deprives the person from acting freely and with reflection. 2. By becoming a bankrupt debtor, or by being a debtor to the Public Treasury, and upon being legally summoned so to do, shall not pay. 3. By being actually subject to a criminal prosecution, and ordered to be arrested by a warrant legally issued. 4. By being a notorious vagrant, gambler, drunkard, or divorced by his own fault. X. The exercise of the rights of citizenship is lost. 1. By a sentence inflicting a punishment attended with infamy. 2. By naturalization in another State. 3. By accepting employments, titles, or any favours from another nation without special permission of the Congress. 4. By fraudulent bankruptcy, judicially declared. 5. By the solemn vows of religion, even when dispensation therefrom may be obtained. 6. By open rebellion in arms, or by popular sedition against the Government and constituted Authorities. XI. Those who have lost their citizenship, excepting such as shall be of the religious profession, or on account of treason to the country, can be rehabilitated by the Congress, the reasons of such rehabilitation being legally grounded.
TITLE V.-

Of the Form of Government.

XII. The Government of the Peruvian Nation is popular, representative, consolidated in unity, responsible and alternative. XIII. The exercise of the Sovereignty resides in the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial Powers. XIV. Neither of the 3 Powers can exceed the functions prescribed by the Constitution


VI.- Of the Legislative Power.

XV. The Legislative Power is exercised by a Congress composed of 2 Chambers, one of Deputies, the other of Senators. XVI. The Deputies and Senators are Representatives of the Nation. XVII. The Deputies and Senators are inviolable for their opinions in the exercise of their duty. XVIII. The Deputies and Senators cannot be accused or arrested from the day of their election until 3 months after the Sessions are concluded, without previous consent of the Congress, with the knowledge of the cause, and, during its recess, of the Council of State; if the party be not taken flagrante delicto, in which case he shall be immediately placed at the disposal of his respective Chamber or that of the Council of State. XIX. When the Congress or the Council of State authorizes the accusation, declaring that there is ground for instituting a trial, the Deputy or Senator shall remain suspended from the exercise of his legislative functions, and be subjected to the competent judge. XX. No individual of the Legislative body can be prosecuted by a civil suit, or be taken in execution for debt, from the period of his election until 3 months after the sessions shall be concluded. XXI. The Deputies and Senators, during the sessions, cannot accept of any employment, excepting those of professional gradation according to law. XXII. A third part of the Chamber of Deputies shall be removed every 2 years ; and one-half of the Senators every 4 years. XXIII. The renewal of Deputies shall be made by ballot in the. 2 first biennials; and that of the Senators by half, in the first quadrennial. XXIV. The Deputies and Senators can be re-elected; and only in this case can they renounce the charge.
TITLE

VII.-Chamber of Deputies.

XXV. The Deputies shall be elected by the Electoral Colleges according to law. XXVI. The right of election resides in the citizens in the exercise of their rights. XXVII. The qualities of those eligible ; the manner of organizing the Electoral Colleges, and the forms of their proceedings shall be detailed by a law. XXVIII. For every 30,000 souls, or for a fraction exceeding 15,000, one Deputy shall be elected. XXIX. Although a Province have a population short of 15,000, it shall nevertheless name a Deputy.


XXX. They shall also elect a substitute for every 2 Deputies; if there should be 3, they shall elect 2 substitutes; and if 1, 1 substitute. XXXI. If a Deputy should be elected for the Province of his birth, and for any other, that of his birth shall be preferred. If it should be for 2 Provinces without his having been born in either, he may select which he pleases. XXXII. To be a Deputy it requires; 1. To be a Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To be 30 years of age. 4. To have 700 dollars a-year, to be proved by the documents which shall be designated by the law of elections. 5. To have been' born in the Province or in the Department to which such Province belongs, or have resided in it for 3 years. 6. Not to have been condemned to any punishment attended with infamy, even if he shall be rehabilitated in his political rights. XXXIII. The following cannot be deputies:1. The President of the Republic, the Ministers of State, the Counsellors of State, the Prefects in their respective departments, and the Sub-Prefects in the Provinces under their charge. 2. The Judges of First Instance in the districts under their jurisdiction. 3. The Military Commanders for the Departments or Provinces under their command. 4. 'The Archbishops, Bishops, Ecclesiastical Governors, Vicars General and Capitulars, in their respective dioceses. XXXIV. To the Chamber of Deputies corresponds the initiative of the laws relative to taxation; the negotiation of loans; and Bills relative to ways and means; it remains with the Senate to admit, reject, or return them with modifications in order that they may be taken into consideration. XXXV. To that Chamber also corresponds the duty of accusing before the Senate the President of the Republic, during the period of his command, for attempts against the national independence and unity, the Members of both Chambers, the Ministers of State, those of the Council of State, and the Members of the Supreme Courts of Justice, for acts of treason, attempts against the public safety, abuse of power; and generally for every offence committed in the exercise of their functions, and to which an infamous punishment is attached.
TITLE

VIII.-Chamber of Senators.

XXXVI. The Senate shall be composed of 21 citizens; their election shall be made by the Departments in conformity to the

 
number designated by the Law of Elections, from amongst those born therein, or who have therein resided at least 5 years. XXXVII. For every 3 Senators 2 substitutes shall in the same manner be elected. XXXVIII. To become a Senator it is requisite: 1. To be a Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To have completed the age of 40 years. 4. To have an income of 700 dollars (£140) arising from landed property, or an income of 1,000 dollars (£200) per annum, to be proved by the documents which shall be designated by the Law of Elections. XXXIX. None can be Senators who are not qualified to become Deputies. XL. If the same citizen be chosen a Senator and a Deputy, he shall give the preference to the election as Senator. XLI. To the Chamber of Senators corresponds the power of giving instructions to the President of the Republic for concluding Concordats with the Apostolic See. XLII. It is also the duty of the Senate to determine whether there be ground for instituting proceedings in accusations brought by the Chamber of Deputies; but the unanimous votes of two-thirds of the Senators present are required, in order to the passing of a sentence. XLIII. The sentence of the Senate in the case of the previous Article shall have only the effect of suspending the accused from his office, who shall then remain amenable to a prosecution in conformity to the laws. TITLE IX.-Duties to be performed by the 2 Chambers in common. XLIV. The 2 Chambers shall assemble for the first time on the 28th of July, 1841, whether summoned or not; their sittings shall be continued 90 days,-reckoning only those on which business is actually transacted, to which may be added 30 more if the Congress shall so determine. XLV. Afterwards they shall assemble every 2 years, so that the next Legislature shall open its Sessions on the 28th of July, 1843, and so on progressively. XLVI. Each Chamber shall qualify the elections of its respective members, resolving any doubts which may exist concerning them. XLVII. Each Chamber has the exclusive right of police within the house of its sittings, and that of the formation of its corresponding estimates of expenses. XLVIII. The Biennial Session cannot be opened with less than two-thirds of the members of each of the Chambers. 


XLIX. When the Congress shall be convoked extraordinarily, the provisions of the previous Articles shall be observed; and it shall then only occupy itself in the objects of its convocation. If in the meantime the meeting of the ordinary Session occurs, it shall, in preference, continue discussing the same. L. Every Senator or Deputy, before he enters upon the exercise of his office, shall take, an oath before the President of his respective Chamber to act in everything agreeably to the Constitution. LI. The Chambers should unite in one body. 1. On the opening of the Biennial Session, on that of the Extraordinary Congress, and on closing their Sessions. 2. To perform the scrutiny of the election for the President of the Republic, or to elect him when that duty shall devolve upon them, according to this fundamental law. 3. In case of deliberating respecting the objects comprehended in the attributions 2, 3, 4, 5, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 25 and 26. LII. The Presidency of the Congress alternates between the Presidents of the Chambers. LIII. Any member of the Chambers may, in his own Chamber, present projects of law in writing, or make such propositions as he may think proper, with the exception of those which correspond exclusively to the Chamber of Deputies. LIV. The office of Deputy or Senator ceases on either being named a Counsellor of State.
TITLE X.-Duties of Congress.

LV. The duties of Congress are: 1. To frame laws, and to interpret, modify and repeal those existing. 2. To declare war, after hearing the Executive Power; and to require the Executive to negotiate a peace. 3. To approve or disapprove Treaties of Peace and other Conventions relating to foreign relations. 4. To approve the conclusion of Concordats with the Apostolic See for their ratification, and to regulate the right of charitable Foundations. 5. To give or refuse its consent to the entrance of foreign troops into the territory of the Republic ; and to the station of squadrons in its ports. 6. To approve or disapprove the estimates of the yearly expenditure ; impose the necessary contributions to provide for it; suppress those established; to determine their disbursement, and to require the accounts annually from the Executive Power. 7. To contract loans within and without the Republic on the faith of the national- credit, and to determine the guarantee for the fulfilment of them.


8. To determine the weight, alloy, type, and denomination of the current coin, and to render uniform the weights and measures. 9. To create or abolish public employments, and assign the proper salaries thereto. 10. To grant letters of citizenship, and to rehabilitate those who may have lost them. 11. To form general plans for the establishment of schools for' public education and instruction. 12. To adjust the political division of the territory. 13. To grant honourable rewards to the towns, corporate bodies, or persons who may have rendered eminent services to the nation. 14. To grant pecuniary rewards when the public debt shall be provided for. 15. To grant amnesties and general pardons. 16. To verify the election of the President of the Republic made by the Electoral Colleges; or to order a new election if they be not elected according to law. 17. To admit or refuse the resignation of the person charged with the Executive power. 18. To decide upon the doubts which may occur in consequence of the perpetual physical incapability of the President, and to declare whether they should or should not proceed to a new election. 19. To elect the Counsellors of State from their body, or otherwise. 20. To establish Custom Houses, and to determine the duties payable on imports and exports. 21. To open or close the principal ports to foreign commerce. 22. To recognize the National Debt, and to fix the means for its consolidation and redemption. 23. To approve or disapprove of the memorialized recommendations which shall be made to it by the Executive on behalf of Generals of the sea and land forces. 24. To determine if there is to be an armed force, and in what number, at specified distances from the place of its sessions. 25. To change the place of its sessions whenever it may deem it necessary, and two-thirds of the Chambers united agree to it. 26. To declare when the Republic is in danger, and to grant in detail to the President the powers which they deem sufficient to save it, designating the time and place in which he ought to exercise them; and with an obligation of giving an account to the Congrets of the use he has made thereof.
TITLE

XI.-Enactment and Promulgation of Laws.

LVI. Are initiatives of Law : 1. Projects presented by Senators and Deputies. 



2. Proects presented by the Executive Power, through the medium of its Ministers. LVII. When a Project has been approved in the Chamber where it originates, it shall be carried to the other, in order that, after being discussed there, it may be either approved or rejected. LVIII. When a Project has been approved by an absolute majority of each Chamber, it shall be transmitted to the Executive Power, which shall sign and publish it immediately, unless it has any observations to make thereupon. LIX. If the Executive Power have any observations to make, it shall return the Project therewith to the Chamber of its origin, within 15 days of its actual sitting, after previously hearing the opinion of the Council of State. LX. When the Project, together with the observations of the Executive, shall have been reconsidered in both Chambers, if it be approved of by an absolute majority of both, it shall be considered as sanctioned, and be carried into effect ; but if it do not obtain the votes just mentioned it cannot be taken into consideration until the following session, when it may be proposed anew. LXI. If the Executive Power do not return it within 15 days of actual sitting, the Project shall be considered as sanctioned, and shall be promulgated, unless within that period the Congress shall close its sittings, in which case the return may be made within the first 8 days after the ensuing session. LXII. If a Project of Law be rejected by the revising Chamber, it cannot be presented until the following Legislature; but if the Chamber in which it had its origin insists upon its being reconsidered, the revising Chamber shall proceed to verify it, and 2 of the members who insist upon its revision may be present at the debate. LXIII. In the additions made to a project by the Chamber which revises it, the same course shall be pursued respecting it. LXIV. In the interpretation, modification, or repeal of existing laws, the same forms shall be observed as in their enactment. LXV. The Congress, in promulgating its laws, shall make use of the following form The Congress of the Peruvian Republic has enacted the following law: (insert the law) Let it be communicated to the Executive power, in order that it may provide what is necessary for its fulfilment, and for its being printed, published, and circulated. LXVI. The Executive power shall cause the laws to be executed, observed, and fulfilled; commencing and concluding them in the following form : Citizen N President of the Republic. Whereas the Congress has passed the following law : (insert the law).

 
Therefore I order the same to be printed, published, and circulated, and that due fulfilment be thereto given. LXVII. If the Executive do not promulgate the law within 6 days after it is communicated thereto by the Congress, the Council of State shall require it to be promulgated within the 3rd day; and if that be not done, the President of the Council shall circulate it to the authorities of the Republic; thus the law will be thereby promulgated and the President of the Council will report his proceedings to the Congress. TITLE XI.-Executive Power. LXVIII. The citizen, named President of the Republic, is the supreme chief of the Executive power. LXIX. To be President of the Republic, it is requisite to possess the same qualifications as are required to become a Counsellor of State. LXX. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the Electoral Colleges at the time and in the manner prescribed by the law. LXXI. The opening of the Acts and their verification and scrutiny correspond to Congress. LXXII. He who shall obtain an absolute majority of the votes of all the electors of the Provincial Colleges shall be President. LXXIII. If 2 or more individuals obtain the said majority, he shall be President who has the greater number of votes; if the number be equal, the Congress shall elect by an absolute plurality of votes one of the two. LXXIV. When no one shall obtain an absolute majority, the Congress shall elect the President from the 3 who have obtained the greater number of votes. LXXV. If more than 2 obtain a relative majority with an equal number of votes, the Congress shall elect from amongst them all. LXXVI. If, in the elections provided for in the previous cases, to be made by the Congress, the parties should obtain an equal number of votes, the election must then be decided by lot. LXXVII. The election of the President in these cases must be concluded in a single session. LXXVIII. The duration of the office of President shall be for 6 years, and no citizen can be re-elected until after an interval of the same period. LXXIX. The President is responsible for the acts of his administration, and this responsibility shall be made effective when the period of his Presidency is concluded. LXXX. The salary of the President shall be determined by a law, and shall neither be augmented nor diminished during the time of his being in office. LXXXI. The Presidency of the Republic becomes vacant, defacto, by death, or by any pact that the President may have concluded



against the national unity and independence, and, de jure, by the admission of his resignation, continued physical or moral incapability, and by the termination of his constitutional period. LXXXII. Whenever the Presidency of the Republic becomes vacant by death, illegal pact, resignation and perpetual physical or moral incapability, the President of the Council shall take charge, provisionally, of the Executive power, who in such case shall convoke the Electoral Colleges within the first 10 days of his government, for the election of President. LXXXIII. If after the conclusion of the constitutional period the election shall not, by some accident, have been made; or being made, the elected shall be absent from the capital, the President of the Council of State shall take charge of the Executive power until the election be made, or the elected shall arrive. LXXXIV. If in any of the before-mentioned cases the President of the Council shall be absent, the person who may be accidentally charged with the Presidency thereof, shall take charge of the Supreme Executive Power. LXXXV. The exercise of the Presidency is suspended by the President placing himself at the head of the army in case of war; and by temporary infirmity. In any of these cases the President of the Council of State shall take charge of the Presidency of the Republic. LXXXVI. The President, to enter upon the execution of his office, shall take the following oath in the presence of the Congress: I, N-, swear by God and the Holy Evangelists, that I will exercise faithfully the office of President which the Republic has intrusted to me, that I will protect the religion of the State, preserve the integrity, independence, and unity of the nation, and observe and cause to be observed its Constitution and laws. LXXXVII. The attributions of the President of the Republic are: 1. To preserve the internal order and exterior security of the Republic. 2. To issue the requisite orders for the realization of the popular elections at the time, and in the manner and form prescribed by law. 3. To convoke Congress at the time fixed by the Constitution; and extraordinarily, with the consent of the Council of State; or to do so himself when the Council cannot be assembled. 4. To open the ordinary and extraordinary Session of Congress, presenting a message on the state of the Republic, and on the improvements and reforms which he may consider expedient. The Chambers may open their own Sessions if the President be impeded from doing so. 5. To take part in the making of the laws. in conformity to this Constitution. 6. To publish, circulate, and cause to be executed, the laws of the Congress.


7. To issue decrees and orders for the better observance of the Constitution and laws. 8. To make observations on the projects of law transmitted by Congress, the opinion of the Council of State being previously heard. 9. To call upon the Tribunals and Judges for a prompt administration of justice. 10. To suspend for the period of 4 months at most, and to remove from one tribunal to another, any functionary of the judicial power, whenever in the opinion of the President, it may be expedient to the public service. 11. To cause the sentences of the Tribunals and Courts to be carried into effect. 12. To organize, distribute, and dispose of the land and sea forces. 13. To declare war and make peace, with the approbation of Congress; and in its recess, with that of the Council of State. 14. To dispose of the National Guard in conformity to Article CL. 15. To grant licenses for privateers, and letters of marque. 16. To direct diplomatic negotiations, and conclude Treaties of Peace, Amity, Alliance, Commerce, and any others with the other Spanish-American States, with the approbation of Congress. 17. To receive foreign Ministers and admit Consuls. 18. To appoint, with the approbation of the Senate, and in its recess, with that of the Council of State, Plenipotentiaries, Resident Ministers, and Charges d'Affaires, and to remove them at his pleasure. 19. To appoint and remove Consuls and Vice-Consuls. 20. To appoint, with the approbation of Congress, the Generals necessary to complete the number designated in Article CXLVII. 21. To appoint the Chiefs, Officers, and other Employes of the Army and Navy, in conformity to law. 22. To give discharges, grant furloughs, widows' and retiring allowances of the Army and Navy, in conformity to the laws. 23. To nominate and remove the Ministers of State, rendering their responsibility effective, in conformity to the laws. 24. To nominate the Members of the Tribunals of Justice, and other functionaries of the Judicial Power, in conformity to this Constitution. 25. To watch over the collection and disbursement of the national revenues. 26. To make [in the financial and commercial codes, with the consent of the Council of State, the necessary alterations for the public service, giving an account of such alterations to the legislative power. 27. To issue police regulations for the maintenance of order and public morals. 28. To nominate the persons to be employed in the public offices




of the Republic ; to change them from office to office, and to remove them at his pleasure, with the consent of the Council of State. 29. To nominate the Prefects and Sub-Prefects in conformity to the Constitution. 30. To issue regulations for the establishment of public charities, and to watch over the due disbursement of the funds thereof, 31. To take care of the public education, to make the alterations in the regulations and plans of education, which he may deem proper, until the Congress shall decree the plan of national education. 32. To elect for Archbishops and Bishops from the list of 3 individuals to be presented to him by the Council of State. 33. To present for the dignities and canonries of cathedrals according to law, and for the curacies and other ecclesiastical benefices according to the practice in force. 34. To appoint to the lay chaplaincies of the national charitable Foundations. 35. To exercise the functions of ecclesiastical patronage according io the laws. 36. To conclude Concordats with the Apostolic See, in conformity with the instructions of the Senate. 37. To approve or reject decrees of councils and pontifical bulls, briefs and rescripts, if they relate to general matters, with the consent of Congress; with that of the Senate and during its recess, with that of the Council of State, if they relate to private business; and after hearing the Supreme Court of Justice, if they relate to matters in litigation. 38. To appoint to all employments that he is not precluded from appointing to, by the constitution and the laws. 39. To grant letters of citizenship. 40. To commute capital punishments of criminals after hearing the report of the Tribunal or Judge who tried the cause, wherever weighty and powerful motives require it, and when the eases are not excepted by law. 41. To request the Legislative body to prorogue their ordinary session for 30 days. 42. To permit foreign vessels to enter the lesser ports and creeks for the purpose of exporting therefrom the produce of the country. 43. To remove the members of the Supreme Courts with the unanimous voice of the Council of State; with the concurrent voice of two-thirds, the members of the Superior Courts; and with an actual majority, the Judges of the First Instance. 44. For military grades conferred upon the field of battle, a simple notification thereof to Congress is only requisite. LXXXVIII. The restrictions upon the President are: 1. He cannot permit the public exercise of any other form of worship than that of the Roman Catholic Apostolic.



2. He cannot defer nor suspend the constitutional elections, nor the sessions of the Congress. 3. He cannot, without permission of Congress, quit the territory of the Republic. 4. He cannot command the army in person without permission of the Congress; or, during its recess, without that of the Council of State; and in the event of commanding it, he shall exercise the chief military command in conformity to the military ordinances, and shall be responsible for his acts, in conformity thereto. 5. He cannot give any military, civil, political, or ecclesiastical employment to any foreigner whomsoever, without consent of the Council of State, excepting to those determined by law. 6. He cannot take cognizance of any judicial matter. 7. He cannot order any citizen to be tried by any other tribunal or court than by those determined by law. 8. He cannot deprive any one of personal liberty; but in case the public security shall require it, he may issue an order of arrest, being bound to place the person detained at the disposal of the competent Judge within 48 hours. 9. He cannot employ the Counsellors of State in any commission, without the approbation of two-thirds of the Council. 10. He cannot, either in part or in toto, delegate to any person the discretional exercise of the powers which may be specifically granted to him in cases when the country is in danger. Ministers of State. LXXXIX. There shall be four Ministers of State for the despatch of business of the public administration. XC. The orders and decrees of the President of the Republic shall be signed by the Ministers in their respective departments, without which formality they shall not be obeyed. XCI. The same qualifications are required to become a Minister of State as are requisite for becoming a Senator. XCII. On the opening of the Sessions of Congress, they shall present an account of the state of their respective departments, and of the corresponding projects of law; and shall also communicate such information as may be demanded of them. XCIII. The Minister of Finance shall present to the Council of State 3 months previous to the opening of the Sessions of the Biennial Congress, a statement of the receipts and disbursements decreed for the expenses of the previous year ; and also general estimates of the income and expenditure of the ensuing year. XCIV. The Ministers of State may be present at the debates of either of the Chambers, and shall retire before the votes are taken. XCV. The Ministers are responsible for the acts of the President,



authorized by their signatures, and which shall be contrary to the Constitution and laws ; this responsibility shall be rendered effective. during the period of holding office.
TITLE

XIII.-Coundil of State.

XCVI. There shall be a Council of State composed of 15 individuals, elected by the Congress from amongst its own members or others; Congress shall also elect 5 substitutes. XCVII. To be a Counsellor of State the same qualifications are requisite as are for a Senator. XCVIII. There cannot be in the Council more than 3 ecclesiastics and 3 military .men. XCIX. Cannot be Counsellors: 1. The Generals, and chiefs in actual command of troops. 2. The Ministers of State. C. This Council shall be presided by one of its members, who shall be elected by Congress in every Session. CI. As a substitute for the President of the Council on any. emergency, the Vice-President shall take his place, who shall also be named by the Congress ; and in like manner it shall name a third, person for the legal cases in which the two first may be wanting ; and should the three be wanting, the Counsellors present shall name, by lot, one to act in their stead. CII. The period of the Presidency of the Council shall be from one Legislature to the other. CIII. The powers of the Council are: 1. To watch over the observance of the Constitution and laws; addressing a first and second representation to the Executive for their fulfilment; demanding its responsibility on the third representation, at the time and in the form determined by this Constitution. 2. To summon of their own accord, or on the proposition of the President of the Republic, an extraordinary meeting of Congress; but it shall be necessary in the first case that two-thirds of the Counsellors present shall concur in the measure. 3. To give their opinion to the President in the cases when he shall call for it. 4. To declare when the country is in danger, and to grant to the President, in detail, the powers which may be necessary to save it; pointing out the time and places in which he ought to exercise them, and the obligation he is under to render an account to Congress, and in its recess, to the Council of State, of the use he has made of them. 5. To name a tribunal of 7 Judges, possessed of the same qualifications as are required for Counsellors of State, in order to render effective the responsibility of the supreme tribunal, or of any of its



members, and for the appeal in cases of nullity which may be laid against sentences pronounced in the third instance. 6. To present to the President of the Republic double lists of fit persons to fill the vacancies that may occur in the supreme and superior courts of justice, and for substitutes in cases of temporary impediments in the proprietors. 7. To form according to law the list for the presentations to Archbishoprics and Bishoprics. 8. To receive the oath, when the Congress is in recess, from the person who may take charge of the Executive Power in consequence of the incapacity or absence of the President, or in case of a vacancy. 9. To examine the accounts of the expenses of the previous year, and the estimates for the coming one; and to transmit them to the Chamber of Deputies with their observations. 10. To give to the Congress a detailed statement of their decisions and resolutions. 11. To give their opinion to the President of the Republic on the projects of law which he may deem proper to present to Congress and upon the observations which he may make upon such as shall be submitted to him by them. 12. To settle the differences which may arise amongst the administrative authorities. CIV. The resolutions of the Council are merely consultative, with the exception of those cases in which the Constitution requires that the Executive shall act in accordance with its opinion. CV. The Counsellors of State are responsible to the Congress for the resolutions they may give contrary to the Constitution and laws. CVI. All the Counsellors who shall refuse to discharge the duties of the supreme Executive authority in the cases in which by this Constitution they are called upon so to do, are responsible to the nation. CVII. The Counsellors have the right to be present in any of the Chambers, to take part in the discussion of the projects of law on which the Council may have given their resolution. CVIII. There cannot be a Council without two -thirds of the total number of the members being present. CIX. In case of any political disturbance the number of 8 individuals shall be sufficient to form a Council; and it is their duty to take the necessary measures for saving the country. CX. One half of the Council shall be removed every 2 years, the first half going out by lot.
TITLE

XIV.-Judicial Power.

CXI. The judicial power is exercised by the tribunals and judges, CXII. They may be dismissed by legal trial and sentence.



CXIII. There shall be in the capital of the Republic a supreme court of justice ; in the departmental capitals, superior courts (at the option of Congress) ; and in the judicial districts, judges of the first instance ; the territorial division of which districts shall be determined by a law. CXIV. There shall be tribunals and special courts for commercial, mining, tithe, water, prize and contraband cases. The number of their members, their powers, and the places in which the courts are to be established, shall be determined by law. Supreme Court of Justice. CXV. The Supreme Court shall be composed of 7 members and a fiscal named from the double list, which the Council of State shall present to the Executive. CXVI. The President of the Supreme Court shall be elected by the members thereof from amongst their own body, and shall continue in office 1 year. CXVII. To be a member or fiscal of the Supreme Court it is requisite : 1. To be a, Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To be 40 years of age. 4. To have been a member or fiscal of some superior court for 8 years, or have exercised the profession of Advocate for 20 years. CXVIII. The duties of the Supreme Court are: 1. To take cognizance of criminal proceedings instituted against the President, the Members of the Chambers, the Ministers of State and Counsellors, agreeably to Articles XXXV and XLII. 2. Of the official conduct of the President of the Republic, and others who shall exercise the Supreme Executive Power, and that of his Ministers. 3. Of contentious eases respecting individuals of the Diplomatic Body and Consuls resident in the Republic; and of offences against the law of nations. 4. Of complaints relative to contracts entered into by the Supreme Government or its agents. 5. Of the exactions made by the Supreme Executive Power with the view alone of restoring the effects taken. 6. Of questions of right between the departments or provinces, and between towns of different departments. 7. Of appeals of nullity, or those established by law against sentences given in the last instance by the superior courts and other tribunals in conformity to the law. 8. Of the official conduct of the Prefects in the second and third instance.



9. Of the official conduct of persons holding public employments as may be subject by the law to such inquiries in the third instance. 10. To settle differences between the superior courts ; as also those between these courts and other tribunals and courts. 11. To render effective the responsibility of the superior courts and to take cognizance of cases of inquiry or any others which may be instituted relative to the official proceedings of courts or their members. 12. To present to the Congress on the opening of its Sessions, reports conducing to the better administration of justice. 13. To take into consideration the doubts of the other tribunals and courts upon the meaning of any law, and to lay before Congress their opinions, and in its recess before the Council of State. 14. To watch over the prompt disposal of the causes pending in the superior courts. 15. To present lists of 3 individuals to the Executive for Reporter, Secretary to the Municipality and Procurator, and to name the other employes in the offices, Superior Courts of Justice. CXIX. The superior courts of justice shall be composed of the number of members and fiscals as shall be determined upon by law. CXX. To be a member of the Superior Court it requires: 1. To be a Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To be 30 years of age. 4. To have been a Judge of the First Instance, a Reporter, a Fiscal Agent at least for 4 years, or to have practised as an Advocate for 8 years. CXXI. The duties of the Superior Court are: 1. To take cognizance in the 1st and 2nd instance of all civil suits whereof cognizance is taken by the courts of the 1st, in the cases and manner designated by law. 2. Of criminal causes, whereof cognizance is taken by the Judges of the First Instance, until trial by Jury be established. 3. Of appeals against the decisions of the lower tribunals. 4. In the 1st instance, of the official conduct of the Prefects during the period of their Prefecture. 5. In the 2nd instance, of the official conduct of the public employes whose conduct is by law subjected to an inquiry upon the expiration of their period of office (residencia). 6. Of the causes of inquiry and others which may be instituted against the official conduct of Judges in the First Instance.
 
7. To adjust differences between Courts dependent upon the superior Courts. 8. To take cognizance, in the 2nd and 3rd instance, in cases wherein military men are concerned, in conjunction with the Chiefs who, in class of co-Judges, should compose the Court agreeably to law. 9. To require that the Judges of the First Instance dispatch quickly the cases pending in their Courts. 10. -To present to the Executive 2 lists each of 3 individuals for Judges of the First Instance of their districts, and a single list for Fiscal Agent, Reporters, Secretary of the Municipality and Procurator; and to name the other employ6s in the offices. Tribunals of First Instance. CXXIL To be a Judge of the First Instance, or Fiscal Agent, it is requisite: 1. To be a Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To be 25 years of age. 4. To be an Advocate admitted to practice in any tribunal of the Republic, and have exercised the profession for 5 years at least with good repute. CXXIII. The duties of the Judges are to take cognizance in -the 1st instance of the civil suits of civilians within their judicial districts. of questions relative to lay benefices, and to the succession to hereditary property ;' and to criminal suits according to the existing form, until Juries be established. Administration of Justice. CXXIV. There shall be Justices of the Peace for the discharge of the attributions which shall be designated by law. CXXV. Publicity is essential in all trials. The tribunals may discuss matters in secret; but the votes must be delivered in a loud voice, and with open doors, and the grounds of the sentence must be laid down, citing the laws, and in default thereof setting forth the principles by which they support their decision. CXXVI. All trials by commission are prohibited. CXXVII. No tribunal or Judge can in any case abridge or suspend the judicial forms established by law. CXXVIII. No citizen is obliged to give evidence against himself in a criminal case; neither can that of a husband against his wife be admitted; nor that of a wife against her husband; nor that of relations in a direct line ; nor that of brothers, nor brothers-in-law. CXXIX. No power or authority can assume a cognizance of causes pending in another Court, substantiate them, or cause law-suits once concluded to be renewed.




CXXX. The Magistrates, Judges, and other employes of the Judicial Power, are responsible for their conduct in conformity to the laws. CXXXI. Subornation, prevarication, bribery, departure from or suspension of, the judicial forms, and illegal proceedings against ,personal liberty and the security of domicile, afford grounds for public accusation against the Magistrates and Judges therein concurring. CXXXII. Trial by Jury shall be established in criminal cases at The law shall regulate the proceedings, and shall common law. designate the places where it shall be observed. CXXXIII. The confiscation of property is abolished, and no punishment shall be inflicted except upon the guilty party.
TITLE

XV.-Interior Government of the Republic.

CXXXIV. The superior political government of each department shall be exercised by a Prefect under the immediate authority of the supreme Government; that of each province by a Sub-Prefect under that of the Prefect; that of each district by a Governor under that of the Sub-Prefect. CXXXV. To be a Prefect it is required: 1. To be a Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To possess landed property to the value of at least 500 dollars,

(1001.) per annum.
CXXXVI. To be Sub-Prefect, it is required: 1. To be a Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To possess landed property to the value of 300 dollars, (601.) per annum. CXXXVII. To be a Governor it is required: 1. To be a Peruvian by birth. 2. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3. To be born in the district, or to have resided therein for at least 5 years. CXXXVIII. The duration of the office of Prefects and Sub-Prefects shall be for 3 years ; that of Governors shall be for 2 years, who however shall be removable sooner at the pleasure of the Executive. CXXXIX. The duties of these functionaries are: 1. To maintain order and public security in their respective districts. 2. To cause the Constitution, the Laws of Congress, and the Decrees and Orders of the Executive Power, to be carried into effect. 3. To cause the sentences of the Tribunals and Courts to be duly executed, to take care that the functionaries under their control discharge their duties faithfully. 4. They are the heads of the high and low Police.


5. The Prefects have also the economical superintendence of the Public Revenue of the Department. CXL. A law shall determine minutely the duties of these authorities. CXLI. They are prohibited: 1. From obstructing in any manner or interfering in popular elections. 2. They cannot exercise any of the attributes of the judicial power. 3. They cannot deprive any individual of his personal liberty; but if the public tranquillity require it, they may issue an order of arrest, placing the person arrested at the disposal of the competent Judge within 24 hours. CXLII. The political and military commands in the Departments and Provinces cannot be held by the same person. TITLE XVI.-Police. CXLIII. In the capital of each Department, there shall be a Superintendent of Police, with the requisite number, of subaltern employes. In the capitals of Provinces and of Districts, the Sub-Prefects and Governors shall discharge the duties of Superintendents of Police. CXLIV. In the capital of each Department and Province, there shall be 2 Procuratorial Syndics, and in each parish, one. The powers of these shall be specified by a law. TITLE XVII.-Public Force. CXLV. The Public Force is composed of the Army, Navy, and National Guard. CXLVI. The Public Force is essentially obedient; it cannot deliberate. CXLVII. There shall be, at most, in the Army, 1 Grand Marshal, 3 Generals of Division, and 6 of Brigade. CXLVIII. There shall be in the Navy, 1 Vice-Admiral and 1 Rear Admiral, and a corresponding number of Subalterns, in conformity to the Naval Ordinances. . CXLIX. The National Guard shall be composed of the Civic Corps, formed in the Provinces according to law. CL. The National Guard cannot quit the limits of their respective Provinces, except in cases of rebellion in the bordering Provinces, or of invasion ; the Council of State first giving its consent. National Guarantees. CLI. The nation does not recognize any pact or agreement concluded with foreign Powers, which is not approved of by the Legislative Power.
 
* CLII. There are no other means of obtaining the Supreme Executive Power than those designated in this Constitution. CLIII. All the acts of the individuals who usurp the Supreme Power arc null, although they should be in conformity to the Constitution and the Laws.
Individual Guarantees. CLIV. No law has a retroactive effect. CLV. No one is born a slave in the Republic. CLVI. All may communicate their thoughts verbally, or in writing, and publish them by means of the press without previous censorship, but under the responsibility which the law determines. CLVII. Every Peruvian may remain in or depart from the Territory of the Republic as it may suit him, and may carry with him his property, without prejudice to the right of any third party, and on observing the Regulations of the Police. CLVIII. The house of every Peruvian is an inviolable asylum; at night no one can enter it without his consent in conformity to the laws; and in the lay-time entrance shall only be permitted in the cases and in the manner which may be determined by law; and in virtue of an order from a competent authority. CLIX. The secrecy of letters is inviolable ; those that are purloined from the Post Office, or from the Postmen, cannot be admitted in any suit or produce any legal effect. CLX. All Peruvians are equal before the law, whether it reward or punish. CLXI. All citizens are admissible to public employments without any other difference than that of their talents and virtues. CLXII. The taxes shall be levied proportionately on the citizens without any exception or privilege whatever. CLXIII. The Constitution does not recognize hereditary employments or privileges, nor any lay entails; all properties are alienable. CLXIV. No Peruvian can be deprived of the right of terminating his differences by means of arbitration. CLXV. The prisons are places of security, and not of punishment. All severity not necessary to the custody of the prisoners is prohibited. CLXVI. Every citizen has a right to be considered of good repute, so long as he be not declared a delinquent by the laws. CLXVII. The right of property is inviolable; if the welfare of the State, under the sanction of the law, requires the property of any citizen, he shall be previously indemnified to the full value thereof. CLXVIII. No foreigner can, by any title acquire landed property in the Republic, without becoming ipso facto subject to the obligations of a citizen; and the rights of one he shall at the same time enjoy. S 




CLXIX. Everykind of labour, industry, and trade, is free, provided it be not opposed to the habits or to the security and health of the citizens. CLXX. Those who invent, improve, or introduce any new means of promoting industry, have an exclusive property in their discoveries and productions. The law secures to them either the necessary patent or a compensation for the loss which they may suffer in case of their being made public. CLXXI. All citizens have the right of presenting petitions to Congress, or to the Executive Power, provided they be subscribed with their names individually. None but bodies legally constituted possess the privilege of presenting petitions signed collectively, and for objects connected with the discharge of their duties. CLXXII. No individual or assemblage of individuals, or body legally constituted can present petitions in the name of the people, or arrogate to itself the title of " sovereign people," ; the violation of this and the preceding Article, is an outrage against the public security. CLXXIII. The Constitution guarantees the Public Debt, domestic and foreign; its consolidation and redemption merit the especial consideration of Congress. CLXXIV. It also guarantees gratuitous primary instruction to all citizens ; the institutions in which may be taught the Sciences, Literature and the Arts: the inviolability of literary property, and the establishments of piety and charity. CLXXV. The permanent possession of political and civil rights of the citizens demands of every member of society the duty of 1contributing towards their support and protection, by means of arms and contributions in proportion to his ability and property. CLXXVI. No Peruvian is obliged to do what the law does not command, nor is he prevented from doing what it does not prohibit. CLXXVII. Every Peruvian may remonstrate before Congress or the Executive Power against infringements of the Constitution. CLXXVIII. Foreigners shall enjoy civil rights equally with Peruvians, provided they submit to the same taxes and imposts as them. CLXXIX. No armed force can recruit or demand any description of succour except by means of the civil authorities. CLXXX. No citizen can be obliged in time of peace to give billets in his house to one or more of the military; and he can only have them billetted on him in time of war by an order of the civil authority. CLXXXI. Commandants-General of departments are not allowed in time of peace, and they can only be appointed in time of war. CLXXXII. All laws which are not opposed to this Constitution continue in full force.



TITLE

XVIII.- Observance and Revision of the Constitution.

CLXXXIII. The form of a popular Representative Government consolidated in unity, responsible, and alternative ; and the division and independence of the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial Powers is unalterable. CLXXXIV. Congress, immediately after the opening of its Sessions, shall examine whether the Constitution has been exactly observed; and if its infringements are corrected, taking such steps as may be proper to render effective the responsibility of the violators. CLXXXV. Every public functionary shall, on receiving possession of office, take the oath of fidelity to the Constitution. CLXXXVI. The reform of one or more Constitutional Articles shall be made by the Congress according to the following dispositions CLXXXVII. The proposition for the reform of one or more Articles may be presented to either of the 2 Chambers, upon being signed by at least a third of the members present. CLXXXVIII. It shall be read three times, with an interval of 6 days between each reading. After the third reading, it shall be determined whether it shall be discussed or not. CLXXXIX. In the event of the affirmative being voted, it shall be sent to a commission of 9 individuals to be elected by an absolute majority of the Chamber, that within the period of 8 days, they may present their respective reports on the necessity of making the Reform. CXC. After presenting the report, they shall proceed to the discussion on the proposed reform, with the same formalities as those observed in the discussion of laws, two-thirds of the suffrages in each Chamber being nevertheless necessary. CXCI. The necessity for making the reform being sanctioned, the 2 Chambers shall meet to prepare the corresponding project; an absolute majority in this case being sufficient. CXCIL The before-mentioned project shall be transmitted to the Executive, who, after hearing the Council of State shall present it with the Message to Congress on the opening of its next Session. CXCIII. Ia the 1st Session of the next Congress, the project shall be discussed by the 2 Chambers united, and that which may be determined on by an absolute majority shall be considered as a Constitutional Article, and shall be communicated to the Executive Power for its publication and observance. Given in the Hall of Congress in Huancayo, this 10th day of November, 1839. [Signatures of 65 Deputies.] 

