l'()RTUGyl

CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

PORTUGAL
1974-1977
by GISBERT H. FLANZ

December 1977

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1977 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

PREAMBLE

On 25 April 1974 the Armed Forces Movement, setting the seal on the Portuguese people's long resistance and interpreting its deep-seated feelings, overthrew the Fascist Regime. The liberation of Portugal from dictatorship, oppression and colonialism represented a revolutionary change and an historic new beginning in Portuguese society. The Revolution restored fundamental rights and freedoms to the people of Portugal. In the exercise of those rights and freedoms, the people's legitimate representatives have met to draw up a Constitution that meets the country's aspirations. The Constituent Assembly affirms the Portuguese people's decision to defend their national independence, safeguard the fundamental rights of citizens, establish the basic principles of democracy, secure the primacy of the rule of law in a democratic state and open the way to a socialist society, respecting the will of the Portuguese people and keeping in view the building of a freer, more just and more fraternal country. The Constituent Assembly, meeting in plenary session on 2 April 1976, approves and decrees the following Constitution of the Portuguese Republic.

Fundamental principles
ARTICLE 1 Portuguese Republic

Portugal is a sovereign Republic based on the dignity of the human person and the will of the people and committed to its own transformation into a classless society.
ARTICLE 2 Democratic state and transition to socialism

The Portuguese Republic is a democratic state based on the sovereignty of the people, on respect for and the safeguarding of fundamental rights and freedoms and on plurality of democratic expression and democratic political organisation, whose object is to ensure the transition to socialism by creating the conditions for democratic exercise of power by the working classes.
ARTICLE 3 Sovereignty and legality

1. Sovereignty, one and indivisible, rests with the people, who shall exercise it in accordance with the forms laid down in the Constitution. 2. The Armed Forces Movernent, as guarantor of the democratic conquests and the revolutionary process, shall participate, in alliance with the people, in the exercise of supreme authority in accordance with the Constitution.
17

3. The political parties shall collaborate in giving organic form to and expressing the will of the people, whilst respecting the principles of national independence and political democracy. 4. The State shall be subject to the Constitution and based on democratic legality.
ARTICLE 4 Portuguese citizenship

All persons are Portuguese citizens who are considered as such by law or under an international convention.
ARTICLE 5 Territory

1. Portugal comprises the territory defined by history on the European continent and the archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira. 2. The state shall not, except for frontier rectifications, alienate any part of the Portuguese territory or of the sovereign rights it exercises over it. 3. The extent and limits of territorial waters and the rights of Portugal to adjacent sea beds shall be defined by law. 4. The territory of Macao, under Portuguese administration, shall be governed by a Statute in keeping with its special situation.
ARTICLE 6 Unitary State 1. The state is a unitary one organised to respect the principles of the autonomy of local authorities and democratic decentralisation of the administration.

2. The archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira shall constitute autonomous regions with their own political and administrative statutes.
ARTICLE 7 International relations

1. In its international relations Portugal shall be governed by the principles of national independence, the right of peoples to self-determination and independence, equality among states, the peaceful settlement of international disputes, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states and co-operation with all other peoples for the emancipation and progress of mankind. 2. Portugal shall advocate the abolition of all forms of imperialism, colonialism and aggression, simultaneous and controlled general disarmament, the dissolution of politico-military blocs and the establishment of a system of collective security, with a view to creating an international order capable of safeguarding peace and justice in relations between peoples. 3. Portugal recognises the right of peoples to revolt against all forms of oppression, in particular colonialism and imperialism, and shall maintain special bonds of friendship and co-operation with Portuguese speaking countries.
ARTICLE 8 International law

1. The rules and principles of general or ordinary international law shall be an integral part of Portuguese law. • 2. Rules derived from international conventions duly ratified or approved shall, following their official publication, apply in municipal law in so far as they are internationally binding on the Portuguese State.

ARTICLE 9 Basic tasks of the State

The basic tasks of the state shall be: a. To safeguard national independence and create the political, economic, social and cultural conditions conducive to it; b. To secure organised participation by the people in the solving of national problems, to defend political democracy and to ensure respect for democratic legality; c. To socialise the means of production and wealth, in forms appropriate to the characteristics of the present period of history, to create conditions permitting the promotion of the people's welfare and quality of life, especially those of the working classes, and to abolish exploitation and oppression of man by man.
ARTICLE 10 Revolutionary process

1. The alliance between the Armed Forces Movement and the democratic parties and organisations shall serve the peaceful advance of the revolutionary process. 2. In the economic field, the advance of the revolutionary process requires collectivisation of the principal means of production.
ARTICLE 11 National symbols

1. The national flag shall be that adopted by the Republic established by the Revolution of 5 October 1910. 2. The national anthem shall be <<.A Portuguesa..

PART I
Fundamental rights and duties
SECTION I General principles
ARTICLE 12 Principle of universality

1. All citizens shall enjoy the rights and be subject to the duties laid down in the Constitution. 2. Bodies corporate shall enjoy such rights and be subject to such duties as are compatible with their nature.
ARTICLE 13 Principle of equality

1. All citizens shall have the same social dignity and shall be equal before the law. 2. No-one shall be privileged, favoured, injured, deprived of any right or exempt from any duty because of his ancestry, sex, race, language, territory of origin, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic situation or social condition.

ARTICLE 14 Portuguese citizens abroad

Portuguese citizens sojourning or residing abroad shall enjoy the protection of the state in the exercise of their rights and shall be subject to such duties as are not incompatible with their absence from the country.

ARTICLE 15

Foreigners and stateless persons

1. Foreigners and stateless persons sojourning or residing in Portugal shall enjoy the same rights and be subject to the same duties as Portuguese citizens. 2. The foregoing paragraph shall not apply to political rights, to the performance of public duties that are not predominantly technical or to rights and duties restricted to Portuguese citizens under the Constitution and by law. 3. Citizens of Portuguese-speaking countries may, by international convention and subject to reciprocity, be granted rights not conferred on foreigners in general, with the exception of membership of the organs of supreme authority and the organs of the autonomous regions, service in the armed forces and membership of the diplomatic service.
ARTICLE 16

Extent of rights

1. The fundamental rights embodied in the Constitution shall not exclude any other rights resulting from the laws and applicable rules of international law. 2. The provisions of the Constitution and laws relating to fundamental rights shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
ARTICLE 17

System of rights, freedoms and safeguards

The general system of rights, freedoms and safeguards shall cover the rights set forth in Section II, the fundamental rights of workers and other freedoms and rights of a similar type, provided for under the Constitution and by law.

ARTICLE 18 Legal force

1. The constitutional provisions relating to rights, freedoms and safeguards shall be directly applicable and binding on public and private bodies. 2. Rights, freedoms and safeguards may be restricted by law in only those cases expressly provided for in the Constitution. 3. Laws restricting rights, freedoms and safeguards shall be general and abstract in character and shall not limit in extent and scope the essential content of constitutional provisions.

ARTICLE 19 Suspension

1. The organs of supreme authority shall not, jointly or separately, suspend the exercise of rights, freedoms and safeguards except in case of a state of siege or emergency declared in the form laid down in the Constitution. 2. The declaration of a state of siege or emergency shall be adequately substantiated and shall specify the rights, freedoms and safeguards whose exercise is to be suspended. 3. The declaration of a state of siege shall in no case affect the right to life and integrity of the person. 4. The declaration of a state of emergency shall at most entail the partial suspension of rights, freedoms and safeguards. 5. The declaration of a state of siege or emergency shall empower the authorities to take the necessary steps conducive to prompt restoration of constitutional normality.

•ARTICLE 20 Defence of rights

1. Everyone shall have access to the courts for the defence of his rights. Justice shall not be withheld from a person for lack of financial means. 2. Everyone shall have the right to resist any order that infringes his rights, freedoms or safeguards and to repel by force any form of aggression when recourse to public authority is impossible.

ARTICLE 21 Civil liability of the state

1. The state and other public bodies shall be jointly and severally liable under civil law with the members of their organs, their officials or their staff members, for actions or omissions in the exercise of their functions, or caused by such exercise which result in violations of rights, freedoms or safeguards or in damage to another party. 2. Citizens unjustly convicted shall have the right to retrial and to compensation for the damage suffered on conditions to be laid down by law.

ARTICLE 22 Right of asylum

1. The right of asylum shall be secured to foreigners and stateless persons persecuted as a result of their activities on behalf of democracy, social and national liberation, peace between peoples or individual freedom and rights. 2. The status of political refugees shall be defined by law.

ARTICLE 23

Extradition and deportation

1. Portuguese citizens shall not be extradited or deported from the national territory. 2. No-one shall be extradited for political reasons. 3. No-one shall be extradited for crimes which carry the death-penalty under the law of the applicant state. 4. Extradition and expulsion shall be decided only by judicial authority.
ARTICLE 24

“Provedor de Justica ” (Ombudsman)

1. Citizens may present complaints concerning actions or omissions on the part of the public authorities to the Provedor de Justica, who shall examine them without power of decision and shall make such recommendations to the appropriate organs as are necessary in order to prevent or make good injustice. 2. The activities of the Provedor de Justica shall be independent of any acts of grace or legal remedies provided for in the Constitution and laws. 3. The Provedor de Justica shall be appointed by the Assembly of the Republic. SECTION II Rights, freedoms and safeguards
ARTICLE 25

Right to life

1. 2. cable.

Human life shall be inviolable. In no case shall the death penalty be appli-

ARTICLE 26 Right to personal integrity

1. The moral and physical integrity of the citizens shall be inviolable. 2. No-one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or punishment.
ARTICLE 27 Right to freedom and security 1.

Everyone shall have the right to freedom and

security. 2. No-one shall be deprived of his freedom except as a result of a court judgment convicting him of an offence punishable by law by a prison sentence or as a result of judicial application of a security measure. 3. An exception to this principle shall be deprivation of freedom in the following cases for a period and on conditions to be laid down by law: a. Remand in custody, where a person is taken in flagrante delicto, or where there is strong evidence that he has committed a deliberate offence punishable by a major sentence (1);

b. The arrest or detention of a person who has unlawfully entered the national territory or against whom extradition or deportation proceedings have been instituted. 4. Everyone deprived of his freedom shall be informed without delay of the reasons for his arrest or detention.

ARTICLE 28 Remand in custody

1. Arrest without charge shall be subject to a court order within 48 hours confirming of continuing detention. The court shall hear the reasons for detention and shall inform the prisoner of them, interrogate him and give him the opportunity to defend himself. 2. Remand in custody shall not be continued if it can be replaced by bail or by a measure of conditional release provided for by law. 3. A court order for a measure involving deprivation of freedom or for its continuance shall be made known immediately to a relation of the prisoner or to a person in whom he has confidence. 4. Remand in custody before and after the charge, shall be subject to the time-limits laid down by law.
ARTICLE 29 Application of criminal law

1. No one shall be convicted under criminal law except by virtue of existing legislation making the action or omission punishable, and no one shall be subjected to a security measure involving deprivation of freedom for reasons that do not warrant such a measure under existing legislation. 2. The foregoing paragraph shall not prevent the punishment, within the limits of municipal law, of an action or omission which at the time it was committed was regarded as criminal by virtue of the commonly accepted general principles of international law. 3. No sentences or security measures involving deprivation of freedom shall be applied that are not expressly provided for in existing laws. 4. No one shall be subjected to a sentence or security measure involving deprivation of freedom that

is more severe than those provided for at the time the act was committed. Criminal laws more favourable to the offender shall apply retroactively. 5. No one shall be tried more than once for the same offence.
ARTICLE 30 Limits on sentences and security measures 1. No-one shall be subjected to a sentence or security measure involving imprisonment for life or for an unlimited or indefinite term. 2. If case of danger due to grave mental disorder that cannot be treated in an open environment, security measures involving deprivation of freedom may be extended successively by judicial decision in each case, for as long as the said condition lasts. 3. Sentences shall not be transferable. 4. No-one shall be deprived for political reason of his Portuguese citizenship, his civil capacity or his name. ARTICLE 31 Habeas corpus»

1. The remedy of habeas corpus shall be available before a court of law or court martial, according to the case, against any wrongful use of power in the form of unlawful detention. 2. Habeas corpus may be demanded by the prisoner or by any citizen in enjoyment of his political rights. 3. The court shall rule on the application for habeas corpus within eight days at a hearing in the presence of both parties.

ARTICLE 32 Safeguards in criminal proceedings

1. Criminal proceedings shall provide all necessary safeguards for the defence. 2. Everyone charged with an offence shall be presumed innocent until his conviction has acquired the force or res judicata. 3. The accused shall have the right to be assisted by counsel at all stages of the proceedings. The cases and stages in which this shall be compulsory shall be specified by law. 4. A judge shall have jurisdiction throughout the preliminary investigation, and the cases in which this shall involve the hearing of both parties shall be specified by law. 5. Criminal proceedings shall be accusatory instructure, and the trial shall be governed by the principle that both parties are to be heard. 6. Any evidence obtained by torture, force, violation of the physical or moral integrity of the individual, wrongful interference in private life, the home, correspondence or telecommunications shall be of no effect. 7. No case shall be withheld from a court which has jurisdiction under existing law.
ARTICLE 33 Right to identity, a good name and privacy

1. Everyone shall have the right to his personal identity, to his good name and reputation and to privacy in his personal and family life. 2. Effective safeguards against the wrongful use, or use contrary to human dignity, of information concerning persons and families shall be provided by law.

ARTICLE 34 Inviolability of home and correspondence

1. The individual's home and the privacy of his correspondence and other means of private communication shall be inviolable. 2. A citizen's home shall not be entered against his will except by order of the competent judicial authority and in the cases and according to the forms laid down by law. 3. No one shall enter the home of any person at night without his consent. 4. Any interference by public authority with correspondence or telecommunications, apart from the cases laid down by law in connection with criminal procedure, shall be prohibited.
ARTICLE 35 Use of data processing

1. All citizens shall have the right to information on the contents of data banks concerning them and on the use for which it is intended. They shall be entitled to require the said contents to be corrected and brought up to date. 2. Data processing shall not be used for information concerning a person's political convictions, religious beliefs or private life except in the case of non-identifiable data for statistical purposes. 3. Citizens shall not be given all-purpose national identification numbers.
ARTICLE 36 Family, marriage and filiation 1. Everyone shall have ghe right to found a family and marry on terms of complete equality.

2. The conditions for and effects of marriage and its dissolution by death or divorce shall be regulated by law without regard to the form of solemnisation. 3. Husbands and wives shall have equal rights and duties with regard to civil and political capacity and the maintenance and education of their children. 4. Children born out of wedlock shall not for that reason be the subject of discrimination; discriminatory designations of filiation shall not be used by the law or by government departments. 5. Parents shall have the right and duty to bring up their children. 6. Children shall not be separated from their parents unless the latter fail to perform their fundamental duties towards the former, and then only by judicial decision.
ARTICLE 37 Freedom of expression and information

1. Everyone shall have the right to express and make known his thoughts freely by words, images or any other means and obtain information without hindrance or discrimination. 2. The exercise of these rights shall not be prevented or restricted by any type or form of censorship. 3. Offences committed in the exercise of these rights shall be punishable under ordinary law, the courts of law having jurisdiction to try them. 4. The right of reply shall be equally and effectively be secured to all natural and artificial persons.
ARTICLE 38 Freedom of the press 1.

Freedom of the press shall be safeguarded.

2. Freedom of the press shall involve freedom of expression and creation for journalists and literary contributors and a place for the former in giving ideological orientation to information organs not belonging to the state or to political parties. without any other sector or group of workers having power to exercise censorship or prevent free creativity. 3. Freedom of the press shall involve the right to found newspapers and any other publications without prior administrative authority, deposit or qualification. 4. Periodicals and non-periodical publications may belong to any non-profit-making bodies corporate, journalistic interprises and publishing houses in company form or natural persons of Portuguese nationality. 5. No administrative or fiscal system, credit policy or foreign trade policy shall affect the freedom of the press, directly or indirectly, and the means necessary to protect the independence of the press against political and economic powers shall be safeguarded by law. 6. The television shall not be privately owned. 7. Means of public information, in particular those belonging to the State, shall be regulated by law through an information statute.

ARTICLE 39 State's means of public information

1. Means of public information belonging to the state or to bodies directly or indirectly subject to its economic control shall be used in such a way as to safeguard their independence of the government and public administrative authorities. 2. The possibility of expressing and confronting the various currents of opinion in the means of public information referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be safeguarded.

3. In the means of public information referred to in this article there shall be established information councils comprising proportionate numbers of representatives appointed by those political parties that hold seats in the Assembly of the Republic. 4. The information councils shall have powers to secure a general orientation in keeping with ideological plurality.
ARTICLE 40 Right to broadcasting time

1. The political parties and trade union and professional organisations shall have the right to broadcasting time on radio and television in keeping with their representativeness, according to criteria to be laid down in the information statute. 2. In election periods the competing political parties shall have the right to regular broadcasting time fairly apportioned.
ARTICLE 41 Freedom of conscience, religion and worship

1. Freedom of conscience, religion and worship shall be inviolable. 2. No one shall be persecuted, deprived of rights or exempted from civil obligations or duties because of his convictions or religious practices. 3. The churches and religious communities shall be separate from the state and shall be free to organise and exercise their own ceremonies and worship. 4. The freedom to teach any religion within its own denomination and the use of its own means of public information for the pursuit of its activities, shall be safeguarded.

5. The right of conscientious objection shall be recognised, provided that conscientious objectors shall be required to perform unarmed service for a period identical with that of compulsory military service.
ARTICLE 42 Freedom of cultural creation

1. Intellectual, artistic and scientific creation shall be unrestricted. 2. This freedom shall include the right to invention, production and dissemination of scientific, literary or artistic works, including legal protection of copyright.
ARTICLE 43 Freedom to learn and teach

1. The freedom to learn and teach shall be safeguarded. 2. The state shall not arrogate to itself the right to plan education and culture in accordance with any philosophical, aesthetic, political, ideological or religious guidelines. 3. Public education shall not be denominational.
ARTICLE 44 Right to travel and emigrate

1. The right of all citizens to travel and to settle freely anywhere in the national territory shall be safeguarded. 2. The right to emigrate or leave the national territory and the right to return to it shall be secured to everyone.

ARTICLE 45 Right to meet and demonstrate

1. Citizens shall have the right to meet peacefully and without arms,' even in public places, without requiring any authorisation. 2. The right of all citizens to demonstrate shall be recognised.
ARTICLE 46 Freedom of association

1. Citizens shall have the right to form associations freely and without requiring any authorisation provided such associations are not intended to promote violence and their objectives are not contrary to the criminal law. 2. Associations may pursue their objectives freely without interference by any public authority. They shall not be dissolved by the state and their activities shall not be suspended except by judicial decision in the cases provided by law. 3. No one shall be obliged to join any association or forced by any means to remain in it. 4. Armed, military-type, militarised or para-military associations outside the state and the Armed Forces and organisations which adopt Fascist ideology shall not be permitted.
ARTICLE 47 Political associations and parties

1. Freedom of association shall include the right to establish or join political associations and parties and through them to work democratically to give form to the will of the people and to organise political power. 2. No one shall be a member of more than one political party simultaneously, or be deprived of the

exercise of any right because of membership, or cessation of membership, of a lawfully constituted party. 3. Without prejudice to the philosophy or ideology inspiring their programmes, political parties shall not use names that contain terms directly related to any religion or church or use emblems which may be mistaken for national or religious symbols.
ARTICLE 48
Participation in public life

1. All citizens shall have the right to take part in political life and the control of the country's public affairs, either directly or through freely-elected representatives. 2. There shall be universal, secret and equal suffrage for all citizens over the age of 18 years, subject to incapacities as provided in general law. Its exercise shall be personal and constitute a civic duty. 3. Every citizen shall have the right to objective information about acts of state and other public bodies and to be informed by the government and other authorities about the management of public affairs. 4. All citizens shall have the right of access to public functions in equal and free conditions.
ARTICLE 49
Right of petition and popular action

1. All citizens may individually or collectively submit to the organs of supreme authority or to any authority whatsoever petitions, representations, claims or complaints in defence of their rights, the Constitution, the laws or the general interest. 2. The right to popular action in the cases and on the conditions provided for by law shall be recognised.

SECTION III Economic, social and cultural rights and duties
CHAPTER I General principle

ARTICLE 50
Safeguards and conditions of effectiveness

The collectivisation of the principal means of production, the planning of economic development and the democratisation of institutions are safeguards and conditions for the effectiveness of economic, social and cultural rights and duties.
CHAPTER II Economic rights and duties

ARTICLE 51
Right to work

1. Everyone shall have the right to work. 2. The duty to work is inseparable from the right to work, except for those persons whose capacities have been diminished by age, sickness or disability. 3. Everyone shall have the right to choose his occupation or type of work freely, subject to such restrictions as are imposed by law in the general interest or are inherent in his own capacity.
ARTICLE 52
Duties of the state with regard to the right to work

It shall he the duty of the state, by implementing

plans for economic and social policy, to safeguard the right to work, ensuring: a. the implementation of policies of full employment and the right to material assistance for persons involuntarily unemployed; b. security of employment, dismissals without good reason or for political or ideological motives being prohibited; c. equality of opportunity in the choice of occupation or type of work and conditions preventing access to any post, work or professional category being prohibited or restricted by reason of a person's sex; d. cultural, technical and vocational training for workers which combine manual and intellectual work.
ARTICLE 53 Rights of workers

All workers shall be entitled, regardless of age, sex, race, nationality, religion or ideology, to: a. remuneration for their work according to its quantity, nature and quality, on the principle of equal pay for equal work so as to secure to them an appropriate livelihood; b. the organisation of work in conditions making for dignity so as to permit personal selffulfilment; c. safe and healthy working conditions; d. rest and recreation, a limit to the length of the working day, a weekly rest day and holidays with pay.

ARTICLE 54 Duties of the state with regard to the rights of workers

It shall be the duty of the state to secure the conditions of work, remuneration and rest to which workers are entitled, in particular by: a. fixing and keeping up to date a national minimum wage and maximum wage, having regard among other factors to workers' needs, the increase in the cost of living, the degree of development of the forces of production, economic and financial stability and the formation of capital for development; b. fixing a national working day of given length; c. special protection at work for women during pregnancy and after childbirth, for minors, for disabled persons and for those engaged in activities requiring particular effort or working in unhealthy, poisonous or dangerous conditions; d. systematic development of a network of rest and holiday centres, in co-operation with welfare organisations.
ARTICLE 55 Workers' committees

1. Workers shall have the right to set up committees for the defence of their interests and for a democratic share in the running of their enterprise, with a view to strengthening the unity of the working classes and mobilising them for the revolutionary process of building democratic workers' power. 2. The committees shall be elected at plenary assemblies of workers by direct and secret ballot. 3. The statutes of such committees shall be approved at a plenary assembly of the workers.

4. The members of the committees shall enjoy the protection afforded by law to trade union delegates. 5. Co-ordinating committees may be set up, in such a form as to safeguard the interests of the workers, for the purpose of more effective intervention in economic reorganisation.
ARTICLE 56 Rights of workers' committees

Workers' committees shall have the right to: a. receive all information needed for the pursuit of their activities; b. supervise the management of enterprises; c. intervene in the reorganisation of production units; d. participate in the drawing up of labour legislation and social and economic plans concerning their sector.
ARTICLE 57 Trade union freedom

1. Workers shall be free to form trade unions, a condition and safeguard for the building of their unity in defence of-their rights and interests. 2. In the exercise of trade union freedom the following freedoms shall be safeguarded for workers without discrimination: a. freedom to set up trade union associations at all levels; b. freedom of membership, no worker being required to pay dues to a trade union of which he is not a member;

c. freedom in the organisation and internal regulation of trade union associations; d. the right to engage in trade union activity within the enterprise. 3. Trade union associations shall be governed by the principles of democratic organisation and management, based on regular elections to their governing bodies by secret ballot. They shall not be subject to any authorisation or recognition, their foundation being active participation by the workers in all aspects of trade union activity. 4. Trade union associations shall be independent of employers, the state, religious denominations. Adequate safeguards for such independence shall be laid down by law as the foundation of the unity of the working classes. 5. In order to ensure unity and dialogue among the varions currents of opinion which may exist in the trade unions, workers shall enjoy secure exercise of the right to different tendencies in the unions, in cases and forms laid down in their statutes. 6. Trade union associations shall have the right to establish relations with or to join international trade union organisations.
ARTICLE 58 Rights of trade union associations and collective agreements

1. The trade union associations shall be competent to defend, and promote the defence of, the rights and interests of the workers they represent. 2. Trade union associations shall have the right to participate in: a. the preparation of labour legislation; b. the management of social security institutions

and other bodies whose aim is to satisfy the interests of the working classes; c. the supervision of implementation of economic and social plans. 3. Trade union associations shall be competent to exercise the right of concluding collective agreements. 4. The rules governing competence to conclude collective labour agreements and the scope of their provisions shall be laid down by law.

ARTICLE 59 Right to strike

1. The right to strike shall be safeguarded. 2. Workers shall be entitled to decide what interests are to be protected by means of strikes. The sphere of such interests shall not be restricted by law.
ARTICLE 60 Proibition of «lock-outs»

«Lock-outs" shall be prohibited.
ARTICLE 61 Co-operatives and self-management

1. Everyone shall have the right to set up cooperatives. The state shall, in accordance with the National Plan, promote and support initiatives to that end. 2. Experiments in self-management shall be supported by the state.

ARTICLE 62 Right to private property

1. Everyone shall have a secure right to private property and to its transfer during life or by death in accordance with the Constitution. 2. Apart from the cases provided for in the Constitution, expropriation for public purposes shall be subject to the payment of fair compensation.
CHAPTER III Social rights and duties ARTICLE 63 Social security

1. Everyone shall be entitled to social security. 2. It shall be the duty of the state to organise, co-ordinate and subsidise a unified and decentralised system of social security with the agreement and participation of the trade union associations and other organisations of the working classes. 3. The organisation of a social security system shall be without prejudice to the existence of private non-profit-making friendly societies, which shall be permitted, regulated by law and subject to state supervision. 4. The social security system shall protect citizens in sickness, old age, disability, widowhood, orphancy, unemployment and all other situations in which the means of subsistence or capacity to work are lost or reduced.
ARTICLE 64 Health 1. Everyone shall have the right to protection of his health and the duty to defend and foster it.

2. The right to health protection shall be met by the establishment of a universal, general and free national health service, the creation of economic, social and cultural conditions securing the protection of children, the young and the old, the systematic improvement of living and working conditions, the promotion of physical culture and sports in schools and for the population at large and the development of health education among the people. 3. In order to safeguard the right to health protection, the state shall give priority to: a. securing access to preventive and curative medicine and rehabilitation by all citizens, regardless of their economic situation; b. providing the whole country with rational and effective medical and hospital coverage; c. directing its work towards the socialisation of medicine and the medico-pharmaceutical sectors; d. controlling and supervising medicine practised in partnership and privately and co-ordinating it with the national health service; e. controlling and supervising the production, marketing and use of chemical, biological and pharmaceutical products and other means of treatment and diagnosis.
ARTICLE 65 Housing

1. Everyone shall have the right for himself and his family to a dwelling of adequate size satisfying standards of hygiene and comfort and preserving personal and family privacy.

2. In order to safeguard the right to housing it shall be the duty of the state to: a. draw up put into effect a housing policy as part of general regional planning and based on town plans which safeguard the existence of an adequate network of transport and social facilities;
b. encourage and support initiative by local authorities and communities aimed at solving their housing problems and promoting individual building and the establishment of housing co-operative: c. promote private building subject to the public interest.

3. The state shall adopt a policy aimed at introducing a system of rents compatible with family incomes and of individual ownership of dwellings. 4. The state and local authorities shall exercise effective supervision over immovable property, take urban lands into national or municipal ownership where necessary and lay down rights of use.
ARTICLE 66 Environment and quality of life

1. Everyone shall have the right to a healthy and ecologically balanced human environment and the duty to defend it. 2. It shall be the duty of the state, acting through appropriate bodies and having recourse to popular iniative to: a. prevent and control pollution and its effects and harmful forms of erosion;

b. have regard in regional planning to the creation of balanced biological areas; c. create and develop natural reserves and parks and recreation areas and classify and protect landscapes and sites so as to ensure the conservation of nature and the preservation of cultural assets of historical or artistic interest; d. promote the rational use of natural resources, safeguarding their capacity for renewal and ecological stability. 3. Any citizen whose rights under paragraph 1 are threatened or infringed may apply as provided by law for an end to the causes of such violation and for appropriate compensation. 4. The state shall promote the progressive and rapid improvement of the quality of life for all Portuguese.
ARTICLE 67 Family

The state shall recognise the institution of the family and ensure its protection, in particular by: a. promoting the social and economic independence of family units; b. developing a national network of assistance to mothers and children and carrying out a policy for the old; c. co-operating with parents in the education of their children; d. promoting by all necessary means the wider knowledge of family planning methods and setting up legal and technical structures permitting planned parenthood; e. adjusting taxes and social security benefits in line with family responsibilities.

ARTICLE 68
Motherhood

1. The state shall recognise the outstanding social value of motherhood by protecting the mother in her irreplaceable role in the upbringing of children and securing her place in working life and her participation in the civic life of the country. 2. Women at work shall be entitled to a period of leave before and after giving birth without loss of remuneration or other privileges.
ARTICLE 69
Childhood

1. Children shall have the right to the protection of society and the state with a view to their full development. 2. Children, particulary orphans and abandoned children, shall be entitled to especial protection by society and the state against any form of discrimination and oppression and against abuses of authority in the family and other institutions.
ARTICLE 70
Youth

1. Young people, particularly those at work, shall receive special protection for the effective enjoyment of their economic, social and cultural rights, including: a. acess to education, culture and work; b. vocational training and advancement; c. physical training, sport and the pursuit of leisure-time activities. 2. The prime objectives of youth policy shall be to develop the personality of young people, a liking for

unfettered creation and a sense of service to the community. 3. The state, in conjuncton with schools, employers, local people's organisations and cultural and recreational associations, shall promote and assist youth organisations in the pursuit of these aims and all forms of international exchange among young people.
ARTICLE 71 Disablement

1. Citizens who are physically or mentally disabled shall enjoy all the rights and be subject to all the duties embodied in the Constitution, except for the exercise or performance of those for which their disablement unfits them. 2. The state shall carry out a national policy for prevention and for the treatment, rehabilitation and integration of handicapped persons, shall develop a form of education to make society aware of its duties of respect for them and solidarity with them and ensure that they enjoy their rights fully, without prejudice to the rights and duties of their parents or guardians.
ARTICLE 72 Old age

1. The state shall promote a policy for old people which safeguards their economic security. 2. The policy for the old shall also promote conditions of housing and of family and community life that will prevent and overcome the isolation of old persons and their marginal position in society and give them oportunities for creating and developing forms of self-fulfilment through active participation in community life.

CHAPTER IV Cultural rights and duties ARTICLE 73 Education and culture

1. Everyone shall have the right to education and culture. 2. The state shall promote the demarcation of education and conditions in which education at school and by other methods can contribute to development of the personality and the advance of a democratic and socialist society. 3. The state shall promote the democratisation of culture by encouraging and securing access by all citizens, particularly the workers, to the enjoyment of culture and cultural creation through local people's organisations, cultural and recreational associations, means of public information and other appropriate chan nels.
ARTICLE 74 Education

1. The state shall recognise and safeguard the right of all citizens to education and to equality of opportunity in schooling. 2. The state shall reform education so as to eliminate its function of perpetuating the social division in labour relations. 3. In the implementation of its education policy it shall be the duty of the state to: a. ensure compulsory and free universal basic education; b. institute a public system of pre-school education;

c. ensure permanent education and abolish illiteracy; d. secure to all citizens, in accordance with their ability, access to the highest levels of education, scientific research and artistic creation; e. institute by stages free education at all levels; f. co-ordinate education with productive and social activities; g. promote the training of scientific and technical staff of working-class origins.
ARTICLE 75 Public and private education

1. The state shall establish a network of official education institutions to meet the needs of the whole population. 2. The state shall supervise private education which is complementary to public education.
ARTICLE 76 Entry to the universities

Entry to the university shall have regard to the needs of the country in qualified staff. Entry by workers and young people from the working classes shall be encou raged.
ARTICLE 77 Scientific creation and research

1. Scientific creation and research shall be encouraged and protected by the state. 2. Scientific and technological policy shall aim at promoting fundamental and applied research, preference being given to fields relevant to the development of the country, with a view to its progressive liberation

from foreign dependence and with due regard to co-operation and interchange with all peoples.
ARTICLE 78 Cultural heritage

The state shall preserve, defend and enhance the cultural heritage of the Portuguese people.
ARTICLE 79 Physical culture and sport

The state shall recognise the right of citizens to physical culture and sport as a means of human self-fulfilment and shall promote, stimulate and guide their practice and their extension.

PART II Economic organisation
SECTION I General principles
ARTICLE 80 Foundation of the economic and social organisation

The economic and social organisation of the Portuguese Republic shall be based on the development of socialist relations of production through collec tivisation of the principal means of production, land and natural resources and through the exercise of democratic power by the working classes.

ARTICLE 81 Priorities of the state

The state shall give priority to: a. promoting an increase in the social and economic wellbeing of the people, especially of the most underprivileged classes; b. stabilising the economy and ensuring the full use of productive forces; c. promoting equality among citizens through the transformation of economic and social structures; d. correcting where necessary inequalities in the distribution of wealth and income; e. guiding economic and social development towards the balanced growth of all sectors and regions; f. developing economic relations with all peoples whilst always safeguarding national independence and the interests of the Portuguese and of the country's economy; g. abolishing and preventing the formation of private monopolies, by nationalisation or other means, and stopping abuses of economic power and all practices harmful to the common interest; h. achieving agrarian reform; i. eliminating progressively social and economic differences between town and country; j. ensuring fair competition between enterprises by providing legal protection for small- and mediumsized firms which are economically and socially viable; k. creating the legal and technical structures necessary for the introduction of a system of democratic economic planning;

I. protecting the consumer, in particular by supporting the establishment of consumer cooperatives and associations; m. promoting the development of socialist relations of production; n. encouraging participation by the working classes and their organisations in the determination, control and enforcement of all major economic and social measures.

ARTICLE 82 Intervention, nationalisation and socialisation

1. The law shall determine the methods and forms of intervention, nationalisation and socialisation of the means of production and criteria for fixing compensation. 2. The law may stipulate that expropriations of large landowners, big property owners and entrepreneurs or shareholders shall not be subject to any compensation whatsoever.

ARTICLE 83 Nationalisation measures carried out since 25 April 1974

1. All nationalisation measures carried out since 25 April 1974 are irreversible conquests by the working c lasses. 2. Small- and medium-sized firms indirectly nationalised which are outside the basic sectors of the economy may exceptionally be made part of the private sector if the workers do not opt for self-management or a co-operative system.

ARTICLE 84 Co-operatives

1. The state shall promote the establishment of co-operatives, notably production, marketing. and consumer co-operatives, and their activities. 2. Without prejudice to their inclusion in the National Plan, and provided co-operative principles are observed, there shall be no restrictions on the constitution of co-operatives, which shall be free to join together in unions, federations and confederations. 3. The constitution and operation of co-operatives shall not be subject to any authorisation. 4. Fiscal and financial concessions to cooperatives and more favourable conditions for borrowing and for obtaining technical assistance shall be determined by law.
ARTICLE 85 Private enterprise

1. Provided it contributes towards the progress of the community, private economic initiative may be exercised freely within the limits defined in the Constitution, by law and in the National Plan. 2. The basic sectors in which the activity of private firms and other similar bodies are prohibited shall be defined by law. 3. The state shall ensure that private firms observe the Constitution, the law and the National Plan and may intervene in their management to safeguard the general interest and the rights of workers, on conditions to be laid down by law.
ARTICLE 86 Economic activity and foreign investment

Economic activity and investment by foreign natural or artificial persons shall be regulated by law, to ensure

that they contribute to the country's development in accordance with the National Plan and to safeguard national independence and the interests of the workers.
ARTICLE 87 Abandoned means of production

1. Abandoned means of production may be expropriated on conditions to be laid down by law with due regard to the special situation of property of workers who have emigrated. 2. In cases of abandonment without good cause expropriation shall not confer any right to compensation.
ARTICLE 88 Offences against the national economy

1. Offences against the national economy shall be defined by law and shall carry penalties in keeping with their gravity. 2. Penalties may involve the loss of property directly or indirectly acquired by means of the unlawful activity, without any entitlement to compensation on the offender's part. SECTION II
Property structures of the means of production
ARTICLE 89 Property sectors in the means of production 1. During the transition to socialism there shall be three sectors of property in the means of production, lands and natural resources, determined by their ownership and the social form of management.

2. The public sector shall comprise collectivised property and production units under the following forms of management: a. property and production units managed by the state and by other public bodies corporate; b. property and production units used and managed by workers collectives; c. community property used and managed by local authorities. 3. The co-operative sector shall comprise property and production units in the possession of members of co-operatives who manage them in accordance with co-operative principles. 4. The private sector shall comprise property and production units not covered by the foregoing paragraphs.
ARTICLE 90 Development of social property

1. The development of social property, which shall tend towards preponderance, shall be based on the property and production units used and managed by workers collectives, on the community property used and managed by local authorities and on the cooperative sector. 2. Nationalisation, democratic planning, the supervision of management and the democratic power of the workers shall be conditions for the development of social property. 3. Production units managed by the state and other public bodies corporate shall as far as possible evolve towards forms of self-management.

SECTION III National plan
ARTICLE 91 Objectives of the Plan

1. With a view to the building of a socialist economy through the transformation of capitalist relations of production and accumulation, the economic and social organisation of the country shall be directed, co-ordinated and regulated by the National Plan. 2. The Plan shall ensure the harmonious development of sectors and regions, the efficient use of productive forces, the fair distribution of the national product among individuals and regions, the coordination of economic policy with social, educational and cultural policy, the preservation of the ecological balance, the protection of the environment and the quality of life of the Portuguese people.
ARTICLE 92 Legal force

1. The Plan shall be binding on the state public sector and shall apply to , other activities of public interest through programme contracts. 2. The Plan shall also state the limits within which enterprises in other sectors are to operate.
ARTICLE 93 Structure

The Plan shall include:
a.

a long-term plan stating the major objectives for the Portuguese economy and the means by which they are to be achieved;

b. a medium-term plan containing overall, sectoral and regional action programmes for the legislative periods; c. an annual plan, which shall constitute the fundamental basis for the government's activity and shall be reflected in the state's budget for the year.
ARTICLE 94 Preparation and implementation

1. The Assembly of the Republic shall be competent to approve the major options corresponding to each Plan and to scrutinise the relative progress reports. 2. The work of preparing the Plan shall be co-ordinated by a National Planning Council, and the population shall take part in it through local authorities and communities, organisations of the working classes and bodies representing economic activities. 3. Implementation of the Plan shall be decentralised by regions and sectors, without prejudice to central co-ordination for which the government shall be competent in the last resort.
ARTICLE 95 Planning regions

1. The country shall be divided into planning regions based on the geographical, natural, social and human potentialities and characteristics of the national territory, with a view to achieving its balanced development, regard being had to the needs and interests of the population in different areas. 2. The planning regions and the system of regional planning organs be laid down by law.

SECTION IV Agrarian reform
ARTICLE 96 Aims of agrarian reform

Agrarian reform is one of the fundamental instruments for the building of socialist society and shall aim to: a. promote improvement of the economic, social and cultural situation of farm workers and small and medium farmers by changing land structures and progressively transferring the use of the land and of the means of production utilised directly in its exploitation to those who work it, as the first step towards creating new relations of production in agriculture; b. increase production and productivity in agriculture by providing it with suitable infrastructures and human, technical and financial resources to ensure that the country's needs are best met and to increase exports; c. create the conditions necessary to achieve effective equality between those who work in agriculture and other workers and prevent the agricultural sector from being at a disadvantage in its trade relations with other sectors.
ARTICLE 97 Abolition of large estates 1. The transfer of the use of the land and of the means of production utilised directly in its exploitation to those who work it shall be brought about through expropriation of large estates and big capitalist enterprises.

2. Property which has been expropriated shall be handed over for exploitation to small farmers, farm workers or small farmers co-operatives or other units of collective exploitation by workers. 3. The transactions provided for in this article shall be carried out in accordance with the agrarian reform law and with the guidelines laid down in the National Plan.
ARTICLE 98 Smaller estates

Without prejudice to property rights, the agrarian reform shall seek to bring about in smallholding regions a suitable redistribution of holdings, primarily by integrating the various units in co-operatives or, whenever necessary, by their consolidation or leasing through the agrarian reform co-ordinating body.
ARTICLE 99 Small and medium farmers

1. The agrarian reform shall secure small and medium farmers property in their land as the instrument or result of their work, and shall safeguard the interests of emigrants and of those who have no other means of livelihood. 2. The criteria for the maximum sizes of private farms shall be determined by law.
ARTICLE 100 Co-operatives and other forms of collective working

Achievement of the aims of agrarian reform implies the establishment by farm workers and small and medium farmers, with the support of the state, of production, purchase, sale and service co-operatives and other forms of collective exploitation by workers.

ARTICLE 101 Forms of farming on land belonging to others

1. Leasing systems and other forms of farming on land belonging to other persons shall be governed by law in such a way as to safeguard stability and the farmer's legitimate interests. 2. Censive and colonical systems shall be abolished and conditions shall be created for farmers whereby the limited liability system in agriculture may be effectively abolished.
ARTICLE 102 State aid

1. Small and medium farmers, whether individually or in co-operatives, agricultural workers co-operatives and other forms of collective farming by workers shall be entitled to state aid. 2. State aid shall include, in accordance with the guidelines of agrarian reform and the National Plan: a. the granting of loans and technical assistance; b. support by public enterprises and co-operatives engaged in marketing, at stages preceding and following production; c. socialisation of the risks resulting from unforeseeable or uncontrollable climatic and phytopathological events.
ARTICLE 103 Agrarian planning and reorganisation and prices

The state shall pursue a policy of agrarian planning and reorganisation in keeping with ecological and social conditions in the country and shall secure the marketing of agricultural products, within the guidelines

laid down in agricultural and food policies, by fixing the respective guaranteed prices at the beginning of each season.
ARTICLE 104 Participation in agrarian reform

There shall be secured to farm workers and small and medium farmers, acting through their own organisations, by co-operatives and by other forms of collective farming by workers, a share in the planning and implementation of agrarian reform, in particular in the bodies set up to that end. SECTION V
Financial and fiscal system
ARTICLE 105

Financial and monetary system

1. The structure of the financial system shall be laid down by law in such a way as to ensure saving and its security and the use of the necessary financial resources for the expansion of productive forces with a view to the progressive effective socialisation of the economy. 2. The Bank of Portugal, as the central bank, shall have the monopoly of the money issue, and shall co-operate in accordance with the National Plan and the government's directives, in carrying out monetary and financial policies.
ARTICLE 106

Tax system

1. The structure of the tax system shall be laid down by law with a view to the egalitarian distribution

of wealth and income and the satisfaction of the state's financial needs. 2. Taxes shall be created by law, which shall determine the incidence, rates, concessions and safeguards for taxpayers. 3. No one shall be compelled to pay taxes which have not been created as provided in the Constitution and whose settlement and collection are not effected in the forms laid down by law.
ARTICLE 107 Taxes

1. The tax on personal income shall seek to reduce inequality. It shall be a single progressive tax having regard to family needs and income and shall seek to limit incomes to a national maximum fixed by law each year. 2. Enterprises shall be taxed fundamentally on their real income. 3. The tax on inheritances and donations shall be progressive, so as to make for equality among citizens, arid shall have regard to transmission by inheritance of the fruits of labour. 4. Consumer taxes shall seek to adapt the structure of consumption to the needs of socialisation of the economy. The goods necessary to the livelihood of the least favoured and their families shall be exempted and the tax shall bear heavily on luxury articles.
ARTICLE 108 Budget

1. The budget law shall be voted each year by the Assembly of the Republic. It shall comprise:
a. a breakdown of revenue and expenditure, in the

part relating to overall appropriations correspon-

ding to offices of state, Ministries and State Secretariats; b. the basic organisation of the social security budget. 2. The General Budget of the state shall be drawn up by the government in accordance with the budget law and the National Plan, having regard to its statutory or contractual liabilities. 3. The Budget shall be a single unit and shall specify expenditure in such a way as to avoid secret appropriations and funds. 4. The Budget shall make provision for the receipts necessary .to cover expenditure. The rules for its preparation and implementation, the period covered by it and the conditions for raising public loans shall be laid down by law. 5. The implementation of the Budget shall be supervised by the Court of Audit and the Assembly of the Republic, which after hearing the opinion of the said court, shall scrutinise and approve the General Accounts of the state, including the social security accounts. SECTION VI Commercial circuits
ARTICLE 109 Prices and distribution circuits

1. The state shall intervene in the establishment and control of prices and shall rationalise distribution circuits and eliminate unnecessary ones. 2. Misleading publicity shall be prohibited.

ARTICLE 110 Foreign trade

In order to develop and diversify foreign trade relations and safeguard national independence, it shall be the duty of the state to: a. promote control of foreign trade transactions, in particular by establishing public enterprises or enterprises of other types; b. regulate and supervise the quality and prices of imported and exported goods.

PART III Organisation of political power
SECTION I General principles
ARTICLE 111 Source and exercise of power

Political power shall lie with the people and be exercised in accordance with the Constitution.
ARTICLE 112 Participation by citizens in political life

Direct and active participation by the citizens in political life is a condition and fundamental instrument for consolidation of the democratic system.
ARTICLE 113 Organs of supreme authority

The organs of supreme authority shall be the President of the Republic, the Council of the Revolu1.

tion, the Assembly of the Republic, the Government and the Courts. 2. The formation, membership, powers and operation of the organs of supreme authority shall be governed by the Constitution.
ARTICLE 114

Separation and interdependence

1. The organs of supreme authority shall be separate and interdependent as established by the Constitution. 2. No organ of supreme authority, organ of an autonomous region or organ of local government shall delegate its powers to other organs except in the cases and in the conditions expressly laid down in the Constitution and by law.
ARTICLE 115

Conformity of acts with the Constitution

The validity of the laws and other acts of the state, the autonomous regions and local government shall depend on their conformity with the Constitution.
ARTICLE 116

General principles of electoral law

1. Direct, secret and regular elections shall be the general rule in appointing the members of the elected organs of supreme authority, the autonomous regions and local government. 2. Registration of electors shall be compulsory and shall serve no other purpose. There shall be a single registration system for all elections by direct universal suffrage.

3. Election campaigns shall observe the following principles: a. Freedom of propaganda; b. Equality of opportunity and. treatment for the various candidates; c. Impartiality towards candidates on the part of public bodies; d. Supervision of vote-counting. 4. Citizens shall have the duty to collaborate with the elections administration in the forms laid down by law. 5. Votes cast shall be converted into effective suffrages in accordance with the principle of proportional representation. 6. The courts shall be competent to judge the validity of electoral acts.
ARTICLE 117 Political parties and right of opposition

1. Political parties shall participate in the organs based on direct universal suffrage, in accordance with their democratic representativeness. 2. Minorities shall have the right of democratic opposition on conditions laid down in the Constitution.
ARTICLE 118 People's organisations

People's organisations set up in accordance with the Constitution shall have the right to take part in local government in forms provided by law.
67

ARTICLE 119 Corporate organs

1. Meetings of the assemblies that act as organs of supreme authority, organs of the autonomous regions or organs of local government shall be public, except in cases provided for by law. 2. Except where a qualified majority is required under the Constitution or by law, decisions by corporate organs shall be taken by simple majority, provided that a majority of the statutory number of members is present.
ARTICLE 120 Responsibility of holders of political office

1. Holders of political office shall be politically, civilly and criminally responsible for their acts and omissions in the exercise of their functions. 2. The offences for which holders of political office shall be liable, the penalties applicable and their effects shall be laid down by law.
ARTICLE 121 Principle of re-election

No one shall hold any national, regional or local political office for life.
ARTICLE 122 Publication of decisions

1. Decisions by the organs of supreme authority, the organs of the autonomous regions and the organs

of local government that have effects external to them shall be published. 2. The following shall be published in the official gazette, Diario da Republica: constitutional laws; international conventions; decrees of the President of the Republic; decrees and resolutions of the Council of the Revolution; e. laws and resolutions of the Assembly of the Repu blic; decrees and regulations of the government; f. g. decisions of the courts are made generally binding by the Constitution or by law; a. b. c. d. h. decrees of the autonomous regions. 3. Forms of publication for other acts shall be determined by law. 4. Failure to publish an act shall make it void. SECTION II
President of the Republic
CHAPTER I Status and election ARTICLE 123 Definition

The President of the Republic shall represent the Portuguese Republic and shall ex officio be President

of the Council of the Revolution and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.

ARTICLE 124 Election

1. The President of the Republic shall be elected by direct and secret universal suffrage by the Portuguese citizens who are registered as voters on the national territory. 2. The right to vote shall be exercised in person on the national territory.
ARTICLE 125 Eligibility for election

Citizens entitled to vote who are Portuguese by origin and more than 35 years of age shall be eligible for election.
ARTICLE 126 Re-election

1. No one shall be re-elected for a third consecutive term of office or during the five years immediately following the end of the second consecutive term of office. 2. If the President of the Republic resigns his office within 30 days of an election to the Assembly of the Republic held as a result of its dissolution, he shall not stand as candidate in the resulting election.

ARTICLE 127 Nominations

1. Nominations for the office of President of the Republic shall be sponsored by no less than 7,500 and no more than 15,000 citizens entitled to vote. 2. Nominations shall be submitted to the Supreme Court of Justice at least thirty days before the date fixed for the election. 3. If a candidate dies, the election procedure shall be re-opened in accordance with conditions to be laid down by law.
ARTICLE 128 Date of election

1. The President of the Republic shall be elected at least 30 days before the end of his predecessor's term of office or within 60 days of the office falling vacant. 2. The election shall not take place within 60 days preceding or following a general election to the Assembly of the Republic, the outgoing President's term of office being extended for the necessary period. 3. The Assembly o f the Republic shall not be dissolved during the extension periods provided for in the foregoing paragraph, except as provided in Article 198 (3).
ARTICLE 129 Election system 1. A candidate who obtains more than half the votes validly cast shall be elected President of the Republic.

2. If none of the candidates obtains this number of votes, there shall be a second ballot within 21 days of the first. 3. Only the two candidates who have obtained most votes and who have not withdrawn shall stand for election in the second ballot.
ARTICLE 130 Induction and swearing in

1. The President elect shall be inducted before the Assembly of the Republic or, if it has been dissolved, before the Supreme Court of Justice. 2. The induction shall take place on the last day of the term of office of the outgoing President or, in the case of elections after the office has fallen, vacant, on 8th day following publication of the election result. 3. During his induction the President of the Republic shall take the following oath: .1 swear on my honour to perform faithfully the office with which I am invested and to defend and cause to be fulfilled the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic».
ARTICLE 131 Term of office

1. The President of the Republic shall hold office for five years. His term of office shall end when the newly elected President is inducted. 2. If the office falls vacant the President of the Republic subsequently elected shall begin a new term of office.

ARTICLE 132 Absence from the national territory

1. The President of the Republic shall not absent himself from the national territory without the authority of the Council of the Revolution and the consent of the Assembly of the Republic, if it is in session. 2. Consent by the Assembly of the Republic shall not be necessary if the President is in transit or on an unofficial journey of not more than 10 days. 3. Failure to comply with paragraph 1 above shall automatically result in forfeiture of office.
ARTICLE 133 Criminal liability

1. The President of the Republic shall be answered before the Supreme Court of Justice for offences committed in the performance of his duties. 2. It shall be the duty of the Council of the Revolution to initiate proceedings, which however shall not take their course unless the Assembly of the Republic so decides by a majority of two thirds of its members entitled to vote. 3. Conviction shall involve dismissal from office. 4. The President of the Republic shall be answerable after the end of his term of office for offences not committed in the performance of his duties.
ARTICLE 134 Resignation

1. The President of the Republic may resign from office by message addressed to the Council of the Revolution and the Assembly of the Republic.

2. Such resignation shall take effect by publication of the message in the Diario da Republica.
ARTICLE 135

Acting President

1. During absences or temporary inabilities to act of the President of the Republic and during vacancies in the office before induction of the newly elected President, the functions of President shall be performed by the President of the Assembly of the Republic or, if it has been dissolved, by a member of the Council of the Revolution to be appointed by. 2. The President of the Assembly of the Republic shall not fulfil his mandate as a member of the Assembly whilst he is acting as President of the Republic.
CHAPTER II Powers
ARTICLE 136

Powers with regard to the working of other organs

Where other organs are concerned, the President of the Republic shall have the following functions: a. to preside over the Council of the Revolution; b. to fix the dates for elections to the Assembly of the Republic, in accordance with the electoral law; c. to convene extraordinary sessions of the Assembly of the Republic; d. to address messages to the Assembly of the Republic;

e. to dissolve the Assembly of the Republic on the recommendation of the Council of the Revolution or as is required to do under Article 198 (3); f. to appoint the Prime Minister and relieve him of his post as provided in Article 190; g. to appoint the members of the government and relieve them of their posts at the proposal of the Prime Minister; h. to preside over the Council of Ministers when the Prime Minister so requests; i. to dissolve or suspend the organs of the autonomous regions after consulting the Council of the Revolution; j. to appoint one of the members of the Constitutional Commission and the Chairman of the Advisory Commission on the Autonomous Regions; I. to appoint and relieve of their posts, at the proposal of the government, the President of the Court of Audit, the Procurador-Geral da Republica, and the representatives of the state in the autonomous regions.
ARTICLE 137 Powers intrinsic to office 1. The powers intrinsic to the office of President of the Republic shall be:

a. to act as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces; b. to promulgate and cause to be published the laws of the Assembly of the Republic and the legislative orders and implementing orders of the Council of the Revolution and the government and to sign other orders; c. to declare a state of siege or emergency, with the authority of the Council of the Revolution, in

all or part of the national territory in cases of actual or imminent attack by foreign forces, serious threats to or disturbance of the democratic order or public disasters; d. to take decisions, after consulting the Council of the Revolution, on all serious emergencies in the life of the Republic; e. to grant pardons and commute sentences. 2. Failure to promulgate or sign an act shall make it void. 3. A state of siege or emergency shall not last for more than 30 days without ratification by the Assembly of the Republic.
ARTICLE 138 Powers in international relation

The President of the Republic shall be competent in international relation to: a. appoint ambassadors and envoys extraordinary at the proposal of the government, and accept the credentials of foreign diplomatic representatives; b. ratify international treaties once they have been duly approved; c. declare war in the case of actual or iminent aggression and make peace, with the authority of the Council of the Revolucion.
ARTICLE 139 Promulgation and veto

1. Within 15 days of receipt of any decision of the Assembly of the Republic for the purpose of promulgation as a law, or after expiry of the period provided for

in Article 277, if the Council of the Revolution does not rule that the decision is unconstitutional, the President of the Republic may, after consulting the Council of the Revolution, exercise his right of veto in a message which shall state the grounds therefore, and shall request re-examination of the decision. 2. If the Assembly of the Republic confirms its vote by an absolute majority of its members entitled to vote, promulgation shall not be refused. 3. A qualified majority of two thirds of members of the Assembly present shall however be necessary for the confirmation of decisions on the following matters: a. the limits between the public, co-operative and private property sectors; b. external relations; c. the organisation of national defence and determination of the duties to which it gives rise; d. regulation of electoral acts provided for under the Constitution. 4. The President of the Republic shall also exercise his right of veto in the conditions laid down in Articles 277 and 278.
ARTICLE 140 Powers of an Acting President

An Acting President of the Republic shall not perform any of the acts provided for in Article 136 (b), (c), (f) and (i), Article 137 (1) (a), and Article 138 (a) without the approval of the Council of the Revolution.
ARTICLE 141 Ministerial counter-signature

1. Acts of the President of the Republic performed under Article 136 (g), (i) and (I), Article 137 (1) (b), (c)

and (e), and Article 138 (a), (b) and (c) shall be counter-signed by the Government. 2. Promulgation of the acts of the Council of the Revolution, provided for in Article 137 (1) (b) shall require counter-signature only if they involve an increase in expenditure or a reduction in revenue. 3. The absence of a counter-signature shall make the act void. SECTION III
Council of the Revolution
CHAPTER I Function and structure

ARTICLE 142
Definition

The council of the Revolution acts as an advisory body to the President of the Republic, as guarantor of the proper working of democratic institutions, of fulfilment of the Constitution and of faithfulness to the spirit of the Portuguese Revolution of 25 April 1974 and as a political and legislative organ in military matters.
ARTICLE 143
Membership

1. The Council of the Revolution shall comprise: a. The President of the Republic; b. The Chief and the Deputy Chief, if any, of the General Staff of the Armed Forces; c. The Chiefs of Staff of the three services of the Armed Forces;

d. The Prime Minister, if he is a member of the Armed Forces; e. 14 officers, of whom 8 from the Army, 3 from the Air Force and 3 from the Navy, appointed by their respective services. 2. In case of the death, resignation or permanent incapacity to act, confirmed by the Council of any of the members referred to in sub-paragraph (e) of the foregoing paragraph, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the respective service of the Armed Forces.
ARTICLE 144 Organisation and working

1. The Council of the Revolution shall be competent to regulate its own organisation and working and draw up its own rules of procedure. 2. The council of the Revolution shall operate in permanent session. 3. The powers of the Council of the Revolution shall not be delegate in their entirety or irrevocably to any one of its members.

CHAPTER II Powers ARTICLE 145 Powers as advisory body to the President of the Republic and as guarantor of the proper working of democratic institutions

As advisory body to the President of the Republic and as guarantor of the proper working of democratic

institutions, the Council of the Revolution shall be competent to: a. advise the President in the performance of his duties; b. authorise the President to declare war and to make peace; c. authorise the President to declare a state of siege or emergency in all or part of the national territory; d. authorise the President to leave the national territory; e. declare the President to be in a state of permanent physical incapacity and confirm any temporary hindrances to the performance of his duties.
ARTICLE 146 Powers as guarantor of fulfilment of the Constitution

As guarantor of fulfilment of the Constitution the Council of the Revolution shall be competent to: a. state its opinion, on its own initiative or at the request of the President of the Republic, on the constitutionality of any act before it is promulgated or signed; b. ensure that the necessary measures are taken to fulfil the Constitution, for which purpose it shall have power to make recommendations; c. scrutinise any published act for constitutionality and make a generally binding declaration that it is unconstitutional, as provided in Article 281.
ARTICLE 147 Powers as guarantor of faithfulness to the spirit of the Portuguese Revolution

As guarantor of faithfulness to the spirit of the Portuguese Revolution of 25 April 1974, the Council of

the Revolution shall be competent to advise the President of the Republic on: a. the appointment and dismissal of the Prime Minister; b. exercice of the right of suspensive veto under Article 139.
ARTICLE 148 Powers in military matters

1. As a political and legislative organ for military matters the Council of the Revolution shall be competent to: a. make laws and regulation concerning the organisation, functioning and discipline of the Armed Forces; b. approve international treaties or agreements on military matters. 2. The powers referred to in sub-paragraph (a) of the foregoing paragraph shall be vested in the Council of the Revolution alone.
ARTICLE 149 Form of validity of acts

1. The legislative or implementing acts of the Council of the Revolution provided for in Articles 144, 148 and 285 shall take the form of decree-laws or implementing decrees respectively. 2. Other acts of the Council of the Revolution shall take the form of resolutions and shall be published independently of promulgation by the President of the Republic.

3. Decree-laws of the Council of the Revolution shall have the same validity as laws of the Assembly of the Republic or the decree-laws of the government, and its implementing decrees shall have the same validity as implementing decrees of the government.

SECTION IV Assembly of the Republic
CHAPTER I Status and election ARTICLE 150 Definition

The Assembly of the Republic is the representative assembly of all Portuguese citizens.
ARTICLE 151 Number of members

The Assembly of the Republic shall have not less than 240 and not more than 250 members as provided by electoral law.
ARTICLE 152 Electoral districts

1. The members of the Assembly shall be elected by the electoral districts provided for by law. 2. The number of members for each district in the national territory shall be proportional to the number of citizens on that district's electoral register.

3. Members shall represent the whole country, not the districts for which they are elected.
ARTICLE 153 Conditions for standing for election

Portuguese citizens entitled to vote may stand for election, subject the restrictions to be laid down by electoral law with regard to incompatible local functions or the holding of certains offices.
ARTICLE 154 Nominations

1. Nominations shall be presented as provided by law, by the political parties either separately or in combination. The lists may include citizens who are not members of the parties concerned. 2. No one shall stand for more than one electoral district or have his name in more than one list.
ARTICLE 155 System of election

1. Members of the Assembly shall be elected by the system of proportional representation according to the Hondt highest average method. 2. The conversion of votes cast into effective suffrages shall not be limited by law through any requirements as to a minimum national percentage of the votes.
ARTICLE 156 Vacant seats and temporary replacement of members

The filling of Assembly seats that fall vacant and the temporary replacement of members, where good cause exists for doing so, shall be regulated by electoral law.

ARTICLE 157 Cases of incompatibility

1. Members of the Assembly who are civil servants or officials of other public bodies corporate shall not perform the duties attaching to such posts while the Assembly is in session. 2. A member of the Assembly who is appointed a member of the Government shall not exercise his mandate while the said appointment is in force. His place shall be temporarily filled as provided in the foregoing article.
ARTICLE 158 Performance of member's duties

1. A member's fulfilment of his mandate shall be without prejudice to his post, social security benefits or permanent career. 2. The conditions in which failure by members, by reasons of meetings of the Assembly or journeys on its behalf, to be present for official acts or activities unconnected with the Assembly warrants the adjournment of such acts or activities shall be regulated by law.
ARTICLE 159 Powers of members

In addition to their powers as set forth in the Rules of Procedure, members of the Assembly shall be entitled to: a. table bills, motions for resolutions and proposals for debate; b. put questions to the Government on any acts by it or by public administrative authorities;

c. ask the government or the organs of any public body for such information and official publications as they may consider useful in the fulfilment of their mandates.
ARTICLE 160 Immunities

1. Members of the Assembly have no civil, criminal or disciplinary liability for the votes they cast and the opinions they express in the performance of their duties. 2. No member of the Assembly shall be detained or arrested without the Assembly's authority, except for a crime punishable by the maximum sentence when he is taken in flagrante delicto. 3. If criminal proceedings are taken against any member of the Assembly and he is indicted or similarly charged the Assembly shall, except in the case of a crime punishable by a major ( 1 ) sentence, decide whether or not he should be suspended to enable the proceeding to take their course.
ARTICLE 161 Rights and privileges

1. Members of the Assembly shall not, without the Assembly's authority, act as jurymen, experts or witnesses while the Assembly is in session. 2. Members of the Assembly shall enjoy the following rights and privileges:
a. deferment of military service, civic service or

civil defence service;

b. free passage and the right to a special passport for their official journeys abroad; c. a special identity card; d. allowances as laid down by law.
ARTICLE 162 Duties

Members of the Assembly shall have the following duties: a. to attend plenary sittings of the Assembly and meetings of those committees to which they belong; b. to discharge their responsibilities in the Assembly and perform the functions to which they are appointed on proposals by their respective parliamentary groups; c. to take part in votes.
ARTICLES 163 Forfeiture and renunciation of mandates

1. A member of the Assembly shall forfeit his mandate if he: a. becomes subject to any of the disabilities or incompatibilities provided by law; b. fails to take his seat in the Assembly or exceeds the number of absences provided for in the Rules of Procedure; c. joins a party other than one that presented him for election; d. is convicted by a court of participation in any organisation with a Fascist ideology. 2. A member of the Assembly may renounce his mandate by written declaration.

CHAPTER II Powers ARTICLE 164 Executive and legislative powers

The Assembly of the Republic shall be competent to:
a. approve amendments to the Constitution as

provided in Articles 286-291;
d. approve the political and administrative statutes

of the autonomous regions; c. approve the Statute of the territory of the territory of Macao; d. enact legislation on all subjects except those which the Constitution reserves to the Council of the Revolution or the government; e. confer legislative authority on the Government; f. grant amnesties; g. approve the national planning laws and budget laws; h. authorise the government to raise loans and engage in other credit transactions not involving floating debts and lay down the relative general conditions; i. define the limits of territorial waters and Portugal's rights to adjacent sea-beds; j. approve treaties on matters within its own legislative power, treaties involving participation by Portugal in international organisations, treaties of friendship, peace treaties, defence treaties, treaties rectifying frontiers and any other treaties which the government submits to it; I. discharge other functions conferred on it under the Constitution and by law.

ARTICLE 165 Supervisory powers

The Assembly of the Republic shall have the following supervisory competence: a. to ensure the fulfilment of the Constitution and laws and to scrutinise the acts of the Government and public administrative authorities; b. to ratify declarations of a state of siege or emergency exceeding 30 days, failing which the state of siege or emergency shall lapse at the end of that period; c. to ratify decree-laws of the government, except those issued in the exercise of the government's reserve legislative powers; d. to receive the accounts of the state, and of other public bodies to be stipulated by law, not later than 31 December of the following year, with the report of the Court of Audit, if prepared, and any other information necessary for their scrutiny; e. to scrutinise the annual progress reports and final report on the National Plan, which reports shall be submitted jointly with the public accounts.
ARTICLE 166 Powers in relation to other organs

As regards its relations with other organs, the Assembly of the Republic shall be competent to: a. scrutinise the government's programme; b. pass motions of confidence in, and censure of, the government; c. express opinions on the dissolutions or suspension of the organs of the autonomous regions;

d. appoint the Provedor de Justice, one member of

the Constitutional Commission and two members of the Advisory Commission on the Autonomous Regions.
ARTICLE 167 Reserve legislative powers

The Assembly of the Republic shall have sole legislative competence in the following matters: a. the acquisition, loss and re-acquisition of Portuguese citizenship; b. The status and capacity of persons; c. rights, freedoms and safeguards; d. the conditions relating to states of siege and emergency; e. the determination of crimes, penalties, security measures, and criminal proceedings, except as provided in Article 148 (1) (a); f. the election of members of the organs of supreme authority, the organs of the autonomous regions and local authorities; g. political parties and associations; h. the organisation of local authorities; participation by the local people's organisations in local government; j. the organisation and powers of the courts and the Ministerio Publico and the status of their members, except in the case of military courts and without prejudice to Article 218 (2); I. the organisation of national defence and determination of the duties to which it gives rise; m. the organisation and sphere of action of the civil service and the civil liability of the Administration;

n. the foundations of the education system; o. the creation of taxes and the revenue system; p. determination of the sectors of ownership of the means of production, including the basic sectors in which private firms and other bodies of a like nature are forbidden to operate; q. the methods and forms of intervention, nationalisation and socialisation of the means of production and the criteria for determining compensation; r. the bases of agrarian reform, including the criteria for determining the maximum size of private farming units; s. the monetary system and the standard of weights and measures; t. the planning system, the membership of the National Planning Council and the determination of planning regions and of a system of regional planning organs; u. the remuneration of the President of the Republic, the members of the Assembly and Government and the judges of the higher courts.
ARTICLE 168 Authorisations to legislate

1. The Assembly of the Republic may authorise the government to issue decree-laws on matters within its own sole powers, and shall specify the subjectmatter and scope of the authorisation and its duration, which may be extended. 2. Authorisation to legislate shall not be used more than once, but may be used in stages. 3. Authorisations shall lapse when the government to which they were granted ceases to hold office, when legislative period ends or when the Assembly is dissolved.

ARTICLE 169 Form of acts of the Assembly

1. The acts provided for in Article 164 (a) shall take the form of constitutional laws. 2. The acts as provided for in Articles 164 (b) - (j) and 165 (b) shall take the form of laws. 3. The acts provided in Article 166 (a) and (b) shall take the form of motions. 4. Other acts of the Assembly of the Republic shall take the form of resolutions. 5. Resolutions, except those approving international treaties, shall be published irrespective of promulgation.
ARTICLE 170 Legislative initiative

1. Power to initiate legislation shall lie with the Members of the Assembly, with the government and, in the case of the autonomous regions, with their respective regional assemblies. 2. Members of the Assembly shall not table bills or move amendments involving any increase in state expenditure or any reduction of state revenue as provided in the budget law. 3. Once a bill has been finally rejected it shall not be re-introduced in the same legislative period unless the Assembly of the Republic has been re-elected. 4. Bills not voted on during the legislative session in which they were presented need not be reintroduced in the following session except where the legislative period has ended, the Assembly has been dissolved or, in the case of private members bills, the government has ceased to hold office.

ARTICLE 171 Deliberation and voting

1. The deliberation on any bill shall include a general debate and a debate on details. 2. If the Assembly so deliberates, the bills approved in a general debate will be voted on details by committees, without prejudice to avocation by the Assembly and to the final vote for general approvement. 3. Matters included in article 167. (c), (d), (g), (h), (i), will always be voted on details.

ARTICLE 172 Ratification of decree-laws

1. A decree-law published by government while the Assembly of Republic is in session, shall be deemed to have been ratified if, at one of the fifteenth sittings subsequent to publication, at least five members of the Assembly don't request that it shall be subjected to ratification. 2. A decree-law published by the government when the Assembly of the Republic is not in session, or under an authorisation to legislate, shall be deemed to have been ratified unless, at one of the first five sittings subsequent to publication, at least twenty members of the Assembly request that it shall be subject to ratification. 3. Ratification may be granted subject to amendments, in which case the legislative order shall remain amended as provided in the law voted by the Assembly. 4. If ratification is refused, the decree-law shall lapse on the day on which the Assembly's resolution was published in the Diario da Republica.

ARTICLE 173 Emergency procedure

The Assembly of the Republic may, at the initiative of any one of its members or the government, decide that any bill or motion for a resolution or the scrutiny of any decree-law whose examination is recommended to it by the Standing Committee shall be dealt with by emergency procedure.
CHAPTER Ill Organisation and working ARTICLE 174 Legislative period

1. Each legislative period shall last four years. 2. In case of dissolution, the Assembly subsequently elected shall not begin a new legislative period. 3. In the event of an election, as a result of dissolution, during the last legislative session, the newly elected Assembly shall complete the current legislative period and continue throughout the following one.
ARTICLE 175 dissolution

1. The order dissolving the Assembly of the Republic shall state the date for the new election, which shall be held within 90 days in accordance with the electoral law in force at the time of dissolution. 2. The Assembly of the Republic shall not be dissolved during a state of siege or emergency. 3. In case of failure to observe this article the dissolution shall be void.

ARTICLE 176 Sitting following election

1. The Assembly of the Republic shall meet of right on the tenth day after the final results of the election are known. 2. If that date falls outside the legislative session, the Assembly shall meet to give effect to Article 178.
ARTICLE 177 Legislative session and convening of the Assembly

1. The legislative session shall run from 15 October to 15 June, without prejudice to any suspensions that the Assembly may decide. 2. Outside the period indicated in the foregoing paragraph, the Assembly shall meet at the initiative of the Standing Committee or, in case of grave emergency, if the Standing Committee is unable to meet, on its own in itiative. 3. Extraordinary sessions of the Assembly may be convened by the President of the Republic to deal with specific business.
ARTICLE 178 Internal powers of the Assembly

The Assembly of the Republic shall be competent to draw up and approve its Rules of Procedure in accordance with the Constitution, to elect its President and the other members of the Bureau (Mesa) and to constitute and elect the Standing Committee and other committees.
ARTICLE 179 Orders of the Day for plenary sittings

1. The Orders of the Day shall be drawn up by the President of the Assembly in accordance with the

priority of business as stipulated in the Rules of Procedure. 2. The Government may request priority for matters of national interest requiring urgent settlement. 3. All parliamentary groups shall be entitled to determine the Orders of the Day for a certain number of sittings, according to criteria to be laid down in the Rules of Procedure, due regard being always had to the position of minority parties or parties not represented in the Government.
ARTICLE 180

Attendance by members of the government at plenary sittings

1. Members of the Government shall be entitled to attend and speak at plenary sittings of the Assembly, as provided in the Rules of Procedure. 2. Sittings may be fixed by agreement with the government, at which its members shall be present to answer oral or written questions and requests for information by members of the Assembly.
ARTICLE 181

Committees

1. The Assembly of the Republic shall have the committees provided for in its Rules of Procedure and may establish committees of enquiry or committees for any other specific purpose. 2. Committees may request members of the Government to attend their meetings. 3. Petitions to the Assembly shall be examined by the committees, which may ask any citizens to give evidence before them.

ARTICLE 182
Standing Committee

1. Between legislative sessions and during suspensions, the Standing Committee of the Assembly shall function. 2. The Standing Committee shall be competent to: a. follow the work of the Government and the administration; b. exercise the powers of the Assembly with regard to the mandates of its members; c. have the Assembly convened whenever necessary; d. make preparations for the opening of the legislative session; e. recommend the examination, when the Assembly is sitting, of legislative orders published by the govern ment.
ARTICLE 183
Parliamentary groups

1. The members of the Assembly elected for each party or combination of parties may form a parliamentary group. 2. Each parliamentary group shall have the following rights: a. to take part in committees of the Assembly in proportion to the number of its members and to designate its representatives; b. to be consulted in the drawing up of the Orders of the Day; c. to initiate two debates in each legislative session on matters of general policy, by means of interpellations to the government;

d. to ask the Standing Committee to have the Assembly convened. e. to request the establishment of parliamentary committees of enquiry. 3. Each parliamentary group shall be entitled to a place of work at the seat of the Assembly and to technical and administrative staff in whom it has confidence, on conditions to be laid down by law.
ARTICLE 184 Officials and specialists serving the Assembly

The work of the Assembly and its committees shall be assisted by a permanent staff of technical and administrative officials and by specialists appointed or temporarily employed, in whatever numbers the President shall consider necessary. SECTION V Government
CHAPTER I Function and structure ARTICLE 185 Definition

1. The government is the organ for conduct of the country's general policy and the highest organ of public administration. 2. The government determines and carries out its policy in observance of the Constitution and in accordance with the objectives of democracy and the building of socialism.

ARTICLE 186 Composition

1. The Government shall comprise the Prime Minister, the other Ministers and the State Secretaries and Under-Secretaries. 2. The government may include one or more Deputy Prime Ministers. 3. The number of Ministries and State Secretariats, their titles and powers and the forms of coordination between them shall be laid down in the order appointing the holders of the respective offices or by legislative order, as the case may be.
ARTICLE 187 Council of Ministers

1. The Council of Ministers shall comprise the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Ministers, if any, and the other Ministers. 2. Councils of specialist ministers may be established by law for particular subjects. 3. The State Secretaries and Under-Secretaries may be called to meetings of the Council of Ministers.
ARTICLE 188 Temporary replacement of members of the government 1. If there is no Deputy Prime Minister, the Prime Minister's place shall be taken in this absence or inability to act by the Minister whom he shall designate to the President of the Republic or, in the absence of such designation, by the Minister whom the President of the Republic shall appoint for the purpose after consulting the Council of the Revolution. 2. Each Minister's place shall be taken in this absence or inability to act by the State Secretary whom

he shall designate to the Prime Minister or, in the absence of such designation, by the member of the government whom the Prime Minister shall appoint for the purpose.
ARTICLE 189

Cessation of functions

1. The Prime Minister shall cease to hold office when relieved of his post by the President of the Republic. 2. Any other member of the government shall cease to hold office when relieved of his post by the Prime Minister. 3. A State Secretary or Under-Secretaries shall cease to hold office when relieved of his post by the appropriate Minister. 4. In case of resignation the members of the outgoing government shall continue in office until the new government takes office.

CHAPTER II Formation and responsibility
ARTICLE 190

Formation

1. The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President of the Republic after consultation with the Council of the Revolution and with the parties represented in the Assembly of the Republic, due regard being had to the election results. 2. The remaining members of the government shall be appointed by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the Prime Minister.

ARTICLE 191 Programme

The government's programme shall set forth the principal political and legislative measures to be taken or to be proposed to the President of the Republic or the Assembly of the Republic with a view to implementation of the Constitution.
ARTICLE 192 Collective responsibility

The members of the government shall be bound by its programme and by the decisions taken in the Council of Ministers.
ARTICLE 193 Political responsibility of the government

The government shall be responsible for its actions to the President of the Republic and the Assembly of the Republic.
ARTICLE 194 Political responsibility of members of the Government

1. The Prime Minister shall be politically responsible to the President of the Republic and, in the context of the government's responsibility, to the Assembly of the Republic. 2. The Deputy Prime Ministers and other Ministers shall be politically responsible to the Prime Minister and, in the context of the government's responsibility, to the Assembly of the Republic. 3. Each State Secretary and Under-Secretary shall be politically responsible to the Prime Minister and to his own Minister.

ARTICLE 195 Scrutiny of the government's programme by the Assembly of the Republic

1. The government's programme shall be presented to the Assembly of the Republic for scrutiny within not more than 10 days of the appointment of the Prime Minister. 2. If the Assembly of the Republic is not in session it shall be required to be convened for the purpose by its President. 3. The debate shall not exceed five days, and until it is closed any parliamentary group may propose rejection of the government's programme. 4. Rejection of the government's programme shall require an absolute majority of members of the Assembly entitled to vote.
ARTICLE 196 Request for vote of confidence

The government may ask the Assembly of the Republic for a vote of confidence on a statement of general policy or on any matter of national interest.
ARTICLE 197 Motions of censure

1. The Assembly of the Republic may, at the initiative of one quarter of its members entitled to vote or at the initiative of any parliamentary group, pass motions of censure on the government concerning the implementation of its programme or any matter of national interest. 2. A motion of censure shall not be considered until 48 hours after it has been tabled. The debate on it shall not last more than three days.

3. If a motion of censure is not approved, its signatories shall not table another such motion during the same legislative session.
ARTICLE 198 Effects of Assembly votes

1. The government shall resign if: a. its programme is rejected; b. a motion of confidence is not approved; c. two motions of censure are approved at an interval of not less than 30-days by an-absolute majority of members of the Assembly entitled to vote. 2. The President of the Republic shall not dissolve the Assembly for rejection of the government's programme, except in case of three consecutive rejections. 3. The President of the Republic shall be required to dissolve the Assembly when, by withholding its confidence from the government, or passing a motion of censure on it, it has brought about a third change of govern ment.
ARTICLE 199 Civil and criminal liability of members of the government

1. Members of the government shall be civilly and criminally liable for the acts they perform or legalise. 2. If court proceedings are taken against a member of the government for any crime and he is indicted or similarly charged, where the crime carries a major sentence ( 1 ), the proceedings shall take their course only if he is suspended from office.

CHAPTER III Powers

ARTICLE 200 Political powers

The government shall have the following political competence: a. to countersign acts of the President of the Republic as provided in Article 141; b. to negotiate and approve the texts of international conventions; c. to approve international agreements and those treaties whose approval is not within the powers of the Council of the Revolution or the Assembly of the Republic or which have not been submitted to the Assembly; d. to perform other acts committed to it under the Constitution or by law.
ARTICLE 201 Legislative powers

1. The government shall have the following legislative competence: a. to issue decree-laws on matters not reserved to the Council of the Revolution or the Assembly of the Republic; b. to issue decree-laws on matters reserved to the Assembly of the Republic, subject to its authorisation; c.. to issue decree-laws in application of laws laying down legal principles or bases. 2. The government shall have sole legislative competence in matters concerning its own organisation and working.

3. Decree-laws not submitted to the Council of Ministers shall be signed by the Prime Minister and the competent Ministers.
ARTICLE 202 Administrative powers

The government shall have the following competence: a. to draw up the National Plan, on the basis of the respective law, and carry it into effect; b. to draw up the General Budget of the State, on the basis of the respective law, and carry it into effect; c. to issue the regulations necessary to give due effect to the laws; d. to superintend the direct and indirect administrative services and activities of the state and independent branches of administration; e. to perform all acts required by law in relation to officials and personnel of the state and of other public bodies corporate; f. to defend democratic legality; g. to perform all acts and make all arrangements necessary to the promotion of economic and social development and satisfaction of the needs of the community.
ARTICLE 203 Powers of the Council of Ministers

1. The Council of Ministers shall be competent to: a. determine the general lines of government policy and its implementation; b. decide whether to seek votes of confidence in the Assembly of the Republic;

c. approve private member's bills and motions for resolutions; d. approve decree-laws in direct implementation of the government's programme; e. approve the National Plan and the Budget; f. approve acts of the government that involve increases or decreases in public revenue or expenditure; g. decide other matters within the government's competence that are committed to it by law or are submitted by the Prime Minister or any other Minister. 2. Councils of specialist Ministers shall exercise the competence attributed to them by law or delegated to them by the Council of Ministers.
ARTICLE 204 Powers of members of the government 1.

The Prime Minister shall be competent to:

a. direct the government's general policy, co-ordinating and guiding the action of all ministries; b. direct the government's working and establish the general relations between it and other organs of the state; c. perform any other functions committed to him under the Constitution or by law. 2. Ministers shall be competent to: a. carry out the policies laid down for their ministries; b. establish the general relations between the government and other organs of the state where their own ministries are concerned.

SECTION VI
The Courts
CHAPTER I General principle ARTICLE 205 Definition

The courts are the organs of supreme authority competent to administer justice in the name of the people.
ARTICLE 206 Judicial function

In administering justice the courts shall ensure the defence of those rights and interests of citizens that are protected by law, punish violations of democratic legality and settle public and private conflicts of interest.
ARTICLE 207 Findings as to unconstitutionality

The courts shall not apply unconstitutional provisions or law to matters brought before them, and for this purpose they shall be competent, without prejudice to Article 282, to find that such a provision is unconstitutional.
ARTICLE 208 Independence

The courts shall be independent and subject only to the law.
ARTICLE 209 Assistance by other authorities

In the discharge of their functions the courts shall be entitled to the assistance of other authorities.

ARTICLE 210 Enforcement of decisions

1. The decisions of the courts shall be binding on all public and private bodies and shall prevail over the decisions of all other authorities. 2. The conditions of enforcement of the courts' decisions in relation to all other authorities, and the penalties for failure to enforce such decisions, shall be regulated by law.	
ARTICLE 211 Hearings before the courts

Hearings before the courts shall be public, except when the competent court shall show cause for deciding otherwise, in order to safeguard personal dignity and public morals or to ensure its own proper working.
CHAPTER 11 Organisation of the courts ARTICLE 212 Categories of courts

1. There shall be courts of law of first instance, courts of second instance and the Supreme Court of Justice. 2. There shall be courts martial and a Court of Audit. 3. There may be administrative courts and revenue cou rts.
ARTICLE 213 Specialisation

1. In the first instance there may be courts with special jurisdiction and courts specialising in the hearing of specific matters.

2. The Courts of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Justice may work in specialist sections. 3. There shall be no courts with exclusive jurisdiction to try certain categories of crimes.
ARTICLE 214 Levels of jurisdiction

1. The courts of first instance shall as a rule be the District Courts, in addition to which there may be the courts referred to in article 213 (1). 2. The courts of second instance shall as a rule be the Courts of Appeal. 3. The Supreme Court of Justice shall serve as a court of first or second instance in cases to be determined by law.
ARTICLE 215 Supreme Court of Justice

The Supreme Court of Justice shall be the highest Court of law.
ARTICLE 216 Juries

1. Each jury shall comprise the judges of the plenary court and jurymen. 2. The jury shall take part in the trial of serious crimes when the prosecution or the defence so demands.
ARTICLE 217 Participation by the people and technical assessors

People's judges may be created, and other forms of participation by the people in the administration of justice established, by law.
1.

2. Provision may be made by law for participation by technically qualified assessors in the hearing of specific matters.
ARTICLE 218 Jurisdiction of Courts Martial

1. The Courts Martial shall have jurisdiction for the trial of essentially military offences. 2. Where good cause exists therefor, deliberate offences comparable to the offences covered by the foregoing paragraph may be included by law in the jurisdiction of the Courts Martial.
ARTICLE 219 Jurisdiction of the Court of Audit

The Court of Audit shall have jurisdiction for the giving of opinions on the general accounts of the state, for scrutinising the lawfulness of public expenditure and for passing judgement on such accounts as shall be required by law to be submitted to it.
CHAPTER III Judges of the courts of law ARTICLE 220 Unity of the Bench

The judges of the courts of law shall form a single body governed by a single statute.
ARTICLE 221 Safeguards

1. Judges shall be irremovable and shall not be transferred, suspended, retired or dismissed except as provided by law.

2. Judges shall not be held liable for their decisions except as provided by law.
ARTICLE 222 Cases of incompatibility

1. Practising judges shall not hold any other paid office, whether public or private. 2. Practising judges shall not, without the authority of the Conselho Superior da Magistratura, be appointed to commissions providing services unrelated to judicial work.
ARTICLE 223 “ Conselho Superior da Magistratura» Higher Council of the Bench

1. The rules for membership of the Conselho Superior da Magistratura shall be laid down by law. There shall be members elected by the judges from among their own number. 2. The Conselho Superior da Magistratura shall be competent to appoint judges, assign them to specific posts, transfer them, promote them and take disciplinary action.
CHAPTER IV «Ministario Ptiblico» State Counsel Division ARTICLE 224 Functions and status 1. The Ministêrio Pablico shall be competent to represent the state, take criminal proceedings and

defend democratic legality and such interests as shall be stipulated by law. 2. The Ministerio POblico shall have independent status.
ARTICLE 225 Staff of the Ministerio PUblico

1, The staff of the Ministerio Pithlico shall be responsible members of the judicial profession, hierarchically graded, and shall not be transferred, suspended, retired or dismissed except as provided by law. 2. The Procuradoria-Geral da Republica shall be competent to make appointments to the staff of the Ministerio Pablico, assign them to specific posts, transfer them, promote them and take disciplinary action.
ARTICLE 226 4cProcuradoria-Geral da Office of the State Counsel General

1. The Procuradoria-Geral da Republica shall be the highest organ of the Ministerio Publico and shall be presided over by the Procurador-Geral da Republica. 2. The rules for the organisation and membership of the Procuradoria-Geral da Republica shall be laid down by law. SECTION VII
Autonomous regions
ARTICLE 227 Political and administrative status of the Azores and Madeira

1. The special political and administrative arrangements for the archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira

shall be based on their geographical, economic and social conditions and on the historic aspirations of the peoples of the islands to autonomy. 2. The autonomy of the regions shall serve the interests of democratic participation by their citizens, their economic and social development, the promotion and defence of regional interests and the strengthening of national unity and of the bonds of solidarity among all the Portuguese. 3. The political and administrative autonomy of the regions shall in no way affect the state's full sovereignty and shall be exercised within the limits of the Constitution.
ARTICLE 228 Statutes

1. The political and administrative statutes for the autonomous regions shall be drafted by the regional assemblies and submitted to the Assembly of the Republic for discussion and approval. 2. If the Assembly of the Republic rejects or amends a draft it shall return it to the regional assembly concerned for its consideration and opinion. 3. Once the said opinion has been expressed, the Assembly of the Republic shall take the final decision.
ARTICLE 229 Powers of the autonomous regions

The autonomous regions shall be public law bodies with the following powers, which shall be further defined in their statutes:
1.

a. to legislate, in observance of the Constitution and the general laws of the Republic, on such matters of special interest to the regions as are

not within the exclusive powers of the organs of supreme authority; b. to issue regulations under regional legislation and under such general laws passed by the organs of supreme authority as do not reserve to those organs the right to issue the regulations in question; c. to initiate legislation by tabling bills in the Assembly of the Republic; d. to exercise their own executive authority; e. to administer and dispose of their own assets and to perform acts and conclude contracts in which they have an interest; f. to dispose of revenue collected by them and of any other revenue assigned to them and to apply all such revenue in cover of their own expenses; g. to guide and supervise their local authorities; h. to supervise public departments and institutions and nationalised undertakings whose activities are confined to the region in question and to exercise supervision in other cases where warranted by the regional interest; i. to draw up the regional economic plan and participate in the preparation of the National Plan; j. to take part in laying down and implementing fiscal, monetary, financial and foreign exchange policies in such a way as to secure regional control of the means of payment in circulation and provide funds for the investment necessary to their economic and social development; I. to participate in negotiating international treaties and agreements of direct concern to them and to share in any benefit derived therefrom. 2. The regional assemblies may request the Council of the Revolution to declare unconstitutional any

provisions of law passed by the organs of supreme authority that infringe the rights of the regions as laid down in the constitution.
ARTICLE 230 Limits to powers

The autonomous regions shall not: a. restrict the rights of workers as recognised by law; b. impose restrictions on the passage of persons and goods between them and the rest of the national territory; c. restrict any occupation or public office to persons born or resident in the region.
ARTICLE 231 Co-operation between the organs of supreme authority and the regional organs

1. The organs of supreme authority shall, in co-operation with the organs of regional government, ensure the economic and social development of the autonomous regions, and shall seek in particular to correct inequalities caused by their insular situation. 2. The organs of supreme authority shall always consult the organs of regional government on those questions within their powers which concern the autonomous regions.
ARTICLE 232 Representation of the Republic's supreme authority

1. In each of the autonomous regions the supreme authority of the Republic shall have special representation through a Minister of the Republic appointed by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the

Prime Minister after consultation with the council of the Revolution. 2. The Minister of the Republic shall be competent to coordinate the work of the central departments of state as it affects the interests of the region, for which purpose he shall have ministerial powers and a seat in meetings of the Council of Ministers that deal with matters of interest to the region concerned. 3. The Minister of the Republic shall superintend the administrative functions performed by the state in the region and coordinate them with those performed by the region itself. 4. In his absence or inability to act, the place of the Minister of the Republic in the region shall be taken by the President of the regional assembly.
ARTICLE 233 Governing organs in the regions

1. The regional assembly and the regional government shall be governing organs peculiar to each region. 2. The regional assembly shall be elected by direct and secret universal suffrage in accordance with the principle of proportional representation. 3. The regional assembly shall have sole exercise of the powers referred to in Article 229 (a), the second part of Article 229 (b) and Article 229 (c) and sole power to approve the regional budget and economic plan. 4. The regional government shall be politically responsible to the regional assembly. Its Chairman shall be appointed by the Minister of the Republic, due regard being had to the election results. 5. The Minister of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss the other members of the regional government on proposals by its Chairman.

ARTICLE 234 Dissolution and suspension of the regional organs

1. The President of the Republic may, after consulting the Council of the Revolution and the Assembly of the Republic, dissolve or suspend the organs of the autonomous regions for acts contrary to the Constitution. 2. Dissolution of the regional organs shall necessitate a new election within not more than 90 days, in accordance with the electoral law in force at the time of dissolution, failing which the dissolution order shall be void. 3. Suspension of the regional organs shall be for a fixed period not exceeding 15 days. There shall not be more than two suspensions in any one legislative period of the regional assembly. 4. In case of dissolution or suspension of , the regional organs, the government of the region shall be carried on by the Minister of the Republic.
ARTICLE 235 Regional decrees

1. Regional decrees and regulations issued under the general laws of the Republic shall be submitted to the Minister of the Republic for signature and publication. 2. Within 15 days of receiving any decree or regulations as provided in the foregoing paragraph, the Minister of the Republic may exercise his right of veto, showing his reasons therefor in writing and requesting further consideration of the decree or regulations. 3. If the regional assembly confirms its vote by an absolute majority of its sitting members, signature shall not be refused.

4. If however he is of the opinion that the decree or regulations are unconstitutional, the Minister of the Republic may refer the matter to the Council of the Revolution as provided in Articles 277 and 278 and with the same effects, mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 236 Advisory Commission on the autonomous regions 1. The President of the Republic shall be assisted by an advisory commission on the affairs of the autonomous regions, which shall be competent to express opinions on:

a. the lawfulness of acts of the regional organs at the request of the Minister of the Republic; b. the confirmity of the laws, regulations and other acts of the organs of supreme authority with the rights of the regions as set forth in their statutes, at the request of the Presidents of the Regional Assemblies; c. other matters which may be submitted to it by the President of the Republic or which it shall have power to consider by virtue of the statutes or the general laws of the Republic. 2. The Commission shall comprise: a. one citizen of acknowledged merit, who shall be Chairman, appointed by the President of the Republic; b. four citizens of acknowledged merit and proved competence in legal matters, two of whom shall be appointed by the Assembly of the Republic and one by each regional assembly. 3. The court of final instance designated by law of the Republic shall have jurisdiction in the matters provided for in paragraph 1 (a) and (b) above.

SECTION VIII Local Government
CHAPTER I General principles ARTICLE 237 Local authorities

1. The democratic organisation of the state shall include local authorities. 2. Local authorities shall be territorial bodies corporate with representative organs serving the particular interests of the local population.
ARTICLE 238 Categories of local authorities and administrative division

1. The local authorities on the mainland shall be the parishes, municipal authorities and administrative regions. 2. The autonomous regions of the Azores and Madeira shall comprise parishes and municipal authorities. 3. In large metropolitan areas other organisational forms of territorial self-government may be established by law in accordance with special local conditions. 4. The administrative divisions of the national territory shall be established by law.
ARTICLE 239 Functions and organisations of local authorities

The functions and organisations of local authorities and the powers of their organs shall be regulated by law in accordance with the principle of administrative decentralisation.

ARTICLE 240 Local assets and finance

1. The local authorities shall have their own assets and financial resources. 2. The system of local finance shall be established by law and shall aim at the fair apportionment of public funds by the state and local authorities and at the necessary correction of inequalities between local authorities on the same level. 3. Local authorities' own receipts shall in all cases include the income from management of their assets and the amounts collected for use of their services.
ARTICLE 241 Deliberating and executive organs

1. The organisation of each local authority shall include an elected assembly with powers of decision and a corporate executive organ responsible to it. 2. The assembly shall be elected by direct and secret universal suffrage of the resident citizens, according to the system of proportional representation.
ARTICLE 242 Power to regulate

The assemblies of local authorities shall have their own powers to issue regulations, within the limits of the Constitution, the laws and the regulations of higher local authorities or authorities with powers of oversight.
ARTICLE 243 Administrative oversight

1. The oversight of local authorities shall be exercised on the mainland by the government and in

the Azores and Madeira by the local regional organs, in accordance with the forms and in the cases provided for by law. 2. Supervisory measures particularly restrictive of local autonomy shall require the prior opinion of a local authority organ to be determined by law. 3. Dissolution of the assembly shall be accompanied by the fixing of a date for a new election, which shall be held within 60 days, and there shall be no further dissolution within one year.
ARTICLE 244 Local government staff establishment

1. In order to assist local authorities and give due effect to their actions, a staff establishment shall be organised under the competent ministry, to include technicians in matters of especial concern to local government. 2. The appointment of established administrative officers to local authorities shall be subject to consultation of the authorities concerned.
CHAPTER II Parishes ARTICLE 245 Organs of the parish

The representative organs of the parish shall be the parish assembly and the parish committee.
ARTICLE 246 Parish assembly 1. The parish assembly shall be elected by the citizens entitled to vote who are resident within the parish.

2. In addition to the political parties, other groups of citizens entitled to vote may put forward candidates for election to the parish organs, on conditions laid down by law. 3. Provision may be made by law for the parish assembly to be replaced in parishes with a small population by meetings of all the citizens entitled to vote.
ARTICLE 247 Parish committee

1. The parish committee shall be the executive organ of the parish. It shall be elected by the assembly in secret ballot from among its members. 2. The chairman of the committee shall be the citizen who heads the list that received the most votes in the election to the assembly or, where no assembly exists, the citizen elected for the purpose by the plenary meeting.
ARTICLE 248 Delegation of duties

The parish assembly may delegate to the local people's organisations administrative duties that do not involve the exercise of authority.
CHAPTER III Municipal authorities ARTICLE 249 (‘ Concelhos» and municipal authorities

The existing concelhos shall be the municipal, authorities provided for in the Constitution. Others may be created, or those that are manifestly not viable, abolished by law.

ARTICLE 250 Municipal organs

The representative organs of the municipal authority shall be the municipal assembly, the municipal chamber and the municipal council.
ARTICLE 251 Municipal assembly

The municipal assembly shall comprise the chairmen of the parish councils and at least an equal number of members elected by the votes in the municipal area.
ARTICLE 252 Municipal chamber

The municipal chamber shall be the corporate executive organ of the municipal authority. It shall be elected by the citizens entitled to vote who are resident in its area. The chairman shall be the candidate who heads the list that received the most votes.
ARTICLE 253 Municipal council

The municipal council shall be the municipal authority's advisory organ. Its membership shall be laid down by law in such a way as to ensure fair representation of the economic social, cultural and professional organisations in the municipal area.
ARTICLE 254 Associations and federations

1. Municipal authorities may form associations and federations for the administration of common interests.

2. The establishment of federations may be required by law.
ARTICLE 255 Share of receipts from direct taxation

Municipal authorities shall be entitled to share in the receipts from direct taxation, as laid down by law.
CHAPTER IV Administrative regions ARTICLE 256 Establishment of regions

1. The regions shall be established simultaneously. The regional statute may lay down differences in the arrangements aplicable to each region. 2. The areas of the regions shall correspond to those of the planning regions. 3. The effective establishment of each region shall be subject to favourable votes by a majority of the municipal assemblies representing the greater part of the population of the regional area.
ARTICLE 257 Functions

In addition to their participation in the preparation and implementation of the regional plan, the regions shall be given specific duties involving co-ordination of and support for the actions of the municipal authorities and management of public services.
ARTICLE 258 Organs of the region

The representative organs of the region shall be the regional assembly, the regional committee and the regional council.

ARTICLE 259 Regional assembly

The regional assembly shall comprise, in addition to representatives elected directly by the citizens, at least an equal number of members elected by the municipal assemblies.
ARTICLE 260 Regional committee

The regional committee shall be the corporate executive organ of the region. It shall be elected by the regional assembly in secret ballot from among its members.
ARTICLE 261 Regional council

The regional council shall be the advisory organ of the region. Its membership shall be laid down by law in such a way as to ensure fair representation of the cultural, social, economic and professional organisations in the area of the region.
ARTICLE 262 Representative of the government

In each region there shall be a representative of the government, appointed by the Council of Ministers. He shall also be competent to deal with the local authorities in the area of the region.
ARTICLE 263 Districts

1. Pending establishment of the regions, the division into districts shall continue.

2. There shall be in each district, on conditions to be laid down by law, a deliberating assembly comprising representatives of the municipal authorities, with the civil governor as chairman. 3. The civil governor, assisted by a council, shall be competent to represent the government and exercise oversight in the area of the district.
CHAPTER V Local peoples' organisations ARTICLE 264 Establishment and area

1. With a view to intensifying participation by the population in local administration, local people's organisations may be established for areas smaller than the parish. 2. The parish assembly shall, on its own initiative or if so requested by committees of residents or by a significant number of residents, demarcate territorial areas for the organisations referred to in the foregoing paragraph and settle any disputes resulting therefrom.
ARTICLE 265 Structure

1. The structure of the people's organisations shall be as laid down by law and shall include an assembly of residents and a committee of residents. 2. The assembly of residents shall comprise the residents enrolled in the census of the parish and those not so enrolled who are over 16 years of age and furnish documentary proof that they are residents. 3. The Assembly shall meet when publicly convened, with due notice, by at least 20 of its members or by the committee of residents.

4. The committee of residents shall be elected by secret ballot by the assembly of residents, which may dismiss it at will.
ARTICLE 266 Functions

1. Local people's organisations shall be entitled to: a. petition local authorities on administrative matters of concern to residents; b. participate through its representatives, in the parish assembly, without the right to vote. 2. Local people's organisations shall be competent to perform duties conferred on them by law or delegated to them by the organs of the parish. SECTION IX Public administrative authorities
ARTICLE 267 Fundamental principles

1. Public administrative authorities shall seek to promote the public interest, while observing those rights and interests of citizens that are protected by law. 2. The organs and staff of the administrative authorities shall be subject to the Constitution and the law and shall exercise their functions fairly and impartially.
ARTICLE 268 Structure of public administrative authorities 1. The structure of public administrative authorities shall be such as to bring their services close to the

population, to ensure participation by those concerned in its actual running, in particular through the local people's organisations or other forms of democratic representation, and to avoid bureaucracy. 2. For the purposes of the foregoing paragraph, suitable forms of administrative decentralisation and devolution shall be established by law, without prejudice to the efficiency and unity of action that are necessary or to take the government's powers to direct and supervise. 3. Administrative procedures shall be dealt with in a special law, which shall ensure rationalisation of the methods to be used by departments and participation by the citizens in the decision-making process or in deliberations which concern them.
ARTICLE 269 Rights and safeguards of citizens in relation to public administrative authorities

1. Citizens shall be entitled to be informed by public administrative authorities, whenever they so require on the progress of proceedings in which they are directly concerned and to have knowledge of final decisions taken with regard to them. 2. Interested parties shall have access to the courts to plead the unlawfulness of any final and enforceable act of public administrative authorities.
ARTICLE 270 Civil service

1. Officials and personnel of the state and of other public bodies will exclusively serve public interest, as it is defined by competent organs of Administration. 2. The officials and personnel of the state and of other public bodies shall not suffer damage or receive

benefit as a result of the exercise of any political rights provided for in the Constitution, in particular as a result of party allegiance. 3. In disciplinary proceedings the right of the individual concerned to be heard and to defend himself shall be secured. 4. No one shall hold more than one public post or office except in cases expressly provided for by law. 5. Cases of incompatibility between the holding of a public post or office and other activities shall be laid down by law.
ARTICLE 271 Liability of officials and personnel

1. Officials and personnel of the state and of other public bodies shall be liable to civil, criminal or disciplinary proceedings in respect of actions and omissions which result in infringements of those rights or interests of citizens that are protected by law. The taking of action or proceedings against an official or member of personnel shall not at any stage be subject to approval by a higher authority. 2. An official or member personnel who acts in accordance with orders or instructions on a service matter from his legitimate superior shall not be held liable provided that he previously requested or required that they should be given or confirmed in writing. 3. The duty of obedience shall cease whenever the carrying out of orders or instructions involves committing some criminal offence. 4. The conditions on which the state and other public bodies shall be entitled to recover the amount of indemnities previously paid by them from officials and their personnel shall be regulated by law.

ARTICLE 272 Police

1. The police shall have the function of defending democratic legality and the rights of citizens. 2. Police measures shall be as provided for by law and shall not be used beyond is strictly necessary. 3. The prevention of crimes, including crimes against the security of the state, shall be performed with due regard to the general rules governing the police and to the rights, freedoms and safeguards of citizens.

SECTION X Armed Forces
ARTICLE 273 Functions

1. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall safeguard national independence, the unity of the state and the integrity of the national territory. 2. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall form part of the people and, in keeping with the spirit 'of the Programme of the Armed Forces Movement, shall secure the continuation of the Revolution of 25 April 1974. 3. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall safeguard the proper functioning of democratic institutions and the fulfilment of the Constitution. 4. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall have the mission before history of ensuring conditions in which Portuguese society may effect a peaceful and pluralist transition to democracy and socialism. 5. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall co-operate in the work of national reconstruction.

ARTICLE 274 Structure

1. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall be a national body, and they and the other military forces shall have a single organisation for the whole national territory. 2. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall comprise only Portuguese citizens. 3. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall obey the competent organs of supreme power as provided in the Constitution.

ARTICLE 275 Independence of parties

1. The Portuguese Armed Forces shall be strictly non-party and shall serve the Portuguese people, not any party or organisation. 2. The members of the Portuguese Armed Forces shall comply with the aims of the Portuguese people as set forth in the Constitution and shall not use their arms, their posts or their ranks in order to impose, influence or prevent the choice of any particular democratic course of policy.

ARTICLE 276 Defence of the country and military service

1. The defence of the country is a fundamental duty of every Portuguese. 2. Military service shall be compulsory, for a period and on conditions to be laid down by law. 3. Persons considered unfit for armed military service and conscientious objectors shall perform unar-

med military service or civic service suited to their situations. 4. Civic service may be established as a substitute for or as a complement to military service' and may be made compulsory by law for citizens not subject to military service. 5. No citizen shall keep or obtain any office in the state or in any other public body if he fails to perform his military service or civic service, if compulsory. 6. Performance by a citizen of military service or compulsory civic service shall be without prejudice to his post, social security benefits or permanent career.

PART IV Safeguards and revision of the Constitution
SECTION I Safeguards for the Constitution
CHAPTER I Scrutiny for constitutionality

ARTICLE 277 Preventive scrutiny for constitutionality

1. All instruments sent to the President of the Republic for promulgation as a law or decree-law and all instruments approving international treaties or agreements shall simultaneously be sent to the Council of the Revolution and shall not be promulgated until five days have elapsed since their receipt by the Council.

2. If in the opinion of the President of the Republic promulgation is urgent, he shall inform the Council of the Revolution that he proposes to promulgate it immediately. 3. If the Council of the Revolution has doubts about whether an instrument is constitutional and wishes to scrutinise it, it shall so inform the President of the Republic within the period provided for in paragraph 1, so that he does not promulgate it. 4. If the Council of the Revolution decides, or the President of the Republic requests, that the constitutionality of an act should be examined, the Council shall give its opinion within 20 days, which period may be reduced by the President in urgent cases.
ARTICLE 278 Effects of decision

1. If the Council of the Revolution rules that any act is unconstitutional, the President of the Republic shall exercise his right of veto and shall not promulgate or sign the act. 2. In the case of an instrument of the Assembly of the Republic, it shall not be promulgated unless the Assembly approves it again by a majority of two thirds of its members present. 3. In the case of an instrument of the government it shall not be promulgated or signed.
ARTICLE 279 Unconstitutionality by omission

When, by omission of the legislative measures necessary to give effect to its provisions, the Constitution is not fulfilled, the Council of the Revolution may recommend to the competent legislative organs that they shall take such measures within a reasonable time.

ARTICLE 280 Active unconstitutionality

1. Provisions of law that infringe a provision of the Constitution or the principles laid down therein are unconstitutional. 2. Unconstitutional provisions of law shall not be applied by the courts. The Council of the Revolution shall be competent to declare them unconstitutional as provided in the following articles and such declarations shall have general binding force. 3. Organic or formal unconstitutionality in international conventions shall not prevent application of their provisions in Portuguese municipal law unless such application is impossible in the municipal law of the other party or parties.
ARTICLE 281 Declaration of unconstitutionality

1. The Council of the Revolution shall, at the request of the President of the Republic, the President of the Assembly of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the Provedor de Justica, the Procurador-Geral da Republica or, in the cases provided for in Article 229 (2), the assemblies of the autonomous regions, scrutinise any provision and make a generally binding declaration that it is unconstitutional. 2. The Council of the Revolution may make a generally binding declaration that a provision is unconstitutional if the Constitutional Commission has judged it unconstitutional in three specific cases, or in one only if it is organically or formally unconstitutional, without prejudice to cases already judged.
ARTICLE 282 Judicial scrutiny for constitutionality

1. Whenever the courts refuse to apply a provision of a law, legislative order, implementing order, regional,

or equivalent act on the ground that it is unconstitutional, recourse shall be available once the ordinary remedies available have been exhausted, to the Constitutional Commission for final judgment on the case in question. Such recourse shall be free of charge, shall be compulsory in the case of the Ministerio Publico, and shall be limited to the question of unconstitutionality. 2. Recourse shall also be available to the Constitutional Commission against any decision that applies a provision previously judged unconstitutional by the Commission. Such recourse shall be free of charge and shall be compulsory in the case of the Ministerio Publico. 3. In the case of provisions of acts not covered by paragraph 1 above, the judgment of the courts as to constitutionality shall be final.
CHAPTER II Constitutional Commission ARTICLE 283 Constitutional Commission

1. The Council of the Revolution shall be assisted by a Constitutional Commission. 2. The Constitutional Commission shall comprise: a. b. a member of the council of the Revolution apointed by the Council, who shall be president and shall have a casting vote; four judges, one appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice and the others by the Conselho Superior da Magistratura, one of whom shall be a judge of the Courts of Appeal and two shall be judges of the courts of first instance;

one citizen of acknowledged merit appointed by the President of the Republic; d. one citizen of acknowledged merit appointed by the Assembly of the Republic; e. two citizens of acknowledged merit appointed by the Council of the Revolution, one of them being a lawyer of proved competence. 3. The members of the Constitutional Commission shall hold office for four years, shall be independent and irremovable and, when exercising judicial functions, shall enjoy the safeguards as to impartiality and the immunity proper to judges.
ARTICLE 284 Powers and duties

c.

The Constitutional Commission shall: give opinions on the constitutionality of acts requiring scrutiny by the Council of the Revolution as provided in Articles 277 and 281 (1); b. give opinions on whether the provisions of the Constitution have been infringed by omission, as provided in Article 279 and for the purpose laid down therein; c. be competent to judge questions of unconstitutionality submitted to it as provided in Article 282. a.
ARTICLE 285 Organisation, function and procedure

1. The organisation, functioning and procedure of the Constitutional Commission shall be regulated by the Council of the Revolution. 2. Its rules of procedure may be amended by the Assembly of the Republic.

SECTION II Revision of the Constitution
ARTICLE 286 First revision

1. During the 2nd legislative period the Assembly of the Republic shall have powers of constitutional reform, which shall lapse once the revision law has been approved. 2. Changes in the Constitution shall be approved by a majority of two-thirds of the members of the Assembly present, provided the number of such members exceeds an absolute majority of members entitled to vote. The President of the Republic shall not refuse to promulgate the revision law.
ARTICLE 287 Subsequent revisions

1. The Assembly of the Republic may revise the Constitution once five years have elapsed after publication of any revision law. 2. The Assembly of the Republic may however, by a majority of four-fifths of its members entitled to vote, assume powers of constitutional reform at any time after revision provided for in the foregoing article. 3. The changes in the Constitution provided for in this article shall be approved by a majority of two-thirds of members of the Assembly entitled to vote.
ARTICLE 288 Revision procedure 1. Members of the Assembly shall be competent to initiate constitutional reform.

2. Once a plan for constitutional reform has been tabled, any further such plans shall be tabled within 30 days. 3. Changes in the Constitution which are approved shall be incorporated in a single revision law.
ARTICLE 289 New text of the Constitution

1. Amendments to the Constitution shall be inserted in their proper place with the necessary substitutions, deletions and additions. 2. The new text of the Constitution shall be published together with the revision law.
ARTICLE 290 Material limits to revision

1. Laws revising the Constitution shall not detract from: a. b. c. d. e. f. national independence and the unity of the state; the republican form of government; the separation of the churches from the state; the rights, freedoms and safeguards of citizens; the rights of workers, workers' committees and trade unions; the principle of collectivisation of the main means of production and land and of natural resources and the abolition of monopolies and large estates; the democratic planning of the economy; the appointment of the elected members of the organs of supreme authority, the organs of the autonomous regions and the organs of local government by direct, secret and regular uni-

g. h.

versal suffrage and the system of proportional representation; i. plurality of expression and of political organisation, including political parties, and the right of democratic oposition; j participation by local people's organisations in local government; I. the separation and interdependence of the organs of supreme authority; m. the scrutiny of legal provisions for active unconstitutionality and unconstitutionality by omission; n. the independence of the courts; o. the autonomy of local authorities; p. the political and administrative autonomy of archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira.
ARTICLE 291 Circumstantial limits to revision

No act shall be undertaken to revise the Constitution while a state of siege or emergency is in force.

Final and transitional provisions
ARTICLE 292 Previous constitutional law

1. Those provisions of the 1933 Constitution, abrogated by the Revolution of 25 April 1974, which were restored to force by Law N.° 3/74 of 14 May shall lapse with the entry into force of this Constitution. 2. Constitutional laws subsequent to 25 April 1974 that are not referred to in Article 294 and not restored to force by this Chapter shall be considered as ordinary laws, subject always to Article 293.

ARTICLE 293 Previous ordinary law

1. The law as it existed before the entry into force of this Constitution shall continue in force except in so far as it is contrary to the Constitution or to the principles laid down therein. 2. In particular, the Code of Military Justice and legislation connected therewith shall continue in force, subject to being brought into line with this Constitution within one year of publication thereof, failing which the said Code and legislation shall lapse. 3. Amendment of earlier provisions relating to the exercise of the rights, freedoms and safeguards laid down in this Constitution shall be completed not later than the end of the first legislative session.
ARTICLE 294 Entry into operation of the system of organs of supreme authority

1. The system of organs of supreme authority provided for in this Constitution shall come into operation with the induction of the President of the Republic elected under the Constitution. 2. Those constitutional laws governing the organisation, powers and working of the organs of supreme authority that have come into force since 25 April 1974 shall continue in force until the date referred to in the foregoing paragraph.
ARTICLE 295 Election of the President of the Republic

1. The election of the first President of the Republic under this Constitution shall be held, as provided in Article 128 (2) not later than the 70th day following election of the Assembly of the Republic.

2. The President of the Republic at present in office shall be competent to fix the date for the election after consulting the Council of the Revolution. 3. By decree-law approved by the Council of the Revolution the Provisional Government shall, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Constitution, lay down the electoral law for election of the President of the Republic, which law shall remain in force until the Assembly of the Republic has legislated in the matter. 4. The President of the Republic shall be inducted as provided in Article 130, on the 8th day after the election results are known.
ARTICLE 296 First term of office of the President of the Republic

1. The first term of office of the President of the Republic shall end three months after completion of the first legislative period. 2. If the office falls vacant, the President of the Republic subsequently elected shall complete the term of office.
ARTICLE 297 Constituent powers of the Council of the Revolution

The constituent powers conferred on the Council of the Revolution by the constitutional laws subsequent to 25 April 1974 shall lapse when the Constituent Assembly passes the order approving the Constitution.
ARTICLE 298 Election of the Assembly of the Republic

1. The election of members to the first Assembly of the Republic shall he held, not later than the 30th day following the date of the decision approving the

Constitution, on a day fixed by the President of the Republic after consultation with the Council of the Revolution. 2. The number of members of the first Assembly of the Republic shall be determined by application of the relevant electoral law prepared by the Provisional Government.
ARTICLE 299 First legislative period

1. The first legislative period shall end on 14 October 1980. The first legislative session shall begin on the day fixed in Article 176. 2. Article 174 (3) shall not apply to the first legislative period. 3. Should it not approve its rules of procedure, the first Assembly of the Republic shall be governed by applicable provisions of the rules of procedure of the Constituent Assembly, provided that the Bureau shall comprise a Chairman appointed by the majority party and two secretaries appointed by the two parties next in order according to the election results.
ARTICLE 300 Provisional Government

The Provisional Government in office at the date of induction of the President of the Republic shall continue to deal with current business until the first government appointed under the Constitution takes office.
ARTICLE 301 Courts

1. Revision of the legislation in force on the organisation of the courts and the status of judges shall be completed by the end of the first legislative session.

2. The laws provided for in Articles 223 (1) and 226 (2) shall be published not later than 31 December 1976. 3. In districts where there are no examining judges pending their appointment, criminal investigations shall be conducted, for the purposes of Article 32 (4), by the Ministerio Publico under the direction of a judge.
ARTICLE 302 Autonomous regions

1. The first elections to the Assemblies of the autonomous regions shall be held, not later than 30 June 1976, on a date to be fixed by the President of the Republic in office, in accordance with the electoral law in force. 2. The government shall, on proposals by the regional committees, lay down not later than 30 April 1976, provisional statutes for the autonomous regions, by decree-law approved by the Council of the Revolution, and the electoral law for the first regional assemblies. 3. The provisional statutes for the autonomous regions shall remain in force until promulgation of the final statutes, to be drawn up as provided in the Constitution.
ARTICLE 303 First local elections

1. The first elections to the organs of local authorities shall be held not later than 15 December 1976, on a single date to be fixed by the government for the whole national territory.

2. With a view to the elections, the government shall issue provisional legislation bringing the structure, powers and working of the municipal and parish organs into line with the Constitution and establishing the system for such elections. 3. The legislation referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be approved by the Council of the Revolution. The Assembly of the Republic may take it subject to ratification in general terms if it is published after the induction of the President of the Republic.
ARTICLE 304 Constitutional Commission

1. The Council of the Revolution shall draw up, not later than 30 June 1976, the legislation provided for in Article 285. 2. Those appointments of members of the Constitutional Commission for which the President of the Republic, the Assembly of the Republic, the Council of the Revolution and the Supreme Court of Justice are competent, shall be made not later than 31 August 1976. 3. The Constitutional Commission shall begin its duties after the members referred to in the foregoing paragraph have assumed office. It may take decisions if 5 members are present. 4. The members of the Commission to be appointed by the Conselho Superior da Magistrature shall be so appointed as soon as that body has been established.
ARTICLE 305 Scrutiny for constitutionality

The system of scrutiny for constitutionality provided for in the Constitution shall operate, where applicable,

without the Constitutional Commission pending the Commission's establishment.
ARTICLE 306 Statute of Macao

1. The statute of the territory of Macao by virtue of Law No. 1/76 of 17 February 1976 shall continue in force. 2. On a proposal by the Legislative Assembly of Macao the Assembly of the Republic may, after consulting the Council of the Revolution, approve amendments to the statute or its replacement by another one. 3. If the proposal is approved with amendments, the President of the Republic shall not promulgate the decision of the Assembly of the Republic unless the Legislative Assembly of Macao expresses its approval.
ARTICLE 307 Independence of Timor

1. Portugal shall remain bound by its responsibility, in accordance with international law, to promote and safeguard the right to independence of Timor Leste. 2. The President of the Republic, assisted by the Council of the Revolution, and the government shall be competent to perform all acts necessary to achievement of the aims set forth in the foregoing paragraph.
ARTICLE 308 Civil disabilities 1. The electoral disabilities provided for in Legislative Order No. 621/B/74 of 15 November 1974 shall apply to the elections to the organs of supreme

authority, the organs of the autonomous regions and the organs of local government which are to come into operation during the first legislative period. 2. Judicial rehabilitations as provided for in the legislative order referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be subject to public hearings of both parties, except for cases already decided. 3. Citizens subject to the passive electoral disabilities referred to in paragraph 1 of this article shall not be appointed to the organs of supreme authority or to any political office during the first legislative period. 4. Citizens who in the 5 years preceding 25 April 1974 held the office of chairman of any organ of local authority shall not be elected to any such organs. 5. The disabilities provided for in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this article shall be subject to paragraph 2 and to Article 3 of Legislative Order No. 621/B/74 of 15 November 1974.
ARTICLE 309 Indictment and trial of officers and personnel of PIDE/DGS

1. Law No. 8/75 of 25 July 1975 shall remain in force with the amendments made by Law No. 16/75 of 23 December 1975 and Law No. 18/75 of 26 December 1975. 2. The offences referred to in Articles 2 (2), 3, 4 (b) and 5 of the Law referred to in the foregoing paragraph may be further defined by law. 3. The exceptional extenuating circumstances as provided for in Article 7 of the said Law may be specifically regulated by law.
ARTICLE 310 Screening of civil servants

1. The legislation on the screening of civil servants shall remain in force until 31 December 1976 as provided in the following paragraphs.

2. No new dismissal or regrading proceedings shall be opened after the induction of the President of the Republic elected under this Constitution. 3. Decisions in dismissal and regrading proceedings pending at the date provided for in the foregoing paragraph shall be taken not later than 31 December 1976, subject to appeal, otherwise the proceedings shall lapse. 4. All interested persons who have not duly appealed against measures of dismissal or regrading shall be entitled to do so within 30 days of publication of this Constitution.
ARTICLE 311 Special rules on political parties

1. Article 47 (3) shall apply to parties already formed. The matter shall be regulated by law. 2. No party shall be formed whose name or programme indicates a regional nature or field of action.
ARTICLE 312 Promulgation, publication, date and entry into force of the Constitution

1. The decision approving this Constitution shall be signed by the President of the Constituent Assembly, promulgated by the President of the Republic and published not later than 10 April 1976. 2. The Constitution of the Portuguese Republic shall bear the date of its approval by the Constituent Assembly. 3. The Constitution of the Portuguese Republic shall come into force on 25 April 1976.

