
 CONSTITUTION OF 21 AUGUST 1911.3
 TITLE I.-THE Form OF GOVERNMENT AND THE Territory OF THE
 PORTUGUESE NATION.
 Article 1. The Portuguese nation, constituted as a unitary State,
 adopts the Republic as the form of government, in the terms of this
 Constitution.
 Art. 2. The territory of the Portuguese nation is that existing at
 the date of the proclamation of the Republic.
  . The nation does not renounce the rights which it has or may
 hereafter acquire to any other territory.
 
 
 
 
 TITLE II.-INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES.
 ART. 3. The Constitution guarantees to Portuguese and foreigners
 resident in the country the inviolability of their rights with regard to
 liberty, personal security and property, in the following terms:
 1. No one can be forced to do anything, or to desist from doing
 anything, except by virtue of a law.
 2. The law is equal for all, but only that which has been promulgated in the terms of this Constitution is binding.
 3. The Portuguese Republic does not admit privileges of birth
 or prerogatives of nobility, and abolishes all titles of nobility and of
 councillorship, as also all orders of merit and all their rights and
 privileges. Civil deeds and military acts may be rewarded by special
 diplomas.
 No Portuguese citizen may accept a foreign decoration.
 4. Liberty of conscience and of creed is inviolable.
 5. The State recognizes the political and civil equality of all
 creeds, and guarantees their exercise within the limits compatible with public order, the laws and good customs, so long as they do not
 infringe the principles of Portuguese public right.
 6. No one can be persecuted on religious grounds, nor questioned by any authority with regard to the religion professed.
 7. No one can, on the ground of religious opinions, be deprived
 of any right or be exempted from the performance of a civic duty.
 8. The public observance of any religion is free in the buildings
 chosen or destined for the purpose by the followers of that religion,
 and the buildings can always have the exterior form of a church; but,
 in the interests of public order and of the liberty and safety of
 citizens, a special law shall lay down the conditions of its observance.
 9. Public cemeteries shall have a secular character, the exercise of the respective rites being free to all religions as regards their
 followers, so long as they do not offend public morals, the principles
 of Portuguese public right and the law.
 10. Teaching in public and private establishments under government control shall be neutral as regards religion.
 11. Primary elementary education shall be obligatory and gratuitous.
 12. The legislation in force which abolished and dissolved in
 Portugal the Society of Jesus, the societies therein affiliated, of whatever denomination, and all religious congregations and monastic orders
 is maintained, and they shall never be admitted in Portuguese territory.
 13. The expression of thought in any form whatever is completely free, and not dependent upon the previous giving of security.
 submission to censure or the obtaining of previous authorization,
 
  
 but the abuse of this privilege is punishable in the cases and in the
 manner prescribed by law.
 14. The right of meeting and association is free to all. Special
 laws shall determine the form and conditions of this right.
 15. Inviolability of domicile is guaranteed; the house of a citizen may be entered at night without his consent only when a demand
 therefor is made from within or in order to render assistance to victims of crimes or accidents; and during the day only in the cases and
 in the manner prescribed by law.
 16. No one can be arrested unless on a specific charge, except in
 flagrante delicto and in the following cases:
 Forgery of coins or of national banknotes and bonds of the Portuguese public debt, deliberate homicide when qualified as a crime,
 burglary, robbery, fraudulent bankruptcy and arson.
 17. No one shall be committed to prison or be therein detained if
 already imprisoned, who offers proper surety or declaration of residence in the cases in which the law admits it.
 18. Except in the cases of flagrante delicto, no arrest can be effected without a written warrant from the competent authority and
 in conformity with the express provisions of the law.
 19. No one shall be committed to prison for inability to pay costs
 and stamps.
 20. The preliminary investigation in criminal proceedings shall
 be open to contestation, thus ensuring the accused, before and after
 the drawing up of the indictment, every means of defending themselves.
 21. No one shall be sentenced except by the competent authority,
 by virtue of an existing law and in the manner prescribed by the
 same.
 22. In no cases can the penalty of death be established, nor can
 corporal punishment he perpetual or of unfixed duration.
 23. No punishment shall extend beyond the person of the delinquent; in no case whatever shall there be confiscation of property,
 nor shall the infamy of the guilty party affect relatives in any degree.
 24. The right to the revision of all sentences of condemnation is
 assured exclusively in favor of the condemned.
 Special laws shall determine what cases are subject to revision
 and the manner of revision.
 25. The right of property is guaranteed within the limitations
 established by the law.
 26. Every description of work, industry and commerce, except
 such as are restricted by law or for the public good, is allowed.
 Only the legislative power and administrative bodies can, in
 cases of recognized public utility, grant the exclusive right to develop any branch of trade or industry.
 
 
 27. No one is obliged to pay taxes which have not been voted by
 the legislative power or by the administrative bodies legally authorized to impose them, when their collection is not effected in the
 manner prescribed by the law.
 28. The secrecy of correspondence is inviolable.
 29. The right to public assistance is recognized.
 30. Every citizen may present to the powers of the State claims,
 complaints and petitions, they may report any infringement of the
 Constitution, and may, without any previous authorization, demand
 from the competent authorities the punishment of offenders.
 31. The habeas corpus must always be granted whenever a person suffers, or is in imminent danger of suffering, violence or restraint illegally or through an abuse of power.
 The guarantee of the habeas corpus shall only be suspended in
 cases of a state of siege on account of sedition, conspiracy, rebellion
 or foreign invasion.
 A special law will regulate the extent of this guarantee and the
 procedure to be followed.
 32. All persons employed in the public service, in administrative
 bodies or companies under contract with the State are guaranteed
 their posts, together with the rights inherent therein, during their
 term of obligatory military service.
 33. Matters relating to civil status and the respective registers
 appertain exclusively to the civil authorities.
 34. If, after the execution of a criminal sentence, it subsequently
 comes to be proved by legal means to have been unjust, the condemned
 person or his heirs shall have the right to compensation for losses
 and damages, which shall be paid by the National Treasury after
 judgment has been passed in conformity with the law.
 35. In cases not provided for by law, no one, even if mentally
 abnormal, can be deprived of his personal liberty, without previous
 judicial sanction, except in cases of duly proved necessity, the proper
 judicial confirmation being immediately applied for.
 36. Any person interned or detained in a lunatic establishment
 or placed under private restraint, and also his legal representative
 or any relative or friend, may at any time call on the judge concerned
 to set him at liberty, after the necessary inquiries have been made,
 should there be good cause to do so.
 37. It is lawful for every citizen to resist any order which infringes individual guarantees, unless they have been legally suspended.
 38. None of the powers of the State shall separately or conjointly
 suspend the Constitution or limit the rights asserted in it, except in
 the cases expressly mentioned therein.
 
 
 ART. 4. The particular guarantees and rights mentioned in the Consitution do not exclude other guarantees and rights not enumerated
 but resulting from the form of government it establishes, and from
 principles asserted or contained in other laws.
 TITLE 111.-THE SOVEREIGNTY AND POWERS OF THE STATE.
 ART. 5. The sovereignty essentially resides in the nation.
 ART. 6. The organs of the national sovereignty are:
 The legislative, executive and judicial powers, independent and
 mutually harmonious.
 SECTION 1.-THE LEGISLATIVE POWER.
 ART. 7. The legislative power is exercised by the Congress of the
 Republic composed of two houses, called the Chamber of Deputies
 and the Senate.
1. The members of Congress are representatives of the nation and
 not of the colleges which elect them.
2. No one can at one and the same time be a member of the two
 houses.
 3. No one can be a senator under 35 years of age, or a deputy
 under 25 years.
 ART. 8. The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate are elected by direct suffrage of the citizen electors.
  . The organization of the electoral colleges of the two houses and
 the procedure of election shall be regulated by special law.
 ART. 9. The Senate shall be composed of senators elected in the proportion of 3 for every district of the continent and the adjacent islands,
 and of 1 for every overseas province.
  . For the elections of senators in each of the districts of the continent and adjacent islands, lists shall only contain two names.
 ART. 10. For the election of the Chamber of Deputies and of the
 Senate, the electoral colleges shall meet on their own prerogative, if
 they are not duly convoked before the termination of the legislature
 and within the period prescribed by law.
 ART. 11. Congress of the Republic will meet on its own prerogative in the capital of the nation on the second day of December of
 each year. The legislative session shall last four months and may
 only be prorogued or adjourned by decision of Congress itself, taken
 at a joint session of the two houses. Each legislature shall last three
 years.
 ART. 12. Congress may be convoked extraordinarily by a fourth
 part of its members or by the executive power.
 ART. 13. The two houses, the opening and closing sessions of
 which shall be on the same days, shall work separately and in public
 sessions, except when otherwise decided.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Decisions shall be taken by majority of votes, an absolute majority
 of the members of each house being present.
  . It is incumbent on each of the houses to verify and recognize
 the powers of their members, to elect their bureau, to organize their
 internal rules, to regulate their police service and to appoint their
 officials.
 ART. 14. The joint sessions of the two houses shall be presided over
 by the elder of the presidents.
 ART. 15. Deputies and senators are inviolable on account of their
 opinions and votes in the discharge of their mandate. Their vote
 shall be free and independent of any promptings and directions.
 ART. 16. During the exercise of the legislative functions no member of Congress may act as juryman, expert or witness without the
 authorization of the house concerned.
 ART. 17. No deputy or senator shall be arrested or imprisoned during the period of the sessions without the previous consent of his
 house, except in case of flagrante delicto, to which is applicable the
 greater penalty or its equivalent in the penal scale.
 ART. 18. Whenever criminal proceedings are brought against a
 deputy or senator and the offender has been committed, the judge
 shall submit the case to the house, which shall decide whether the
 deputy or senator ought to be suspended, and whether the proceedings shall continue during the interruption of the sessions or after
 the duties of the offender have terminated.
 ART. 19. During the sessions members of Congress will receive a
 salary to be fixed by the National Constituent Assembly.
 ART. 20. No member of Congress may, after being elected, conclude contracts with the executive power or accept from it or from
 any foreign government any paid office or commission.
 M 1. The following are exceptions to this prohibition:
 1. Diplomatic missions.
 2. Military commissions or commands and the office of Commissioner for the Republic in the Colonies.
 3. The offices which are the result of promotion.
 4. Appointments, preceded by competition, which by law are
 made by the government or on a proposal made by bodies whose
 legal province it is to indicate or select the official to be appointed.
 2. No deputy or senator, however, may accept a nomination to
 missions, commissions or commands referred to in Nos. 1 and 2 of the
 preceding, without the previous consent of the house to which he
 belongs, whenever such acceptance would prevent him from exercising his legislative functions, except in case of war or when the
 honor or integrity of the nation is at stake.
 
ART. 21. No deputy or senator may take part in the administration,
 management or superintendence of undertakings or companies constituted by contract or by special concession or which have any privilege from the State, not conferred by general law, subsidy or guarantee of revenue (save what is in the interests of the State under
 government control) ; nor, moreover, can he be a concessionnaire, contractor or partner in any firm holding concessions, contracts or engagements for public works and financial operations with the State.
  . The disregard of the provisions contained in this or the preceding article entails forfeiture of the seat and cancellation of the acts
 and contracts therein referred to.
 THE CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES.
 ART. 22. Deputies are elected for three years.
  . A deputy elected to fill a vacancy occurring by death or any
 other cause shall only exercise his mandate during the unexpired
 period of the legislature.
 ART. 23. It is the province of the Chamber of Deputies to take the
 initiative:
 a. As regards taxes.
 b. The organization of the land and sea forces.
 c. The discussion of the bills laid by the executive power.
 d. The impeachment of the members of the executive power, for
 breaches of duty committed in that capacity, in accordance with the
 provisions of this Constitution.
 e. The revision of the Constitution.
 f. The prorogation and adjournment of the legislative session.
 THE SENATE.
 ART. 24. Senators are elected for six years.
 Whenever it shall be necessary to hold a general election of deputies,
 one half of the members of the Senate shall be renewed.
   1. For the first renewal of the Senate, it shall be decided by lot
 which are the districts and overseas provinces whose representatives
 must retire; subsequent retirements will be by priority of election.
   2. A senator elected to fill a vacancy arising through death or
 any other cause will exercise his mandate during the unexpired term
 of office of the late senator.
 ART. 25. The Senate has the exclusive right to approve or reject by
 secret vote proposals for the appointments of governors and commissioners of the Republic in the provinces.
  . When Congress is closed, the appointments mentioned in this
 article, when made by the executive power, shall be considered provisional.
 

 THE ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE REPUBLIC.
 ART. 26. It is the exclusive province of the Congress of the Republic:
 1. To make, interpret, suspend and revoke laws.
 2. To see to the observance of the Constitution and of the laws
 and to promote the welfare of the nation.
 3. To estimate the receipts and fix the amount of expenditure each
 year, take charge of the accounts of receipts and expenditure of each
 financial year and vote the annual taxes.
 4. To authorize the executive power to contract loans and undertake other financial operations, except in connection with the floating debt, and to establish and give previous approval to the general
 conditions under which they are to be carried out.
 5. To regulate the payment of the internal and external debt.
 6. To take measures for the organization of national defense.
 7. To create and suppress public employments and determine
 the attributions and salaries of officials.
 8. To create and suppress customs houses.
 9. To settle the weight, value, inscription, type and denomination of coins.
 10. To determine the standard of weights and measures.
 11. To establish banks of issue, regulate the issue of notes and
 the respective charges thereon.
 12. To decide as to the boundaries of the territories of the nation.
 13. To fix the limits of the administrative divisions of the
 country, and decide as to their general organization.
 1!. To authorize the executive power to declare war if recourse
 be not had to arbitration, or if the same should fail, except in cases
 of imminent or effective aggression by foreign forces.
 15. To give a definite decision as to treaties and conventions.
 16. To declare one or more places of the national territory to be
 in a state of siege, with a total or partial suspension of constitutional
 rights, in an emergency of foreign aggression or internal disorder.
   1. Should Congress not be sitting, this function shall be exercised by the executive power.
   2. The latter, however, during the state of siege, shall restrict
 itself to measures of repression against persons and to the detention
 of criminals in places not destined to common offenders.
   3. On the reassembly on its own prerogative of Congress within
 the space of 30 days, the executive power shall present a report stating
 the reasons for the exceptional measures taken and for the abuse of
 which the respective authorities shall be made responsible.
 17. To organize the judicial power in the terms of the present
 Constitution.

 18. To grant amnesties.
 19. To elect the President of the Republic.
 20. To dismiss the President of the Republic according to the
 terms of the Constitution.
 21. To settle as to the revision of the Constitution before the lapse
 of the period of ten years, in the terms of   1 of Article 82.
 22. To regulate the administration of national property.
 23. To legislate in regard to the disposal of national property.
 24. To sanction codes of rules for the due execution of the laws.
  Rules which have not obtained this sanction are considered
 provisional.
 25. To continue in the exercise of their legislative functions, after
 the termination of the respective legislature, if for any reason the
 elections have not been held within the constitutional periods.
  . This extension of functions shall continue until the elections,
 which will return the new members to Congress, have been held.
 THE INITIATIVE, FORMATION AND PROMULGATION OF LAWS AND RESOLUTIONS.
 ART. 27. The authorization allowed by the legislative power can not
 be utilized more than once.
 ART. 28. Save the exceptions mentioned in Article 23, the initiative
 of bills is open without distinction to all members of the Congress or
 of the executive power.
 An. 29. A bill when adopted in one of the houses shall be submitted to the other, and the latter, if it approves it, shall send it to
 the President of the Republic, who shall promulgate it as law.
 ART. 30. The form of promulgation shall be as follows: " In the
 name of the nation, the Congress of the Republic has decreed and I
 hereby promulgate the following law (or resolution)."
 ART. 31. The President of the Republic, as chief of the executive
 power, shall promulgate any bill within the period of 15 days from
 the date on which it was presented to him. Silence on the part of
 the President up to the last day of the said period is equivalent to
 promulgation of the law.
 ART. 32. A bill approved by one house shall be sent to the other,
 which shall decide in regard to it not later than in the legislative
 session following that in which it was approved. Failing this, the
 text approved by the house in which the bill was introduced shall
 be promulgated.
 ART. 33. A bill brought in by one house and amended by the other
 shall be returned to the first, which, if it accept the amendments,
 shall send the bill amended accordingly to the President of the Republic for promulgation.
 
  . When the amendments are not approved, the latter, together
 with the bill, shall be submitted for discussion and to a vote of the
 two houses at a joint sitting.
 The approved text shall be sent to the President of the Republic,
 who shall promulgate it as a law.
 AR. 34. When a bill has been rejected by one of the houses after
 it has been approved in the other, it shall be dealt with as if it had
 undergone amendments instead of rejection.
 ART. 35. Bills which have been definitely rejected cannot be reintroduced in the same legislative session.
 SECTION 2.--THE EXECUTIVE POWER.
 ART. 36. The executive power is exercised by the President of the
 Republic and by the ministers.
 ART. 37. The President of the Republic represents the nation in all
 general State relations, both internal and external.
 THE ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC.
 ART. 38. The election of the President of the Republic shall take
 place at a special sitting of Congress, which shall assemble of its own
 prerogative 60 days before the term of the presidential office.
   1. Voting will be by secret ballot and election will be by two
 thirds of the votes of the members of the two houses of Congress
 at a joint sitting.
 If none of the candidates obtain an absolute majority, the election
 will continue, at a third voting, only as between the two who have
 obtained the highest number of votes, the one obtaining the highest
 number of votes being finally elected.
  2. In the case of a vacancy occurring in the Presidency, through
 death or any other cause, the two houses, united in Congress of the
 Republic on their own prerogative, shall forthwith proceed to the
 election of a new President, who shall exercise his functions during
 the presidential period still to run.
   3. So long as the election referred to in the preceding   shall
 not have been carried out, or whenever there shall be a temporary
 impediment in the exercise of presidential functions, the ministers
 shall jointly assume full executive power.
 ART. 39. Only Portuguese citizens not less than 35 years of age, in
 the full enjoyment of political and civil rights, and who have not
 had any other nationality may be elected President of the Republic.
 ART. 40. The following are ineligible to the office of President of
 the Republic:
 a. Members of the families which have reigned in Portugal.
 
 
 
 508
 
 
 b. Blood relatives or connections in the first or second degrees,
 by civil right, of the outgoing President, but only as regards the
 first election following his retirement.
 ART. 41. A member of Congress who is elected President immediately loses such membership by reason of his election.
 ART. 42. The President shall hold office for 4 years, and can not
 be re-elected for the period of 4 years immediately following.
  . The President will cease to perform the duties of his office on
 the same (lay as his mandate expires, the newly elected President
 assuming his office at once.
 ART. 43. On assuming office the President will make the following
 declaration of covenant before Congress in session, presided over by
 the oldest president:
 I solemnly affirm, on my honor, to maintain and carry out with loyalty and
 fidelity the Constitution of the Republic, to observe, the law, to promote the
 general welfare of the nation and to uphold and defend its integrity and independence.
 ART. 44. The President shall not leave national territory without
 permission from Congress under pain of losing his office.
 ART. 45. The President shall receive a salary to be determined before his election, which may not be altered during the period of his
 office.
  . None of the State properties, not even that in which the secretariat of the Presidency of the Republic is lodged, may be used for
 the personal accommodation of the President or of persons of his
 family.
 ART. 46. The President may be dismissed by the two houses in
 Congress on a resolution, supported and approved by two thirds
 of its members, which resolution shall clearly set forth the dismissal,
 or on conviction for a crime for breach of duty.
 THE ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC.
 ART. 47. It is the province of the President of the Republic:
 1. To appoint ministers from among eligible Portuguese citizens
 and to dismiss them.
 2. To convoke Congress in extraordinary session, whenever the
 welfare of the nation may require it.
 3. To promulgate and cause to be published the laws and regulations of Congress and to issue decrees, instructions and regulations
 to secure their faithful execution.
 4. To fill up civil and military offices upon the recommendation
 of ministers and to relieve, suspend and dismiss officials, in accordance with law, the right of appeal to the proper courts being always
 reserved to them.
 

 5. To represent the nation as regards foreign States and to direct the external affairs of the Republic without prejudice to the attributions of Congress.
 6. To proclaim, with the approval of the ministers and for a
 period not exceeding 30 days, a ptate of siege in any part of the national territory in cases of foreign attack or serious internal disturbance, according to the terms of    1, 2 and 3 of No. 16 of Article
 26 of this Constitution.
 7. To negotiate treaties of commerce, of peace and of arbitration and to conclude other international conventions, submitting the
 same to Congress for ratification.
  . Treaties of alliance shall be submitted to the examination of
 Congress at a secret session, whenever two thirds of its members
 petition in that sense.
 8. To remit and commute punishments.
 9. To attend to all matters that may concern the internal and
 external safety of the State, in accordance with the Constitution.
 ART. 48. The attributions referred to in the preceding article
 shall be exercised through the intermediary of the ministers and
 according to the terms of Article 49.
 THE MINISTERS.
 ART. 49. All the acts of the President of the Republic shall be
 countersigned, at least by the minister concerned. Should this not be
 the case, they shall be null and void, they cannot be executed and no
 one shall be obliged to obey them.
 ART. 50. Ministers cannot hold positions in any other employment or public charge, nor be elected to the office of President of
 the Republic, unless they have ceased to hold office six months before
 the date of the election.
   1. Members of Congress who accept the post of minister shall
 not lose their mandate.
   2. The prohibitions and other provisions enumerated in Article 21 and its . are applicable to ministers.
 ART. 51. Each minister is responsible politically, civilly and criminally for his legislative and executive acts.
 Ministers shall be tried for crimes of breach of duty which they
 may commit or sanction by the ordinary courts.
 ART. 52. Ministers must appear in the session of Congress and
 shall always have the right to be heard in defense of their acts.
 ART. 53. One of the ministers, who shall also be appointed by the
 President of the Republic, shall be President of the Ministry and
 shall answer not only for the affairs of his office, but also for general
 policy.
 

 ART. 54. During the first fifteen days of January the Minister of
 Finance shall lay the general budget of the State before the Chamber
 of Deputies.
 CRIMES FOR BREACH OF DUTY.
 ART. 55. Crimes for breach of duty are those acts on the part of
 the executive power and its agents which are directed against:
 1. The political existence of the nation.
 2. The Constitution and the republican democratic regime.
 3. The free working of the powers of the State.
 4. The enjoyment and exercise of political or individual rights.
 5. The internal security of the country.
 6. The integrity of the administration.
 7. The custody and constitutional employment of public moneys.
 8. The budgetary laws voted by Congress.
   1. Conviction for the commission of any of these crimes involves loss of office and renders the offender incapable of exercising
 any public function.
 .   2. The President of the Republic is not responsible for the administrative acts of his ministers or their agents, but only for the
 crimes mentioned in Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article.
 SECTION 3.-THE JUDICIAL POWER.
 ART. 56. The organs of the judicial power of the Republic shall
 consist in a Supreme Court of Justice and courts of first and second
 instance.
  . The Supreme Court of Justice shall have its seat in Lisbon.
 The courts of first and second instance shall be distributed throughout the, country according as the necessities of the administration of
 justice demand.
 ART. 57. Judges belonging to the section of the judicial magistrature hold office for life and are irremovable, and their nomination,
 dismissal, suspension, promotion, transfer and appointment outside
 their section shall be made in accordance with the forms of the organic law concerning the judicial power.
 ART. 58. The institution of the jury is maintained.
 ART. 59. Trial by jury shall be optional in civil and commercial
 cases and obligatory in criminal cases, when a penalty more severe
 than correctional is provided for the crime committed or when the
 offense is of political origin or character.
 ART. 60. Judges shall not be held responsible for the sentences
 pronounced by them, except in the cases mentioned in the law.
 ART. 61. No judge may accept an office of profit from the government. The government may, when the interests of the public service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 demand it, appoint the judges it considers necessary on any permanent or temporary commission, and these appointments shall be made
 in accordance with the terms laid down in the organic law on this
 subject.
 ART. 62. Sentences and orders of the judicial power shall be executed by exclusively judicial officials, to whom the proper authorities
 shall be obliged to lend assistance when called upon to do so.
 ART. 63. When either of the parties in a case submitted to the decision of the judicial power calls in question the validity of a law or of
 acts which have been cited and which were issued by the executive
 power or of bodies invested with public authority, the judicial power
 shall pronounce on its constitutional legality or on how far it is in
 accordance with the Constitution and the principles laid down
 therein.
 ART. 04. The President of the Republic shall be tried and sentenced
 by the ordinary tribunal for any crimes which he may commit.
 A. When the proceedings have been carried to the point of committal for trial, the judge shall communicate the fact to Congress,
 which shall in a joint session of both houses decide whether the
 President of the Republic shall be immediately tried or whether his
 trial shall take place at the conclusion of his tenure of office.
 ART. 65. If a minister is to be tried on a criminal charge, the judge
 shall, when proceedings have reached the point of committal for trial,
 communicate the fact to the Chamber of Deputies, which shall decide whether the minister shall be suspended and whether its trial is
 to take place in the interval between the sessions or only after the
 accused has ceased to hold office.
 TITLE IV.-LOCAL ADMINISTRIATIVE IN STITUTIONS.
 ART. 66. The organization and attributions of administrative
 bodies shall be regulated by a special law and shall be based on the
 following principles:
 1. The activities of administrative bodies shall be entirely independent of the executive.
 2. Deliberations of administrative bodies can be modified or annulled by the courts, when they conflict with laws or regulations of
 general order.
 3. District and municipal powers shall be divided into deliberative and executive according to the terms prescribed by the law.
 4. The use of the referendum, according to the provisions laid
 down by law.
 5. Minority representation in administrative bodies.
 6. Financial autonomy of administrative bodies in the form prescribed by law.
TITLE V.-THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COLONIAL PROVINCES,
 ART. 67. The prevailing principle in the administration of colonial provinces shall be that of decentralization, with special laws
 suited to the state of the civilization of each one of those provinces.
 TITLE VI.GENERAL PROVISIONs.
 ART. 68. All Portuguese, each according to his capacity, are bound
 to military service in order to sustain the independence and integrity
 of the country and Constitution and to defend them from their enemies, internal and external.
 ART. 69. The public forces are essentially obedient and can not
 formulate petitions or collective representation nor meet together.
 except with the authority of or by order of the competent authorities. Armed bodies cannot deliberate.
 ART. 70. Special laws shall provide for the organization and administration of the military and naval forces in the whole of the
 territory of the Republic.
 ART. 71. There is no pardon for those who are condemned for
 crimes and offenses against the electoral laws. That house, on account of which such crimes and offenses have been committed, can
 nevertheless take the initiative in granting an amnesty, when two
 thirds of its members vote therefor, but only after one half of the
 sentence, if it is one of imprisonment, has been served. Such amnesty cannot include the costs of trial, fines and legal expenses.
 ART. 72. The crimes for breach of duty referred to in Article 55
 shall be defined by a special law.
 ART. 73. The Portuguese Republic, without prejudice to its engagements under its treaties of alliance, advocates the principle of
 arbitration as the best method for solving international questions.
 ART. 74. For the effects of the exercise of political rights, all those
 persons are Portuguese citizens who are considered as such by the
 civil law.
 . The loss and recognition of Portuguese citizenship are also
 regulated by the civil law.
 ART. 75. The right to the military medal is guaranteed in the
 terms of the respective laws and regulations to all those who, at the
 date of the promulgation of this Constitution, are serving in the
 army and navy.
  . The pensions hitherto enjoyed by persons decorated with the
 Order of the Torre and Espada are maintained.
 ART. 76. The medal for merit, philanthropy and generosity, as
 well as for good service overseas, is maintained.
 

 ART. 77. Congress shall annually allocate certain of its sessions to
 the exclusive deliberation of local interests and representations made
 to the legislative power by administrative bodies in those matters in
 which the State should intervene.
 ART. 78. A special law shall determine the cases and the conditions in which the State shall grant pensions to the families of
 soldiers who have died in the service of the Republic or to soldiers
 incapacitated by reason of the same service.
 ART. 79. Certificates granted for civil deeds and military acts can
 be accompanied by medals.
 ART. 80. The laws and decrees, with the force of law hitherto existing, continue in force until revoked or revised by the legislative
 power and remain valid in so far as they are not explicitly contrary
 to the system of government adopted by the Constitution and to the
 principles consigned therein.
 ART. 81. As soon as this Constitution is approved, it shall be decreed and promulgated by the bureau of the National Constituent
 Assembly and signed by its members.
 TITLE VII.-THE REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION.
 ART. 82. The Constitution of the Portuguese Republic shall be
 revised every 10 years beginning with the promulgation of the
 present one, and for this purpose constituent powers shall be held
 by the Congress whose mandate embraces the period of revision.
   1. Revision can be anticipated by 5 years, if approved by two
 thirds of the Congress of the two houses in joint session.
   2. Bills for the revision of the Constitution which do not define
 precisely the alterations projected cannot be admitted to discussion,
 nor can those the purport of which is to abolish the republican form
 of government.
 TRANSITORY PROVISIONS.
 ART. 83. The first President of the Portuguese Republic shall be
 elected in special session fixed for the third day after that on which
 the Constitution has been approved by the National Constituent
 Assembly, and after his salary has been determined.
 The election shall be by secret ballot and by an absolute majority
 of the members of the National Constituent Assembly, with powers
 certified up till the eve.
 If, after the second ballot has taken place, it is ascertained that
 there has not been an absolute majority, the third ballot shall be by
 a majority as between the two candidates who obtain most votes in
 the second.
 The first presidential mandate shall terminate on 5 October 1915.
  . For this election the disability referred to in Article 50 shall
 not obtain.
 ART. 84. The election of the Senate shall take place in the session
 immediately following that in which the election of the President
 was held.
   1. The first senators shall be elected from among the deputies
 of the National Constituent Assembly over 30 years of age. They
 shall number 71, and the remaining members of the National Constituent Assembly shall form the first Chamber of Deputies.
   2. The choice of the senators shall be made in four elections, the
 first three by lists of 21 names and the last by a list of 8. In the first
 three lists there shall be representatives of all the districts, provided
 the deputies of these districts fulfil the conditions of this article.
   3. The mandate of the members of the two houses thus formed
 terminates, when, after the end of the legislative session of 1914,
 there has been constituted a new Congress in the terms laid down by
 the Constitution.
 ART. 85. The first Congress of the Republic shall elaborate the
 following laws:
 a. Law respecting crimes for breaches of duty.
 b. The administrative code.
 c. The organic laws of overseas provinces.
 d. The law on judicial organization.
 e. The law upon the simultaneous enjoyment of more than one
 public office.
 f. The law regulating political incompatibilities.
 g. The electoral law.
  . At the same time and at alternate sessions, the general estimates of the State and other necessary measures shall be discussed.
 ART. 86. The vacancies which occur in the first Chamber of
 Deputies shall only be filled if its number be reduced to less than
 135 members.
 ART. 87. When Congress is closed, the government can take the
 measures it judges necessary and urgent for the overseas provinces.
  . As soon as Congress opens, the government shall give an account of the measures taken.


