VIII NEW CONSTITUTION (FUNDAMENTAL LAW) OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

THE GOVERNMENT

OF THE

SOVIET UNION

CHAPTER I

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION

Article i. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)

is a socialist state of workers and peasants. Article 2. The political foundation of the USSR is formed by the Soviets of toilers' deputies which have grown and become strong as a result of the overthrow of the power of the landlords and capitalists and the conquests of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Article 3. All power in the USSR belongs to the toilers of

the town and village in the form of Soviets of toilers' deputies. Article 4. The economic foundation of the USSR consists in the socialist system of economy and socialist ownership of the implements and means of production, firmly established as a result of the liquidation of the capitalist system of economy, the abolition of private ownership of the implements and means of production and the abolition of exploitation of man by man. Article 5. Socialist ownership in the USSR has either the form of state ownership (public property) or the form of cooperative and collective-farm ownership (property of individual collective farms, property of co-operative associations). Article 6. The land, its deposits, waters, forests, mills, factories, mines, railway, water and air transport, banks, means of communication, large agricultural enterprises organized by the state (state farms, machine-tractor stations, and so on), as well as communal enterprises and the essential part of housing in the cities and industrial centers, are state property, that is, public property.
Article 7. Public enterprises in collective farms and co-operative organizations, with their livestock and implements, products produced by the collective farms and co-operative organizations as well as their public buildings, constitute the public, socialist property of the collective farms and co-operative organizations. Each collective farm household, in addition to the basic income from the socialized collective-farm economy, has for its own use a plot of land attached to the household and, as individual property, subsidiary establishments on the land attached

to the household, a house, productive livestock and poultry, and minor agricultural implements-in accordance with the statutes of the agricultural artel. Article 8. The land occupied by collective farms is secured to them for use without payment and time limit, that is, in perpetuity. Article 9. Alongside the socialist system of economy, which is the dominant form of economy in the USSR, the law allows small private economy of individual peasants and handicraftsmen based on individual labor and excluding the exploitation of the labor of others. Article io. The right of personal ownership by citizens of their income from work and savings, home and auxiliary household economy, of objects of domestic and household economy, of objects of personal use and comfort, as well as the right of inheritance of the personal property of citizens-is protected by law. Article ii. The economic life of the USSR is determined and directed by the national economic state plan for the purposes of increasing public wealth, of a steady rise in the material and cultural level of the toilers, of strengthening the independence of the USSR and its defense capacity. Article 12. Work in the USSR is the obligation and matter of honor of each citizen capable of working, according to the principle: "He who does not work shall not eat." In the USSR the principle of socialism is being realized: "From each according to his ability, to each according t.o his work."
CHAPTER II

STATE ORGANIZATION

Article 13. The USSR is a federal state, formed on the basis of the voluntary association of the Soviet Socialist Republics with equal rights: Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, White-Russian Soviet Socialist Republic, Azerbaizhan Soviet Socialist Republic,
THE GOVERNMENT

OF THE SOVIET UNION

Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic, Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, Turkmenian Soviet Socialist Republic, Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic, Tadzhik Soviet Socialist Republic, Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic, Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic. Article i4. The jurisdiction of the USSR, as represented by its supreme organs of power and organs of state administration, extends to: (a) Representation of the Union in international relations, conclusion and ratification of treaties with other states; (b) Questions of war and peace; (c) Admission of new republics into the USSR; (d) Control of the observance of the Constitution of the USSR and ensuring conformity of the constitutions of the Union republics with the Constitution of the USSR; (e) Approval of alterations of boundaries between Union republics; (I) Confirmation of the forming of new regions, and also of new autonomous republics within Union republics; (g) Organization of the defense of the USSR and the direction of all the armed forces of the USSR; (h) Foreign trade on the basis of the state monopoly; (i) Protection of state security; (j) Establishment of the national economic plans of the USSR; (k) Approval of the unified state budget of the USSR as well as the taxes and revenues entering into the USSR, Union republic and local budgets; (1) Administration of banks, industrial and agricultural establishments as well as trading enterprises of All-Union importance; (m) Administration of transport and means of communication;
(n) Direction of the monetary and credit system;

(o) Organization of the state insurance; (p) Contracting and granting loans;

(q) Establishment of the fundamental principles for the use of land as well as the exploitation of deposits, forests and waters; (r) Establishment of the fundamental principles in the field of education and protection of public health; (s) Organization of a unified system of national economic accounting; (t) Establishment of basic labor laws; (u) Legislation on judicature and legal procedure; criminal and civil codes; (v) Laws on citizenship of the Union; laws on the rights of foreigners; (x) Passing All-Union amnesty acts. Article 15 . The sovereignty of the Union republics is restricted only within the limits set forth in Article i4 of the Constitution of the USSR. Outside of these limits, each Union republic exercises independently its state power. The USSR protects the sovereign rights of the Union republics. Article z6. Each Union republic has its own Constitution, which takes into account the specific features of the republic and is drawn up in full conformity with the Constitution of the USSR. Article 17. Each Union republic retains its right freely to secede from the USSR. Article r8. The territory of the Union republics may not be changed without their consent. Article r9. The laws of the USSR have the same force in the territories of all Union republics. Article 20. In the event of a law of a Union republic differing from an All-Union law, the All-Union law prevails. Article 21. A single Union citizenship is established for all citizens of the USSR. A citizen of a Union republic is also a citizen of the USSR. Article 22. The Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic consists of the following Territories: Azov-Black Sea, Far East, West Siberia, Krasnoyarsk, North Caucasus; Provinces:' Voronezh, East Siberia, Gorky, Western, Ivanovo, Kalinin,

Kirov, Kuibyshev, Kursk, Leningrad, Moscow, Omsk, Orenburg, Saratov, Sverdlovsk, Northern, Stalingrad, Chelyabinsk, Yaroslavl; Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics: Tatar, Bashkir, Daghestan, Buryat-Mongolia, Kabardino-Balkaria, Kalmyk, Karelia, Komi, Crimea, Marii, Mordva, Volga German, North Osetia, Udmurt, Chechen-Ingush, Chuvash, Yakut; Autonomous Provinces: Adygei, Jewish, Karachayev, Oirot, Khakas, Cherkes. Article 23. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic consists of the following Provinces: Vinnitsa, Dniepropetrovsk, Donets, Kiev, Odessa, Kharkov, Chernigov, and the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. Article 24. The Azerbaizhan Soviet Socialist Republic includes the Nakhichevan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic and the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Province. Article 25. The Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic includes the Abkhazian ASSR, Adzharian ASSR, South Osetian Autonomous Province. Article 26. The Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic includes the Kara-Kalpak ASSR. Article 27. The Tadzhik Soviet Socialist Republic includes the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province. Article 28. The Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic consists of the following Provinces: Aktyubin, Alma-Ata, East Kazakhstan, West Kazakhstan, Karaganda, Kutanai, North Kazakhstan, South Kazakhstan. Article 29. The Armenian SSR, White Russian SSR, Turkmenian SSR, and Kirghiz SSR do not include any autonomous republics or territories and provinces.
CHAPTER III

SUPREME ORGANS OF STATE POWER

Article 30. The supreme organ of state power of the USSR is the Supreme Council of the USSR.

Article 3,. The Supreme Council of the USSR exercises all rights vested in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics according to Article 14 of the Constitution, insofar as they do not enter, by virtue of the Constitution, into the competence of those organs of the USSR subordinate to the Supreme Council of the USSR: the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR, the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR, and the People's Commissariats of the USSR. Article 32. The legislative power of the USSR is exercised exclusively by the Supreme Council of the USSR. Article 33. The Supreme Council of the USSR consists of two chambers: the Council 1 of the Union and the Council' of Nationalities. Article 34. The Council of the Union is elected by election districts by the citizens of the USSR on the basis of one deputy per 300,000 of population. Article 35. The Council of Nationalities is elected by the citizens of the USSR, by Union republics and autonomous republics, by autonomous regions and national districts (okrug), on the basis of 25 deputies from each Union republic, i i deputies from each autonomous republic, 5 deputies from each autonomous region and one deputy from each national district. Article 36. The Supreme Council of the USSR is elected for a period of four years. Article 37. Both chambers of the Supreme Council of the USSR, the Council of the Union and Council of Nationalities, have equal rights. Article 38. Legislative initiative belongs in equal degree to the Council of the Union and the Council of Nationalities. Article 39. A law is considered approved if adopted by both chambers of the Supreme Council of the USSR by simple majority vote in each. Article 40. Laws adopted by the Supreme Council of the USSR are published in the languages of the Union republics over the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR. 

Article 41. Sessions of the Council of the Union and of the Council of Nationalities begin and terminate concurrently. Article 42. The Council of the Union elects the chairman of the Council of the Union and two vice-chairmen. Article 43. The Council of Nationalities elects the chairman of the Council of Nationalities and two vice-chairmen. Article 44. The chairmen of the Council of the Union and of the Council of Nationalities direct the sessions of the corresponding chambers and regulate their inner arrangements. Article 45. Joint sessions of both chambers of the Supreme Council of the USSR are directed in turn by the chairman of the Council of the Union and the chairman of the Council of Nationalities. Article 46. Sessions of the Supreme Council of the USSR are convened by the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR twice a year. Extraordinary sessions are convened by the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR at its discretion or on the demand of one of the Union republics. Article 47. In case of disagreement between the Council of the Union and the Council of Nationalities the question is referred for settlement to a conciliation commission established on the basis of equal representation. If the conciliation commission does not come to an agreement upon a decision, or if its decision does not satisfy one of the chambers, the question is considered for a second time in the chambers. In the event of the two chambers not agreeing upon a decision, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR dissolves the Supreme Council of the USSR and fixes new elections. Article 48. The Supreme Council of the USSR elects, at a joint session of both chambers, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR, composed of the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR, eleven ViceChairmen, the Secretary of the Presidium and 24 members of the Presidium. The Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR is accountable to the Supreme Council of the USSR in all its activities.


Article 49. The Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR: (a) Convenes sessions of the Supreme Council of the USSR; (b) Interprets laws in force of the USSR, issues instructions; (c) Dissolves the Supreme Council of the USSR on the basis of Article 47 of the Constitution of the USSR and fixes new elections; (d) Conducts a referendum on its own initiative or on the demand of one of the Union republics; (e) Rescinds decisions and orders of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR and the Councils of People's Commissars of the Union republics in the event that they are not in accordance with the law; (f) Between sessions of the Supreme Council of the USSR, relieves of their duties and appoints the various People's Commissars of the USSR at the instance of the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR, to be later submitted for confirmation to the Supreme Council of the USSR; (g) Awards decorations and assigns titles of honor of the USSR; (h) Exercises the right of pardon; (i) Appoints and replaces the supreme command of the armed forces of the USSR; (j) Between sessions of the Supreme Council of the USSR declares a state of war in the event of an armed attack on the USSR, or in the event of the need to carry out international treaty obligations of mutual defense against aggression; (k) Declares general or partial mobilization; (1) Ratifies international treaties; (m) Appoints and recalls plenipotentiary representatives of the USSR to foreign states; (n) Accepts the documents of appointment and recall of diplomatic representatives of foreign states accredited to it. Article 50. The Council of the Union and the Council of Nationalities elect Credential Commissions which verify the authorization of the deputies of each chamber. On representation from the Credential Commission the chambers decide either to recognize the authorization or annul the elections of the individual deputies.

Article 51. The Supreme Council of the USSR appoints, when it deems necessary, investigating and auditing commissions on any question. All institutions and officials are obliged to comply with the demands of these commissions and to supply them with the necessary materials and documents. Article 52. A deputy of the Supreme Council of the USSR cannot be prosecuted or arrested without the consent of the Supreme Council of the USSR and, in the period when the Supreme Council of the USSR is not in session, without the consent of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR. Article 53. After the authority of the Supreme Council of the USSR has expired or after the Supreme Council has been dissolved before the expiration of its term, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR preserves its authority until the formation by the newly-elected Supreme Council of the USSR, of a new Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR. Article 54. When the authority of the Supreme Council of the USSR expires or in the event of its dissolution before the expiration of its term, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR fixes new elections within a period of not more than two months from the date of the expiration of its authority or the dissolution of the Supreme Council of the USSR. Article 55. The newly-elected Supreme Council of the USSR is convened by the former Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR not later than a month after the elections. Article 56. The Supreme Council of the USSR at a joint session of both chambers forms the government of the USSR the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR.
CHAPTER IV SUPREME ORGANS OF STATE POWER OF THE UNION REPUBLICS

Article 57. The supreme organ of state power of a Union republic is the Supreme Council of the Union republic.


Article 58. The Supreme Council of the Union republic is elected by citizens of the republic for a period of four years. The ratio of representation is determined by the constitutions of the Union republics.
Article 59. The Supreme Council of the Union republic is

the sole legislative organ of the republic. Article 6o. The Supreme Council of the Union republic: (a) Adopts the Constitution of the republic and amends it in accordance with Article 16 of the Constitution of the USSR; (b) Ratifies the constitutions of the autonomous republics belonging to it and defines the boundaries of their territories; (c) Approves the national economic plan and budget of the republic; (d) Exercises the right of amnesty and pardon to citizens sentenced by judicial organs of the Union republic.
Article 61. The Supreme Council of the Union republic elects

a Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Union republic composed of: the chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Union republic, his deputies, the secretary of the Presidium, and members of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Union republic. The powers of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of a Union republic are determined by the Constitution of the Union republic. Article 62. The Supreme Council of the Union republic elects the chairman and his deputies to conduct its meetings. Article 63. The Supreme Council of the Union republic organizes the government of the Union republic-the Council of People's Commissars of the Union republic.
CHAPTER V

ORGANS OF STATE ADMINISTRATION OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

Article 64. The supreme executive and administrative organ of state power in the USSR is the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR.

Article 65. The Council of People's Commissars of the USSR is responsible to the Supreme Council of the USSR and accountable to it, and between sessions of the Supreme Council-to the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR, to which it is accountable. Article 66. The Council of People's Commissars of the USSR issues decisions and orders on the basis of and in fulfillment of laws in force and controls their execution. Article 67. Decisions and orders of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR have obligatory force and must be carried out throughout the entire territory of the USSR. Article 68. The Council of People's Commissars of the USSR: (a) Unites and directs the work of All-Union and Union republic people's commissariats of the USSR and of other economic and cultural institutions under its jurisdiction; (b) Takes measures to realize the national economic plan and state budget and to strengthen the credit-monetary system; (c) Takes measures to ensure public order, to defend the interests of the state and to safeguard the rights of citizens; (d) Exercises general direction in the realm of relations with foreign states; (e) Determines the annual contingent of citizens to be called for active military service and directs the general upbuilding of the armed forces of the country; (f) Appoints in case of need special committees and Main Boards under the Council of People's Commissars, on matters of economic, cultural and defense construction. Article 69. The Council of People's Commissars of the USSR has the right in respect to those branches of administration and economy which fall within the jurisdiction of the USSR, to suspend decisions and orders of the Councils of People's Commissars of the Union republics and to annul orders and instructions of the People's Commissars of the USSR. Article 70. The Council of People's Commissars of the USSR is formed by the Supreme Council of the USSR and is composed as follows: The Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR;


The Vice-Chairmen of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR; The Chairman of the State Planning Commission of the USSR; The Chairman of the Commission of Soviet Control; The People's Commissars of the USSR; The Chairman of the Committee for Purchasing Agricultural Products; The Chairman of the Art Committee; The Chairman of the Committee on Higher Education. Article 71. The Government of the USSR or a People's Commissar of the USSR to whom any question of a deputy of the Supreme Council is addressed, is obliged to give an oral or written reply in the respective chamber within a period of not more than three days. Article 72. People's Commissars of the USSR direct the branches of state administration which come within the jurisdiction of the USSR. Article 73. The People's Commissars of the USSR issue within the limits of jurisdiction of the respective People's Commissariats, orders and instructions on the basis of and in fulfillment of laws in force, as well as of decisions and orders of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR and verify their fulfillment. Article 74. The People's Commissariats of the USSR are either All-Union or Union-republic. Article 75. The All-Union People's Commissariats direct the branch of state administration intrusted to them on the entire territory of the USSR, either directly or through organs appointed by them. Article 76. Union-republic People's Commissariats direct the branch of state administration intrusted to them, as a rule, through identically named People's Commissariats of the Union republics, and administer directly only a specific, limited number of enterprises as listed and sanctioned by the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR. Article 77. The following People's Commissariats comprise the All-Union People's Commissariats: Defense; Foreign Affairs; Foreign Trade; Railways; Communications; Water Transport; Heavy Industry; Defense Industry. Article 78. The following People's Commissariats comprise the Union-republic People's Commissariats: Food Industry; Light Industry; Timber Industry; Agricultural State Grain and Livestock Farms; Finance; Home Trade; Home Affairs; Justice; Health.
CHAPTER VI

ORGANS

OF STATE ADMINISTRATION UNION REPUBLICS

OF THE

Article 79. The supreme executive and administrative organ of state power of a Union republic is the Council of People's Commissars of the Union republic. Article 8o. The Council of People's Commissars of a Union republic is responsible to the Supreme Council of the Union republic and is accountable to it, and between sessions of the Supreme Council of a Union republic-to the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Union republic, to which it is accountable. Article 81. The Council of People's Commissars of a Union republic issues decisions and orders on the basis and in fulfillment of the laws in force in the USSR and the Union republic, and on the basis of decisions and orders of the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR, and verifies their execution. Article 82. The Council of People's Commissars of a Union republic has the right to suspend decisions and orders of the Councils of People's Commissars of autonomous republics and to rescind decisions and orders of executive committees of Soviets of toilers' deputies of territories, provinces and autonomous provinces. Article 83. The Council of People's Commissars of a Union republic is formed by the Supreme Council of the Union republic and is composed of: The Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Union republic;


The Vice-Chairmen; The Chairman of the State Planning Commission; People's Commissars of: Food Industry; Light Industry; Timber Industry; Agriculture; State Grain and Livestock Farms; Finance; Home Trade; Home Affairs; Justice; Health; Education; Local Industry; Communal Economy; Social Welfare; A representative of the Committee for Purchasing Agricultural Products; Chief of the Art Administration; Representatives of the All-Union People's Commissariats. Article 84. The People's Commissars of a Union republic direct the branches of the state administration which come within the jurisdiction of the Union republic. Article 85. The People's Commissars of a Union republic issue within the limits of jurisdiction of respective People's Commissariats-, orders and instructions on the basis of and in fulfillment of the laws of the USSR and the Union republic, of decisions and orders of the Councils of People's Commissars of the USSR and of the Union republic, and of orders and instructions of the Union-republic People's Commissariats of the USSR. Article 86. The People's Commissariats of a Union republic are either Union-republic or republic. Article 87. Union-republic People's Commissariats direct the branch of state administration intrusted to them, being subordinate to the corresponding Union-republic People's Commissariat of the USSR as well as to the Council of People's Commissars of the Union republic. Article 88. Republic People's Commissariats direct the branch of state administration intrusted to them, being subordinated directly to the Council of People's Commissars of the Union republic.
CHAPTER VII

THE SUPREME ORGANS OF STATE POWER OF THE AUTONOMOUS SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

Article 89. The supreme organ of state power of an autonomous republic is the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics (ASSR).


Article 90. The Supreme Council of an autonomous republic is elected by the citizens of the republic for a period of four years in the ratio of representation established by the Constitution of the autonomous republic. Article 91. The Supreme Council of an autonomous republic is the sole legislative organ of the ASSR. Article 92. Each autonomous republic has its own Constitution which takes into account the specific features of the autonomous republic and is drawn up in full conformity with the Constitution of the Union republic. Article 93. The Supreme Council of an autonomous republic elects the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the autonomous republic and forms a Council of People's Commissars of the autonomous republic, in accordance with its Constitution.
CHAPTER

VIII

LOCAL ORGANS OF STATE POWER Article 94. The organs of state power in territories, provinces, autonomous provinces, regions, districts, cities and villages (including stanitsas, khutors, kishlaks, auls) are Soviets of toilers' deputies. Article 95. The Soviets of toilers' deputies of territories, provinces, autonomous provinces, regions, districts, cities and villages (including stanitsas, khutors, kishlaks, auls) are elected by the toilers of the respective territory, province, autonomous provinces, region, district, city or village for a period of two years. Article 96. The ratios of representation in the Soviets of toilers' deputies are determined by the Constitutions of the Union republics. Article 97. The Soviets of toilers' deputies direct the activities of the organs of administration subordinated to them, ensure the maintenance of state order, observance of the laws and the protection of the rights of the citizens, direct local economic and cultural construction and draw up the local budget. Article 98. The Soviets of toilers' deputies adopt decisions


and issue orders, within the limits of the powers vested in them by the laws of the USSR and the Union republic. Article 99. The executive and administrative organs of the Soviets of toilers' deputies of the territories, provinces, autonomous provinces, regions, districts, cities and villages are the executive committees elected by them, composed of the chairman, the vice-chairman, secretary and members. Article zoo. The executive and administrative organ of village Soviets of toilers' deputies in small localities, in accordance with the Constitutions of the Union republics, is the chairman, vice-chairman and secretary elected by them.
Article 101. The executive organs of the Soviets of toilers'

deputies are directly accountable both to the Soviets of toilers' deputies which elected them and to the executive organ of the higher Soviet of toilers' deputies.
CHAPTER IX

COURT AND PROSECUTION Article 102. Justice in the USSR is administered by the Supreme Court of the USSR, the supreme courts of the Union republics, territorial and provincial courts, courts of the autonomous republics and autonomous provinces, district courts, special courts of the USSR which are created by decision of the Supreme Council of the USSR, and People's Courts. Article 103. In all courts cases are tried with the participation of the people's associate-judges, with the exception of cases specially provided for by law. Article 104. The Supreme Court of the USSR is the highest judicial organ. It is charged with supervision of the judicial activity of all judicial organs of the USSR and Union republics. Article zo 5 . The Supreme Court of the USSR and special courts of the USSR are elected by the Supreme Council of the USSR for a period of five years. Article zo6. The supreme courts of Union republics are elected by the Supreme Councils of the Union republics for a period of five years. Article 107. The supreme courts of autonomous republics are


elected by the Supreme Councils of the autonomous republics for a period of five years. Article 108. Territorial and provincial courts, courts of the autonomous provinces, and district courts are elected by territorial, provincial or district Soviets of toilers' deputies or by Soviets of toilers' deputies of the autonomous provinces for a period of five years.
Article 109. People's Courts are elected by secret ballot for Supreme Council of the USSR for a period of seven years. 

a period of three years by citizens of the district, on the basis of universal, direct and equal suffrage. Article 110. Court proceedings are conducted in the language of the Union or autonomous republic or autonomous province, persons not knowing this language being ensured the possibility of fully acquainting themselves with the material of the case through an interpreter as well as having the right to address the court in their native language. Article. In all courts of the USSR cases are heard openly, except when otherwise provided for by law, and the accused person is ensured the right of defense. Article 112. Judges are independent and subject only to the law. Article x113. Highest supervision of the exact observance, of the laws by all People's Commissariats and institutions under them, as well as by individual persons holding official posts, and also by citizens of the USSR, is vested in the Prosecutor of the USSR.
Article Article
114.
115.

The Prosecutor of the USSR is appointed by the Prosecutors of republics, territories and provinces, as well as prosecutors of autonomous republics and autonomous provinces, are appointed by the Prosecutor of the USSR for a period of five years. Article 1 16. District and urban prosecutors are appointed for a period of five years by the prosecutors of the Union republics with the approval of the Prosecutor of the USSR.
Article
117.

The organs of prosecution perform their functions independently of any local organs whatsoever, being responsible only to the Prosecutor of the USSR.


CHAPTER X

BASIC RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF CITIZENS

Article 118. Citizens of the USSR have the right to work, that is the right to receive guaranteed work with payment for their work in accordance with its quantity and quality. The right to work is ensured by the socialist organization of national economy, the steady growth of the productive forces of Soviet society, the absence of economic crises, and the abolition of unemployment. Article 119 . Citizens of the USSR have the right to rest. The right to rest is ensured by the reduction of the working day to seven hours for the overwhelming majority of the workers, establishment of annual vacations with pay for workers and employees, and provision for a wide network of sanatoria, rest-homes and clubs for the accommodation of the toilers.
Article 120. Citizens of the USSR have the right to material security in old age as well as in the event of sickness and loss of capacity to work. This right is ensured by the wide development of social insurance of workers and employees at the expense of the state, free medical aid, and the provision of a wide network of health resorts for the use of the toilers. Article 121. Citizens of the USSR have the right to education.

This right is ensured by universal compulsory elementary education, free of charge, including higher education, by the system of state stipends for the overwhelming majority of students in higher schools, instruction in schools in the native language, and organization of free industrial, technical and agronomic education for the toilers at the factories, state farms, machine-tractor stations and collective farms. Article r22. Women in the USSR are accorded equal rights with men in all fields of economic, state, cultural, social and political life. The possibility of realizing these rights of women is ensured


by affording women equally with men the right to work, payment for work, rest, social insurance and education, state protection of the interests of mother and child, granting pregnancy leave with pay, and the provision for a wide network of maternity homes, nurseries and kindergartens. Article 123. The equality of the rights of citizens of the USSR, irrespective of their nationality or race, in all fields of economic, state, cultural, social and political life, is an irrevocable law. Any direct or indirect restriction of these rights, or conversely, the establishment of direct or indirect privileges for citizens on account of the race or nationality to which they belong, as well as any propagation of racial or national exceptionalism or hatred and contempt, is punishable by law. Article 124. To ensure to citizens freedom of conscience the church in the USSR is separated from the state and the school from the church. Freedom to perform religious rites and freedom of anti-religious propaganda is recognized for all citizens. Article 125. In accordance with the interests of the toilers and for the purpose of strengthening the socialist system, the citizens of the USSR are guaranteed: (a) Freedom of speech; (b) Freedom of the press; (c) Freedom of assembly and meetings; (d) Freedom of street processions and demonstrations. These rights of the citizens are ensured by placing at the disposal of the toilers and their organizations printing presses, supplies of paper, public buildings, streets, means of communication and other material conditions necessary for their realization. Article 126. In accordance with the interests of the toilers and for the purpose of developing the organizational self-expression and political activity of the masses of the people, citizens of the USSR are ensured the right of combining in public organizations: trade unions, co-operative associations, youth organizations, sport and defense organizations, cultural, technical


and scientific societies, and for the most active and conscientious citizens from the ranks of the working class and other strata of the toilers, of uniting in the All-Union Communist Party (of Bolsheviks), which is the vanguard of the toilers in their struggle for strengthening and developing the socialist system and which represents the leading nucleus of all organizations of the toilers, both public and state. Article 127. The citizens of the USSR are ensured the inviolability of the person. No one may be subjected to arrest except upon the decision of a court or with the sanction of the prosecutor. , Article 128. The inviolability of the homes of citizens and the secrecy of correspondence are protected by law. Article 129. The USSR grants the right of asylum to foreign citizens persecuted for defending the interests of the toilers or for their scientific activity or for their struggle for national liberation.
Article
13o.

Every citizen of the USSR is obliged to observe

the Constitution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, to carry out the laws, observe labor discipline, honestly fulfill his social duties, and respect the rules of the socialist community. Article 131. Every citizen of the USSR is obliged to safeguard and consolidate public, socialist property as the sacred and inviolable foundation of the Soviet system, as the source of wealth and might of the fatherland, as the source of the prosperous cultural life of all the toilers. Persons attempting to violate public socialist property are enemies of the people. Article 132. Universal military service is the law. Military service in the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army represents the honorable duty of the citizens of the USSR.
Article
133.

The defense of the fatherland is the sacred duty

of every citizen of the USSR. Treason to the fatherland: Violation of oath, desertion to the enemy, impairing the military might of the state, espionage-is punishable with the full severity of the law as the most heinous crime.

CHAPTER XI

ELECTORAL SYSTEM Article 134. Deputies to all Soviets of toilers' deputies, the Supreme Council of the USSR, Supreme Councils of the Union republics, territorial and provincial Soviets of toilers' deputies, Supreme Councils of autonomous republics, Soviets of toilers' deputies of autonomous provinces, regional, district, city and village Soviets of toilers' deputies (including stanitsas, villages, khutors, kishlaks, auls), are elected by the electors on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. Article 135. Elections of the deputies are universal: all citizens of the USSR who have reached the age of 18, irrespective of race or nationality, religion, educational qualifications, residential qualifications, social origin, property status and past activity, have the right to participate in elections of deputies and to be elected, with the exception of the mentally deficient and persons deprived of electoral rights by the courts. Article 136. Elections of deputies are equal: every citizen has one vote; all citizens participate in the elections on equal terms. Article 137. Women have the right to elect and be elected on equal terms with men. Article 138. Citizens serving in the ranks of the Red Army have the right to elect and be elected on equal terms with all other citizens. Article 139. Elections of deputies are direct: elections to all Soviets of toilers' deputies from the village and city Soviets of toilers' deputies up to the Supreme Council of the USSR are effected by the citizens voting directly. Article 140. Voting at elections of deputies is secret. Article 14z. Candidates are put forward for election according to electoral districts. The right to put forward candidates is granted to social organizations and societies of the toilers: Communist Party organizations, trade unions, co-operatives, youth organizations and cultural societies.

Article

142.

Every deputy is obliged to render account to the

electors of his work and the work of the Soviet of toilers' deputies, and may at any time be recalled in the manner established by law on the decision of a majority of the electors.
CHAPTER XII

EMBLEM, FLAG, CAPITAL
Article 143. The state emblem of the USSR consists of a hammer and sickle against a globe depicted in rays of the sun and surrounded by ears of grain with the inscription "Proletarians of all Countries, Unite!" in the languages of the Union republics. Above the emblem is a five-pointed star. Article 144. The state flag of the USSR is red cloth with the hammer and sickle depicted in gold in the upper corner near the staff and above them a five-pointed red star bordered in gold. The relation of the width to the length is 1:2.
Article
145.

The capital of the USSR is the city of Moscow.
CHAPTER XIII

PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING THE CONSTITUTION Article 146. Amendment of the Constitution of the USSR is

effected only by the decision of the Supreme Council of the USSR when adopted by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the votes in each of its chambers.


