
PART I

Declaration Since the foundation of the Soviet Republics, the States of the world have been divided into two camps: the camp of Capitalism and the camp of Socialism. There, in the camp of Capitalism: national hate and inequality, colonial slavery and chauvinism, national oppression and massacres, brutalities and imperialistic wars. Here, in the camp of Socialism: reciprocal confidence and peace, national liberty and equality, the pacific co-existence and fraternal collaboration of peoples. The attempts made by the capitalistic world during the past ten years to decide the question of nationalities by bringing together the principle of the free development of peoples with a system of exploitation of man by man have been fruitless. In addition, the number of national conflicts becomes more and more confusing, even menacing the capitalistic regime. The bourgeoisie has proven itself incapable of realizing a harmonious collaboration of the peoples. It is only in the camp of the Soviets; it is only under the conditions of the dictatorship of the proletariat that has grouped around itself the majority of the people, that it has been possible to eliminate the oppression of nationalities, to create an atmosphere of mutual confidence and to establish the basis of a fraternal collaboration of peoples. It is only thanks to these circumstances that the Soviet Republics have succeeded in repulsing the imperialistic attacks both internally and externally; it is only thanks to them that the Soviet Republics have succeeded in satisfactorily


ending a civil war, in assuring their existence and in dedicating themselves to pacific economic reconstruction. But the years of the war have not passed without leaving their trace. The devastated fields, the closed factories, the forces of production destroyed and the economic resources exhausted, this heritage of the war renders insufficient the isolated economic efforts of the several Republics. National economic reestablishment is impossible as long as the Republics remain separated. On the other hand, the instability of the international situation and the danger of new attacks make inevitable the creation of a united front of the Soviet Republics in the presence of capitalistic surroundings. Finally, the very structure of Soviet power, international by nature of class, pushes the masses of workers of the Soviet Republics to unite in one socialist family. All these considerations insistently demand the union of the Soviet Republics into one federated State capable of guaranteeing security against the exterior, economic prosperity internally, and the free national development of peoples.

assembled in Congress, where they decide unanimously to

The will of the peoples of the Soviet Republics recently

form the "Union of Socialist Soviet Republics," is a sure
guarantee that this Union is a free federation of peoples equal in rights, that the right to freely withdraw from the Union is assured to each Republic, that access to the Union is open to all Republics already existing, as well as those that may be born in the future, that the new federal state will be the worthy crowning of the principles laid down as early as October 1917, of the pacific co-existence and fraternal collaboration of peoples, that it will serve as a bulwark against the capitalistic world and mark a new decisive step towards the union of workers of all countries in one World Wide Socialist Soviet Republic.




The Russian Soviet Soviet Republic of Ukraine, the Socialist Republic of White Russia, and the Socialist Soviet Republic of Transcaucasia (including the Socialist Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan, the Socialist Soviet Republic of Georgia, and the Socialist Soviet Republic of Armenia) -unite themselves in one federal State-"The Union of Socialist Soviet Republics."*
CHAPTER I

Socialist Federal Soviet Republic, the Socialist


Attributions of the Supreme Organs of Power of the Union

ARTICLE 1. The Union of Socialist Soviet Republics through its supreme organs has the following powers: (a) To represent the Union in its international relations; to conclude all diplomatic relations; to conclude treaties, political and otherwise, with other States; To modify the exterior frontiers of the Union, as (b) well as to regulate questions concerning the modification of frontiers between the member Republics; (c) To conclude treaties concerning the reception of new Republics into the Union; To declare war and to conclude peace; (d) To conclude internal and external loans of the (e) Union and to authorize internal and external loans of the member Republics; (f) To ratify international treaties; (g) To direct commerce with foreign countries and to determine the system of internal commerce;



(h) To establish the bases and the general plan of all national economy of the Union; to define the domains of industry and industrial enterprises that are of federal interest; to conclude treaties of concession both federal and in the name of the member Republics; (i) To direct transportation and the postal and telegraphic services; (j) To organize and direct the armed forces of the Union; (k ) To approve the budget of the Federal State which includes the budgets of the member Republics; to establish duties and federal revenues, making additions and reductions in order to balance the member Republics' budgets; to authorize duties and supplementary taxes to meet the member Republics' budgets; (1) To establish a uniform system of money and credit; (m) To establish general principles of exploitation and use of the earth, as well as those of the sub-soil, the forests, and the waters of the territories of the Union; (n) To establish federal legislation on the emigration from the territory of one of the Republics to the territory of another and to set up a fund for such emigration; (o) To establish principles of the judicial organization and procedure, as well as civil and criminal legislation for the Union; (p) To establish the fundamental laws regarding work; (q) To establish the general principles regarding public instruction; (r) To establish the general measures regarding public hygiene; (s) To establish a standard system of weights and measures; (t) To organize federal statistics; (u) To fix the fundamental legislation regarding federal nationality, with reference to the rights of foreigners;

 
(v) To exercise the right of amnesty in all territories of the Union; (w) To abrogate the acts of the Congresses of the Soviets and the Central Executive Committees of the member Republics contrary to the present Constitution; (x) To arbitrate litigious questions between the member Republics. ARTICLE 2. The approval and modification of the fundamental principles of the present Constitution belong exclusively to the Congress of Soviets of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.
CHAPTER III

Sovereign Rights of the Member Republics 3. The sovereignty of the member Republics is limited only in the matters indicated in the present Constitution, as coming within the competence of the Union. Outside of those limits, each member Republic exerts its public powers independently; the Union of S. S. R. protects the rights of the member Republics. ARTICLE 4. Each one of the member Republics retains the right to freely withdraw from the Union. ARTICLE 5. The member Republics will make changes in their Constitutions to conform with the present Constitution. ARTICLE 6. The territory of the member Republics cannot be modified without their consent; also, any limitation or modification or suppression of Article 4 must have the approval of all the member Republics of the Union. ARTICLE 7. Just one federal nationality is established for the citizens of the member Republics.
ARTICLE




CHAPTER IV

Congress of Soviets of the Union


8. The supreme organ of power of the Union of S. S. R. is the Congress of Soviets, and, in the recesses
ARTICLE

of the Congress of Soviets-the Central Executive Committee of the Union of S. S. R. which is composed of the Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities. The Congress of Soviets of the Union of ARTICLE 9. S. S. R. is composed of representatives of the urban Soviets
and of the Soviets of the urban type on the basis of one deputy per 25,000 electors, and of representatives of the Congresses of Soviets of the rural districts on the basis of one deputy per 125,000 inhabitants.


ARTICLE 10. The delegates to the Congress of the Soviets of the Union of S. S. R. are elected in the Congresses of Soviets of the rural and urban governments. In the Republics where there does not exist a rural division, the delegates are elected directly to the Congress of Soviets of the respective Republic. ARTICLE 11.


Regular sessions of the Congress of the

Soviets of the Union of S. S. R. are convoked by the Central Executive Committee of the Union once yearly; extraordinary sessions may be convoked on decision of the C. E. C. (Central Executive Committee), or on the demand of the Federal Soviet, or of the Soviet of Nationalities, or on the demand of two member Republics.

ARTICLE

12.

In cases where extraordinary circumstances interfere with the meeting of the Congress of Soviets


of the Union of S. S. R. on the date set, the C. E. C. of the Union has the power to adjourn the meeting of Congress.


CHAPTER V. The Central Executive Committee of the Union

13. The Central Executive Committee (C. E. C.) of the Union of S. S. R. is composed of the Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities. ARTICLE 14. The Congress of Soviets of the Union of S.S.R. elects the Federal Soviet from among the representatives of the member Republics in proportion to the population of each one to make a grand total of 371* members. The Soviet of Nationalities is composed ARTICLE 15. of representatives of the member Republics and associated autonomous Republics of the R.S.F.S.R.t on the basis of five representatives for each member Republic, and one representative for each associated autonomous Republic. The composition of the Soviet of Nationalities in its entirety is approved by the Congress of the Union of S.S.R. (The autonomous Republics of Adjaria, and Abkhasia and the autonomous region of Osetia, each send a representative to the Soviet of Nationalities.) ARTICLE 16. The Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities examine all decrees, codes, and acts that are presented to them by the Presidium of the C.E.C. and by the Council of Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R., by the different Commissions of the People of the Union, by the C.E.C of the member Republics, as well as those that owe their origin to the Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities. ARTICLE 17. The C.E.C. of the Union publishes the codes, decrees, acts, and ordinances; orders the work of

legislation and administration of the Union of S.S.R., and defines the sphere of activity of the Presidium of the C.E.C. and of the Council of Commissioners of the People of the Union of S. S. R. ARTICLE 18. All decrees and acts defining the general rules of the political and economic life of the Union of S.S.R., or making radical modifications in the existing practices of public organs of the Union of S.S.R. must obligatorily be submitted for examination and approval to the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 19. All decrees, acts, and ordinances promulgated by the C.E.C. must be immediately put into force throughout all the territory of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 20. The C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. has the right to suspend or abrogate the decrees, acts, and orders of the Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R., as well as those of the Congress of Soviets and of the C.E.C. of the Member Republics, and all other organs of power throughout the territory of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 21. The ordinary sessions of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. are convoked by the Presidium of the C. E. C. three times yearly. The extraordinary sessions are convoked by the Presidium of the C. E. C. of the Union of S.S.R. on the demand of the Presidium of the Federal Soviet or of the Presidium of the Soviet of Nationalities, and also on demand of one of the C.E.C. of the member Republics. ARTICLE 22. The projects of law submitted for examination to the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. do not have the force of law until adopted by the Federal Soviet and by the Soviet of Nationalities; they are published in the name of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 23. In case of disagreement between the Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities, the question is transmitted to a compromise committee chosen by the two of them.

24. If an accord is not reached by the the question is transferred for examination committee, compromise to a joint meeting of the Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities; and, if neither the Federal Soviet nor the Soviet of Nationalities get a majority, then the question may be submitted, on the demand of one of these organs, to the decision of an ordinary or extraordinary Congress of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 25. The Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities elect for the preparation of their sessions and the direction of their work-their Presidiums, composed of seven * members each. ARTICLE 26. Between sessions of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R., the supreme organ of power is the Presidium of the Union of S.S.R., constituted by the C.E.C. to the extent of 21* members, including the Presidium of the Federal Soviet and the Presidium of the Soviet of Nationalities. To form the Presidium of the C.E.C. and the Council of Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R., conforming to Articles 26 and 37 of the present Constitution, joint sessions of the Federal Soviet and of the Soviet of Nationalities are convoked. In the joint session of the Federal Soviet and the Soviet of Nationalities, the vote is taken separately within each group. ARTICLE 27. The C.E.C. elects, in accordance with the number of member Republics, 4t Presidents of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. from among the members of the Presidium of the C-E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 28. The C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. is responsible before the Congress of Soviets of the Union of S.S.R.
ARTICLE




CHAPTER VI.

The Presidium of the C. E. C. of the Union

29. Between sessions of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R., the Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. is the supreme organ of legislative, executive, and administrative power of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 30. The Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union S.S.R. oversees the enforcement of the Constitution of the Union of S.S.R. and the execution of all decisions of the Congress of Soviets and of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. by all the public agents. ARTICLE 31. The Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. has the right to suspend and abrogate the orders of the Council of Commissioners of the People and of the different Councils of the People of the Union of the S.S.R. as well as those of the C.E.C. and C.C.P. (Councils of Commissioners of the People) of the member Republics. ARTICLE 32. The Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. has the right to suspend the acts of the Congresses of Soviets of the member Republics submitting afterwards these acts for the examination and approval of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R.
ARTICLE


ARTICLE

33.

The Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union

of S.S.R. promulgates the decrees, acts, and orders; examines and approves the projects of decrees and acts deposited by the C. C. P., by the different authorities of the Union of S.S.R., by the C.E.C. of the member Republics, by their Presidiums and by other organs of power. ARTICLE 34. The decrees and decisions of the C.E.C., of its Presidium, and the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. are printed in the languages generally employed in the member Republics: Russian, Ukranian, White Russian, Georgian, Armenian, Turko-Tartarian.


The Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. decides questions regarding the relationships between the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. and the Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R., for one part and the C.E.C. of the member Republics and their Presidiums, for the second part. ARTICLE 36. The Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. is responsible before the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R.

35.

CHAPTER VII.

Council of Commissioners of the People of the Union* ARTICLE 37. The Council of Commissioners of the People (C.C.P.) of the Union of S.S.R. is the executive and administrative organ of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. and is constituted by the C.E.C. as follows: (a) The President of the Council of Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R., (b) The Vice-Presidents, (c) The Commissioner of the People for Foreign Affairs, (d) The Commissioner of the People for Military and Naval Affairs, (e) The Commissioner of the People for Foreign Commerce, (f) The Commissioner of the People for Ways of Communication, (g) The Commissioner of the People for Postal and Telegraphic Service, (h) The Commissioner of the People for the Inspection of Workers and Peasants, (i) The President of the Supreme Council of National Economy,

(j) The Commissioner of the People for Labor, (k) The Commissioner of the People for Finances, (1) The Commissioner of the People for Supplies.* ARTICLE 38. The Council of Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R., in the limits of the powers granted to it by the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R, and on the basis of rules regulating the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R., publishes the decrees and decisions that must become effective throughout the territory of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 39. The C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. examines the decrees and decisions given it by the various Commissions of the People as well as those from the C.E.C. of the member Republics and by their Presidiums. ARTICLE 40. The C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. is
responsible for all its work before the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. and before its Presidium. ARTICLE 41. The orders and acts of the C.C.P. of the

Union of S.S.R. may be suspended and abrogated by the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. and by its Presidium. ARTICLE 42. The Central Executive Committees of the member Republics and their Presidiums may object to the decrees and orders of the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. to the Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R., without suspending the execution of these orders.
CHAPTER VIII The Supreme Court of the Union

ARTICLE 43. In order to maintain revolutionary legality within the territory of the Union of S.S.R., a Supreme Court


under the jurisdiction of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. is established, competent: (a) To give the Supreme Courts of the member Republics the authentic interpretations on questions of federal legislation; (b) To examine, on the request of the Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R., the decrees, decisions, and verdicts of the Supreme Courts of the member Republics, with view of discovering any infraction of the federal laws, or harming the interests of other Republics, and if such be discovered to bring them before the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. (c) To render decisions on the request of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. as to the constitutionality of laws passed by the member Republics; (d) To settle legal disputes between the member Republics; p (e) To examine the accusations brought before it of high officials against whom charges have been made relative to their performance of duties. ARTICLE 44. The Supreme Court performs its functions in the following manner: (a) With a full attendance of the member judges of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R.; (b) Or, in a meeting of the Civil Judiciary College and the Criminal Judiciary College of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R.; (c) Or, in a meeting of the Military College. ARTICLE 45. The Supreme Court of the Union of S.S. R., in full session, is composed of 11* members, including its President and Vice-President, the four Presidents of the Supreme Courts of the member Republics, and a representative of the Unified Political Administration of the State of the Union of S.S.R.; the President and the Vice-President
 


and the other five members are named by the Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R.

ARTICLE 46. The Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of, the Union of S.S.R. and his assistant are named by the Presidium of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R. The Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R. is charged with the duties: (1) to give the decisions of all questions in the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R., (2) to prosecute the cases brought before the Court, (3) and, in cases of lack of agreement among the judges of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R., to bring these questions of dispute before the Presidium of the C.E.C. of the S.S.R. ARTICLE 47. The right to submit the questions referred to in Article 43 to the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R. for examination belongs exclusively to the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R., to its Presidium, to the Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R., to the Prosecutors of the Supreme Courts of the member Republics, and to the Unified Political Administration of the State of the Union of S.S.R.

48. The regular sessions of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R. constitute the special legal chambers to examine:

The civil and criminal affairs of exceptional importance that are of interest to two or more member Republics; Personal charges against members of the C.E.C. (b) and the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. A decision of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R. to proceed to examine a case may take place only after special authority has been granted for each case by the C.E. C. of the Union or its Presidium.


 
CHAPTER IX
Commissioners of the People of the Union
ARTICLE

49.

For the immediate direction of the several

branches of public administrator, attributed to the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R., 10 Commissioners of the People are

created as mentioned in Article 37 of the present Constitution and who act according to the regulations of the Commissioners of the People approved by the C.E.C. of the Union of the S.S.R. ARTICLE 50. The Commissioners of the People of the

Union of S.S.R. are divided into the following groups: Commissioners of the People handling strictly federal matters of the Union of S.S.R. that are external in character; (b) Commissioners of the People handling matters that are purely domestic in character. ARTICLE 51. The first group of Commissioners handling matters external in character includes the following Commissioners of the People: (a) For Foreign Affairs, (b) For Military and Naval Affairs, (c) For Foreign Commerce, (d) For Ways of Communication, (e) For Postal and Telegraphic Service. ARTICLE 52. The second group handling matters that are strictly domestic in character includes the following Commissioners of the People: (a) The Council of National Economy, (b) For Supplies.* (c) For Labor, (d) For Finances, (e) For the Inspection of Workers and Peasants.





ARTICLE 53. The Commissioners of the People handling matters of purely external character have, in the various member Republics, their delegates directly subordinate to these Commissioners. ARTICLE 54. The Commissioners of the People handling matters of domestic concern have, as executing organs in the various member Republics, the Commissioners of the People of these Republics of similar title. ARTICLE 55. The C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R., including the individual Commissioners, are the heads of the various departments mentioned. ARTICLE 56. Under each Commissioner of the People, and under his presidency, is formed a College, of which the members are named by the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 57. The Commissioner of the People has the right to personally take decisions on all questions that come within the jurisdiction of his department, on advising the College of his department of his act. In case of disagreement on any decision of the Commissioner of the People, the College, or its members separately, may bring the dispute before the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R., without suspending the act of the Commissioner. ARTICLE 58. The orders of the different Commissioners of the People of the Union may be abrogated by the Presidium of the C.E.C. and by the C.C.P. of the Union of S.

S.R.
ARTICLE 59. The orders of the Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R. may be suspended by the C. E.C. or by the Presidiums of the C.E.C. of the member Republic in case of evident incompatibility of these orders with the Federal Constitution, with federal legislation or with legislation of the member Republic. This suspension is immediately communicated by the C.E.C. or by the Presidiums of the C.E.C. of the member Republics to the C.C.P. of the





Union of S.S.R. and to the proper Commissioner of the People of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 60. The Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R. are responsible before the C.C.P., the C.E. C. of the Union of S.S.R. and its Presidium.
CHPTER X

The Unified Political Administration of State

61. In view of unifying the revolutionary efforts of the member Republics in their struggle against the political and economic counter-revolution, spying and banditry, there shall be created under the jurisdiction of the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R., a Unified Political Administration of State (G.P.U.) of which the President shall be a consulting member of the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 62. The G.P.U. of the Union of S.S.R. directs the activities of the local organs of G.P.U. through its delegates under the jurisdiction of the C.C.P. of the member Republics, acting in virtue of a special ruling sanctioned through legislative channels. ARTICLE 63. The overseeing of acts of the G.P.U. as to their legality shall be in charge of the Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of the Union of S.S.R. in virtue of a special ruling of the C.E.C. of the Union of S.S.R.
ARTICLE CHAPTER XI


The Member Republics ARTICLE 64. Within the limits of the territory of each member Republic the supreme organ of power is the 


Congress of Soviets of the Republic, and in Congressional recesses, its Central Executive Committee.
ARTICLE 65. The relations between the supreme organs of power of the member Republics and the supreme organs of power of the Union of S.S.R. are established by the present Constitution. ARTICLE 66. The-C.E.C. of the member Republics elect from among their own membership the Presidiums that in the recesses between sessions of the C.E.C. are the supreme organs of power. ARTICLE 67. The C.E.C. of the member Republics will form their executive organs-the Councils of Commissioners of the People, as follows: The President of the Council of Commissioners of (a) the People, (b) The Vice-Presidents, (c) The President of the Supreme Council for National Economy, (d) The Commissioner of the People for Agriculture, (e) The Commissioner of the People for Finances, (f) The Commissioner of the People for Supplies,* (g) The Commissioner of the People for Labor, (h) The Commissioner of the People for the Interior, (i) The Commissioner of the People for Justice, (j) The Commissioner of the People for the Inspection of the Workers and Peasants, (k) The Commissioner of the People for Public Instruction, (1) The Commissioner of the People for Public Health, (m) The Commissioner of the People for Social Pre. caution, and in addition, and with a voice either consultative




or deliberative, according to the decision of the C.E.C. of the member Republics, Delegates of the Commissioners of the People of the Union of S.S.R. for Foreign Affairs, for Military and Naval Affairs, for Foreign Commerce, for Ways of Communication, for Postal and Telegraphic Service. ARTICLE 68. The Supreme Council of National Economy and the Commissioners of Supplies,* of Finances, of Labor, of the Inspection of Workers and Peasants of the member Republics, while being subordinate to the C.E.C. and C.C.P. of the member Republics, will execute the orders of the C.C.P. of the Union of S.S.R. ARTICLE 69. The right of amnesty, as well as the right of pardon and the rehabilitation of citizens condemned by the judicial and administrative organs of the member Republics belongs to the C.E.C of these Republics.
CHAPTER XII

Arms, Flag and Capital of the Union 70. The insignia of the State of the Union of S.S.R. is composed of a sickle and a hammer on an earthly globe, surrounded by sun rays and framed with wheat stalks, with an inscription in the six languages mentioned in Article 34: "Proletarians of all countries, unite !" Above the insignia, there shall be a five pointed star. ARTICLE 71. The flag of the State of the Union of S. S.R. shall be in red or vermillion cloth with the arms of the Union. ARTICLE 72. The Capital of the Union of S.S.R. is Moscow.
