AND PRINCIPE

SÃO TOME

CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
by MATTHEW F. JODZIEWICZ
Issued July 1977

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1977 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

S.

TOME

AND

PRINCIPE

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION For five centuries the people of the Archipelago of S. Tome and Principe have been living under the domination of colonialism, being the victims of every form of oppression and exploitation. Reacting against the arbitrary acts and humiliations imposed by foreign domination and resolved to regain their liberty and human dignity, they established in 1960 the Committee for the Liberation of S. Tome and Principe, later called the Movement for the Liberation of S. Tome and Principe (M.L.S.T.P.), as an expression of their resolve to fight by all means within their power against the political, economic, social and cultural domination established in the country by the Portuguese colonial regime. It was this intransigent struggle, led by the M.L.S.T.P., the revolutionary vanguard of the people, which forced the Portuguese Government to celebrate and to sign with the Movement for the Liberation of S. Tome and Principe on November 26, 1974, the Agreement of Argel, which recognized the right of the people of S. Tome and Principe to self-determination and independence and provided for the election of a Representative Assembly with powers to proclaim independence and to elaborate this Constitution. Having won national independence on July 12, 1975, the People of S. Tome and Principe continued their irreversible march in the path of popular democratic revolution with the goal of attaining the economic, social and cultural objectives defined in the program of the M.L.S.T.P., aiming at the building of a society free of man's exploitation of man and the consolidation of the unity of African peoples and the strengthening of friendship and solidarity with all the peoples of the world.

1

CHAPTER I FOUNDATIONS AND OBJECTIVES Article 1. 1. The Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe shall be a sovereign, independent, unitary and democratic state and shall have as its objective the total liberation of the People of the Islands of S. Tome and Principe by the construction of economic progress and by the building of a new society based on social justice. 2. In the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe power belongs to the people, free and in control of their own destiny. 3. The Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe struggles for the total liberation of Africa from imperialism, from colonialism, from neo-colonialism, from racism, and for the dignity and the right of the African peoples to political, social and cultural progress in a spirit of solidarity with all the oppressed and exploited peoples of the world. 4. The Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe is dedicated to safeguarding universal peace, to the establishment of relations based on equality of rights and mutual respect for sovereignty between all nations, and to the social progress of humanity on the basis of the principles of international law, namely, peaceful coexistence and non-alignment. 5. The Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe observes and applies the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Organization of African Unity. 6. The Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe is a secular state, inasmuch as there exists a separation between the State and religious institutions.

2

Article 2

•

1. The capital of the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe shall be the City of S. Tome. 2. The national flag shall consist of three horizontal stripes; the top and bottom shall be green and of equal width. The middle stripe, in which shall be placed two black five-pointed stars, shall be yellow and shall be one and one-half times as large as the two others, partially covered by a red triangle whose base shall be located along the left side of the flag. The altitude of the triangle shall be half the base. 3. The national anthem shall be "Total Independence." 4. The motto of the Republic shall be "Unity, Discipline, Labor." Article 3. 1. The Movement for the Liberation of S. Tome and Principe, as the revolutionary vanguard, shall be the directing political force of the nation, the appropriate vehicle for determining the political orientation of the State. 2. In order to guarantee the mobilization of the masses and their active participation in the political life of the State, the M.L.S.T.P. shall encourage the creation and development of organizations of the masses, such as organizations of workers, youth, women, and the like. Article 4. 1. In the economic realm, the State shall have as its objective the destruction of the colonial economic structure and the abolition of unjust privileges established in favor of foreign nations or individuals, the abolition of the underdeveloped state of the nation, and the creation of conditions suitable for elevating the standard of living of the workers and the general well3

being of the entire population. 2. The land and the natural resources of the soil and subsoil, in territorial waters and on the continental shelf of the islands, shall be the property of the State, which shall determine the conditions of their improvement and their use. 3. The State shall promote national economic planning for the purpose of the rational utilization of existing resources, with a view to assuring their rapid and harmonious development. The Public Sector shall be the preponderant and determining element in the national economy. 4. The existence of private property shall be permitted, to the degree that its existence does not run counter to the general interests of the economic policy of the State. 5. Foreign capital shall be authorized to operate within the framework of the economic policy of the State. Article 5. The struggle against illiteracy and ignorance shall constitute one of the principal goals of the educational policy of the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe, which will promote education at all levels, assuring the conditions necessary for the development of the arts and sciences, and will devote particular attention to the increase of national culture. Article 6. The defense of the sovereignty of the Nation is incumbent upon all the people, as the source of the armed forces whose duty shall be to participate actively in the reconstruction of the country, in the consolidation of its independence and the strengthening of national unity. CHAPTER II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS, FREEDOMS AND DUTIES OF THE CITIZEN Article 7. In accordance with the necessi-

ties inherent in realizing its democratic and revolutionary objectives, the State shall guarantee respect for the fundamental principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and shall undertake to create the political, economic, social and cultural conditions necessary for their enjoyment and effective realization. The rights and obligations of citizens established in this Constitution shall be the law of the Nation. Article 8. The defense of the sovereignty of the Republic shall be the supreme honor and duty of every citizen. Article 9. 1. All citizens shall be equal before the law, without distinction as to social origin, race, sex, or political, religious or philosophical views. 2. In the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe, women shall enjoy equal rights and duties with men. Every precaution shall be taken to assure tneir effective participation in the task of national reconstruction. 3. Al] citizens of the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe over the age of 18 years shall have the right to vote and hold office, with the exception of those legally disenfranchised. Article 10. The State shall consider labor to be a fundamental right and duty of every citizen. Article 11. The State shall establish the conditions which will grant every citizen the right to assistance in case of incapacity or old age. Article 12. Every citizen shall have the right and the duty to contribute to the realization of the objectives of this Constitution and to participate in the life of the State and of Society, including the right to direct suggestions 5

and present petitions to all organs of the State. Article 13. Liberty of expression, of thought, of assembly, of association, and of demonstration, as well as freedom of religion, shall be guaranteed by appropriate provisions of the Law. Article 14. The State shall guarantee the exercise of individual rights and liberties, insofar as they do not conflict with the interests of the people or with the demands of public order. Article 15. A citizen may not be detained, imprisoned or convicted except by virtue of a law in force at the time of the commission of the act of which he is accused. The right to counsel shall be guaranteed to both accuser and accused. Article 16. A citizen's place of residence and his correspondence shall be inviolate. Article 17. Persons who, by their actions or conduct, act contrary to National Unity and sovereignty, or who aid neo-colonialism, imperialism, racism or regionalism, will be deprived of the exercise of their political rights and the fundamental rights of a citizen. Article 18. 1. Every citizen of the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe shall have the duty to respect the Constitution and the laws. The State shall prohibit abuse of individual rights and liberties. 2. The State shall punish all acts of treason, subversion, sabotage and, in general, acts undertaken against the objectives of the M.L.S.T.P. and against the popular revolutionary order. CHAPTER III ORGANIZATION OF THE POWER OF THE STATE

Article 19. 1. The Popular Assembly shall be the supreme organ of the State and the highest legislative organ for the diffusion of the powers of the other organs of the State. 2. Citizens shall exercise their political power through the Popular Assembly. Article 20. 1. Until further definition of the composition of, and the criteria for election to, the Popular Assembly, it shall be made up of the following members: a) the members of the Political Bureau of the M.L.S.T.P.; b) the members of the Government; c) 13 representatives from the District Committees; d) 2 representatives from the Organization of Women; e) 2 representatives from the Youth Organization; f) 5 qualified citizens. 2. The responsibility for the selection of candidates shall lie with the M.L.S.T.P. POPULAR ASSEMBLY Article 21.

1. The Popular Assembly shall be elected for a period of four years. It shall meet in ordinary session twice yearly, and may meet in extraordinary session at the initiative of the President of the Republic, the Council of Ministers, or of twothirds of its members.

7

2. The election of a new Assembly shall take place between twenty and thirty days before the expiration of the mandated term of the Assembly then sitting. 3. At the initial session of each legislature, the Popular Assembly shall choose, for the period of its term of office, the President and the other members of the President's Cabinet. 4. The Popular Assembly shall adopt its own rules, which shall regulate all questions pertaining to its functioning. 5. In the interval between sessions of the Popular Assembly, its functions shall be assured by a Permanent Commission chosen from its members. Article 22. The members of the Popular Assembly shall take the following oath: "I swear on my honor to be faithful to this Assembly, to respect the goals of the Constitution and to dedicate all my efforts to defending the interests of the people, namely, the promotion of the economic, social, and political progress of S. Tome and Principe." Article 23. 1. A member of the Popular Assembly shall represent the national interests. He has a duty to maintain permanent contact with his constituents and to render to them a periodic account of his activities. 2. Upon the request of the M.L.S.T.P. or of two-thirds of the members of the Popular Assembly, the Assembly shall be empowered to unseat any member who is seriously remiss in his duties. Article 24. Except in cases of flagrant offenses, or with the acquiescence of the Popular Assembly or of the Permanent Commission of the Popular Assembly, no member may be prosecuted on criminal or disciplinary charges, in or out of a court of law. Under no circumstances may he be prosecuted, detained, sentenced or condemned on 8

account of any opinion or vote given in the exercise of his mandate.

Article 25. 1. It is the duty of the Popular Assembly to deliberate concerning fundamental questions of the internal and external policies of the State, and to control the application of the political, economic, social and cultural policy line as defined by the M.L.S.T.P.
2. As the supreme organ of power in the State, the Popular Assembly has the power to modify or nullify policy lines adopted by other organs of the State which might be contrary to the orientation of the J.L.S.T.P. It may initiate commissions or inquiry. 3. The Popular Assembly has the authority to elect or dismiss the President of the Republic upon the recommendation of the M.L.S.T.P. Article 26. 1. The Popular Assembly may, on specified questions, delegate legislative power to the Council of Ministers. 2. The measures adopted by the Council of Ministers in the exercise of their delegated powers shall take effect immediately and shall be submitted to the Popular Assembly at its first session after their adoption. Article 27. In the exercise of its powers and authority, the Popular Assembly shall adopt Laws and Resolutions. PERMANENT COMMISSION OF THE POPULAR ASSEMBLY Article 28. The Permanent Commission of the Popular Assembly shall be made up of the following members, chosen by the Popular Assembly from among its members: a) 3 members of the Political Bureau of the

9

M.L.S.T.P.; b) 3 members of the Government; c) 3 representatives of Local Committees; d) 1 representative of the Organization of Women; e) 1 representative of the Youth Organization f) 1 qualified citizen. Article 29. 1. The Permanent Commission of the Popular Assembly shall be responsible to the Popular Assembly, submitting its legislative acts for the latter's ratification. 2. The Permanent Commission of the Popular Assembly shall be presided over by the President of the Popular Assembly. CHIEF OF STATE Article 30. The Chief of State shall be the President of the Republic, who shall be elected by the Popular Assembly for a period of four years upon the recommendation of the U.L.S.T.P. He shall be the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and shall have the following duties: 1. To enforce the proper observance of the Constitution and the other laws of the Republic; To represent the State in international relations; To conclude agreements and ratify treaties, either directly or through representatives; To set the date of election of deputies to the Popular Assembly;

2. 3.

4.

10

5. 6. 7. 8.

To convene the Popular Assembly and to open and close its ordinary sessions; To promulgate and make public the laws, decree-laws, and decrees; To create Ministries and define their duties; To direct the activities of the Council of Ministers and to preside at its sessions; To appoint and dismiss members of the Government; To install members of the Government; To accredit and receive diplomatic representatives; To appoint and dismiss diplomatic representatives of the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe; To grant amnesties, pardons and commutations of sentences; To proclaim a state of siege in the event of an actual or imminent foreign invasion or in time of great danger to the public security and order; To award State decorations; To perform all other functions assigned to him under the Laws and Resolutions of the Popular Assembly.

9. 10. 11. 12.

13. 14.

15. 16.

Article 31. The President of the Republic shall take office on the appointed day and shall assume power in the presence of the Popular Assembly upon taking the following oath: "I swear on my honor to guarantee the exercise of all rights and freedoms of the citizens, to observe and implement the political

11

constitution and the democratic process, to promote the social progress and general well-being of the people, and to maintain national independence." Article 32. In the exercise of his powers and in the capacity of his office, the President of the Republic shall issue decisions with the force of law. Article 33. The President of the Republic shall be responsible to the Popular Assembly. Article 34. 1. In case of the death, permanent incapacity or resignation of the President of the Republic, his duties shall be immediately assumed by the President of the Popular Assembly, who shall convene, within seven days, an extraordinary session for the election of the new President of the Republic, proposed by the M.L.S.T.P. 2. The President of the Republic shall have the right to absent himself from the national territory with the consent of the Assembly. 3. The President of the Republic shall decide who shall represent him in case of impediment or absence, or in the performance of certain specific tasks. GOVERNMENT Article 35. The Government shall be made up of the President of the Republic and his Ministers. Article 36. The Ministers shall be sworn in to their offices by the President of the Republic, in whose presence they shall take the following oath: "I swear on my honor to carry out faithfully the duties entrusted to me."

12

Article 37. 1. The Government, as assembled in the Council of Ministers, shall interpret and execute in a constructive manner the fundamental lines of internal and external policy, as laid down by the Popular Assembly, with a view to the realization of the political, economic, social and cultural program of defense and security, as defined by the M.L.S.T.P. 2. The Ministers shall direct, coordinate and control the activities of their respective governmental departments. 3. The Government, when meeting in Council, shall possess full executive power, exercised through Decrees. 4. The legislative power of the Government, delegated by the Popular Assembly and protected by the provisions of Article 26, shall be exercised through Decree-Laws. Article 38. 1. The Government shall be responsible to the Popular Assembly through the President of the Republic. 2. The Ministers shall be responsible to the President of the Republic. JUDICIAL POWER Article 39. 1. The Judicial Power has as its goal respect for the liberties and rights of the citizens, as well as the defense of national institutions and of the economic and social order of the State. 2. The prevention of crimes is an interest common to both the Judicial Power of the State and to all its citizens. Article 40. The Judicial Power shall be

13

exercised through the Supreme Tribunal and through tribunals provided from the ordinary laws. Article 41. 1. The Supreme Tribunal, the court of highest standing, shall direct the authority of lower courts by means of this Constitution and the other laws of the Republic, and shall assure uniformity of jurisprudence. 2. The members of the Supreme Tribunal shall be appointed by the Popular Assembly, with the advice of the M.L.S.T.P. 3. The Supreme Tribunal shall be responsible to the Popular Assembly. Article 42. 1. In the exercise of his duties, the judge shall obey the Law and his own conscience. 2. Participation in the composition of the courts shall be open to every citizen who has given proof of his fitness to exercise the function of judge with fidelity to constitutional principles and objectives. Article 43. The Prosecutor's office shall promote and supervise respect for the Law; it shall direct the struggle against crime and guarantee the punishments meted out by the various courts. Article 44. The Prosecutor's office shall be under the direction of the Solicitor-General of the Republic. The latter shall be appointed, with the approval of the Minister of Justice, by the Government, to whom it is responsible. Article 95. The right of defense shall be guaranteed to accuser and accused.

19

CHAPTER IV CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT Article 46. This Constitution may be amended by the Popular Assembly through the initiative of at least one-third of its members. Article 47.

1. Every amendment to the Constitution must be approved by a majority of two-thirds of its members. 2. The Popular Assembly shall be empowered to submit any proposed constitutional amendment to a popular referendum. CHAPTER V GENERAL TEMPORARY ARRANGEMENTS Article 48. Portuguese law in force at the time of National Independence shall remain temporarily in full force insofar as it is not in conflict with National Sovereignty, this Constitution, other laws of the Republic, and the principles and objectives of the M.L.S.T.P. Article 49. This Constitution shall take effect immediately upon its approval. Approved by acclamation at a Joint Meeting of the Political Bureau of the M.L.S.T.P. and the Constituent Assembly on November 5, 1975. [Signatures of members] Proclaimed and published by me, MANUEL PINTO DA COSTA, President of the Republic

15

