MODERN CONSTITUTIONS
A ( ul led ion of the Fundamental Laws of Twentytwo of the Most Important Countries of the World, with Historical and Bibliographical Notes

By

WALTER FAIRLEIGH DODD

VOLUME II

CHICAGO THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS LONDON T. FISHER UNWIN, i ADELPHI TERRACE 1909

COPYRIGHT 1908 B Y T H E U N I V E R S I T Y OF CHICAGO

Published January 1909

Composed and Printed By The University of Chicago Press Chicago, Illinois, U. S, A.

5

SPAIN
SANTAMARIA DE PAKEDES, VICENTE. Curso de derecho

199
administrativo.

1854; and a liberal not adopted; by a was amended and in several important these amendments e Queen Isabel II universal suffrage, monarchical system could be persuaded to of Victor Emmanuel ned only a little over was proclaimed, and federal system of gov. The republic did support; the people had been so recently was re-established in proclaimed king. A 1876, and the cono of the same year; the present day.
Espanola y leyes compler

(Sth ed., Madrid, 1898.) trative law. POSADA, ADOLFO. 2 vols.)
TORRES CAMPOS, MANUEL":

T h e best brief treatise on Spanish adminis(Madrid, 1897-98.
Konigrekhs Spanien.

Tratado

de derecho administrativo.
Das Staatsrecht des

(Freiburg, 1889. Handbuch des oeffentlichen Rechts.) •GMELIN, H A N S . Studien sur spanischen Verfassungsgeschichte des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. (Stuttgart, 1905.) A useful study of Spanish constitutional development. PUBLICACIONES PARLAMENTARIAS. A n ambitious work which is t o include Spanish constitutional texts, a treatise on Spanish constitutional law, and a collection of foreign constitutions. T h e first volume, which contains texts of Spanish constitutional documents, has been issued (Constituciones y reglamentos. Madrid, 1906). P O N S Y UMBERT, A. Organizacion y funcionamento de las cortes segtin las constituciones espanolas y reglamentacion de dicho cuerpo colegislador. (Madrid, 1906.)

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF T H E SPANISH MONARCHY 1
(June 30, 1876) TITLE I. SPANIARDS AND T H E I R RIGHTS

naciones de Europa. (Madrid, 1886. 2 vols.) de la administration invaluable collection of Since 1892 the colix. politico. (6th ed., s an excellent sketch law. y administrativo de

The following are Spaniards: 1) Persons born in Spanish territory. 2) Children of a Spanish father or mother, although born •outside of Spain. 3) Foreigners who have obtained papers of naturalization. 4) Foreigners who without such papers have acquired a residence in any town of the kingdom. Spaniards lose their nationality by becoming naturalized in a foreign country, or by entering the service of another ^government without the permission of the King.
ARTICLE I .
In the preparation of this text assistance has been received from the .translation in British and Foreign State Papers, Vol. LXVII (1875-76), p. 118.
1

200

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS

ART. 2. Foreigners may freely establish themselves in Spanish territory, may exercise their calling therein, and may practice any profession for the exercise of which the laws do not require certificates of fitness issued by Spanish authorities. Persons not naturalized cannot hold in Spain any office conferring authority or jurisdiction. ART. 3. Every Spaniard is under obligation to bear arms in the defense of the country when called upon by law, and to contribute, in proportion to his wealth, toward the expenses of the state, of the province, and of the municipality. No person shall be required to pay a tax which has not been voted by the Cortes, or by a corporation legally authorized to impose the same. ART. 4. No Spaniard or foreigner shall be arrested except in the cases and in the manner prescribed by law. Every person arrested shall be set at liberty or handed over to the judicial authority within twenty-four hours after his arrest. Every arrest shall be without effect, or shall be converted into imprisonment within seventy-two hours of the delivery of the arrested person to a competent judge. The action taken in the matter shall be made known to the interested party within the same time. ART. 5. No Spaniard shall be imprisoned except by virtue of an order of a competent judge. The writ containing the order [of arrest] shall be approved or annulled, after a hearing of the suspected offender, within seventy-two hours after the arrest. Every person detained or imprisoned without the legal formalities, or in cases not provided by the constitution and the laws, shall be set at liberty on the petition of himself or of any Spaniard. The law shall provide the form of summary procedure in such cases. ART. 6. No one shall enter the house of a Spaniard or of

SPAIN

20I

a foreigner resident in Spain, without his consent, except in the cases and in the manner expressly provided by law. The examination of papers and effects shall always take place in the presence of the interested party or of a member of his family, and in default thereof, in the presence of two witnesses from the same town. ART. 7. Correspondence intrusted to the post shall not be detained or opened by the governmental authorities. ART. 8. Every order for imprisonment, for the search of domicile, or for the detention, of correspondence shall contain a statement of the cause of its issuance. ART. 9. No Spaniard shall be compelled to change his domicile or residence except by virtue of the order of a competent authority, and in the cases provided by law. ART. 10. The penalty of confiscation of property shall never be imposed, and no one shall be deprived of his property except by the competent authority, and for a proved cause of public utility, always after due compensation. If this requirement is not fulfilled, the judges shall protect the dispossessed person and, in such case, shall return the property to his possession. ART. 11. The Apostolic Roman Catholic religion is the religion of the state. The nation binds itself to maintain this religion and its ministers. No one shall be molested in Spanish territory on account of his religious opinions, or for the exercise of his particular form of worship, provided he show the respect due to Christian morality. Ceremonies and public manifestations other than those of the state religion, however, shall not be permitted. ART. 12. Everyone shall be free to choose his profession and to learn it as he may think best. Any Spaniard may found and maintain institutions of instruction or of education, in conformity with the law. The state shall have the power to issue professional diplo-

202

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS

mas, and to determine the qualifications of those who desire to obtain them, and the manner in which such persons shall prove their fitness therefor. A special law shall determine the duties of teachers and the rules to which teaching is to be subjected in the institutions of public instruction supported by the state, the provinces, or the municipalities. ART. 13. Every Spaniard shall have the right: To give free expression to his ideas and opinions, either verbally or in writing, through the medium of the press or of any other similar process, without subjection to' previous censorship. To hold peaceful meetings. To become a member of associations for the purpose of promoting the objects of human life. To address petitions, either individually or with others, to the King, to the Cortes, or to the authorities. The right of petition shall not be exercised by any kind of armed force. Those who form a part of an armed force shall not exercise individually the right of petition, except in accordance with the laws of their organization, in regard to matters relating thereto. ART. 14. Proper rules shall be provided by law to secure to Spaniards the mutual observance of the rights recognized in this title, without detriment to the rights of the nation or to the essential attributes of public authority. The law shall also determine the civil and penal liability incurred by judges, officers, and functionaries of all classes who attempt to violate the rights enumerated in this title. ART. 15. All Spaniards shall be eligible to public offices and employments, according to their merit and capacity. ART. 16. No Spaniard shall be tried or sentenced except by the proper judge or court, by virtue of laws passed prior to the offense, and in the manner prescribed therein.

SPAIN

203

ART. 17. The guaranties expressed in Arts. 4, 5,6, and 9, and in the first, second, and third paragraphs of Art. 13 shall not be suspended throughout the kingdom or in any portion thereof, except temporarily and by means of a law, when, in extraordinary circumstances, the security of the state mayrequire it. When the Cortes is not in session and the case is grave and clearly urgent, the government, upon its own responsibility, may order the suspension of the guaranties mentioned in the previous paragraph, submitting its action to the approval of the Cortes as soon as possible. But in no case shall other guaranties than those mentioned in the first paragraph of this article be suspended. Nor shall the military or civil authorities have power to establish any other penalty than that previously prescribed by law.
TITLE I I . T H E CORTES

ART. 18. together with ART. 19. bodies, equal Deputies.

The legislative power shall reside in the Cortes the King. The Cortes shall be composed of two legislative in powers: the Senate and the Congress of
TITLE I I I . T H E SENATE

ART. 20. The Senate shall be composed: 1) Of senators in their own right. 2) Of life senators appointed by the crown. 3J) Of senators elected by the corporations of the state and by the larger taxpayers, in the manner to be determined by law.8
The election of senators is regulated by the law of February 8, 1877. The 180 elected senators are chosen as follows: (1) One member by the clergy of each of the nine Archbishoprics, 9; (2) One by each of the six royal academies, 6; (3) One by each of the ten universities, 10; (4) Five by the Economic Societies of the Friends of the Country, 5 ; (5) The remaining 150 senators are chosen by electoral colleges in each province. These
2

204

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS

The number of senators in their own right and of life senators shall not exceed one hundred and eighty. There shall be the same number of elected senators. ART. 21. The following shall be senators in their own right: The sons of the King and of the heir presumptive to the throne, upon the attainment of their majority. Grandees of Spain in their own right, who are not subjects of another power and have a proven yearly income of 60,000 pesetas derived from real property of their own or from rights legally equivalent to real property. The captains-general of the army and the admiral of the navy. The patriarch of the Indies and the archbishops. The presidents of the Council of State, of the Supreme Court, of the Court of Accounts of the Kingdom, and of the Supreme Councils of War and of the Navy, after two years of service.ART. 22. Only the Spaniards who belong, or shall have belonged, to> one of the following classes shall be senators by royal appointment, or through election by the corporations of the state and the larger taxpayers: 1) President of the Senate or of the Congress o>f Deputies. 2) Deputies who shall have belonged to three different congresses, or who shall have served during eight sessions. 3) Ministers of the crown. 4) Bishops. 5) Grandees of Spain. 6) Lieutenant-generals of the army and vice-admirals of the navy, two years after their appointment. 7) Ambassadors, after two years of active service, and ministers plenipotentiary after four years of service.
colleges are composed of members of the provincial deputations, and of representatives chosen from among the municipal councilors and largest taxpayers of the several towns and municipal districts.

SPAIN

205

8) Councilors of state, the fiscal3 of that council, ministers, and fiscals of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Accounts of the Kingdom, supreme councilors of war and of the navy* and the dean of the Court of Military Orders, after two years of service. 9) Presidents or directors of the Royal Academies, viz. : The Royal Spanish Academy; The Royal Academy of History; The Royal Academy of Fine Arts of San Fernando; The Royal Academy of Exact, Physical, and Natural Sciences; The Royal Academy of Moral and Political Sciences, and The Royal Academy of Medicine. 10) Members of the aforesaid academies who shall in point of seniority come within the first half of the list of members of their respective bodies; first-class inspectors-general of the Corps of Engineers of roads, mines, and forests; and headprofessors of the universities, if they have held that rank and performed the duties thereof for four years. Persons included in the above categories must also have an annual income of 7,500 pesetas, derived from property of their own, or from salaries of employments that can be lost only for cause legally proven, or from a pension, or retirement or dismissal allowance. 11) Persons who for two years shall have possessed an annual income of 20,000 pesetas, or who shall have paid into the public treasury a direct tax of 4,000 pesetas, if, in addition, they possess titles of nobility, or shall have been deputies to the Cortes, provincial deputies, or mayors in capitals of provinces or in towns of more than 20,000 inhabitants. 12) Persons who shall have been senators at any time before the promulgation of this constitution. Those who, in order to become senators, shall have proved their income at any time, may give evidence thereof, in order that it may be computed for them, upon their becoming senators in their own
"Fiscal is an officer corresponding to the American state attorney or attorney-general.

206

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS

right, by certificate of the register of property, proving that they still own the same property. The appointment of senators by the King shall be made by special decree, which shall always set forth the foundation upon which, in accordance with the provisions of this article, the appointment is based. ART. 23. The qualifications necessary for the appointment or election of a senator may be altered by law. ART. 24. One-half of the elected senators shall be renewed every five years, and all shall be renewed when the King dissolves the elected part of the Senate. ART. 25. Senators shall not accept employment, promotion (except that strictly governed by seniority), titles, or decorations during the sessions of the Cortes. However, the government may confer upon them, within the sphere of their respective posts or ranks, such commissions as the public service may require. The office of minister of the crown is excepted from the provisions of the first paragraph of this article. ART. 26. To become a senator one must be a Spaniard, have completed the age of thirty-five years, not have been subjected to criminal proceedings, nor have been deprived of the exercise of his political rights, and have the free management of his property.
TITLE IV. T H E CONGRESS OF DEPUTIES

ART. 27. The Congress of Deputies shall be composed of those named by the electoral bodies, in the form determined by law. At least one deputy shall be chosen for every 50,000 inhabitants.*
*The election of deputies is regulated by a law of August 8, 1907. Male Spaniards of the age of twenty-five, who are in possession of their civil rigfits, and have resided in the district for two years, enjoy the privilege of voting. The exercise of this privilege is compulsory, the only exceptions to this rule being persons over the age of seventy and certain judicial officers. Deputies are directly elected from districts into which the

SPAIN

207

ART. 28. Deputies shall be elected and may be re-elected an indefinite number of times in the manner provided by law. ART. 29. To be elected as a deputy, one must be a Spaniard, a layman, of full age,5 and in the enjoyment of all civil rights. The law shall determine what classes of functions are incompatible with the office of deputy and with re-election to this office. ART. 30. Deputies shall be elected for five years. ART. 31. Deputies upon whom the government or the royal household confers a pension, office, promotion (except promotion governed by seniority), commission with remuneration, honors, or decorations, shall cease to exercise their functions as deputies, without the necessity of any declaration, unless within one fortnight after their appointment they inform the Congress of their refusal of the favor. The provisions of the preceding paragraph do not relate to deputies who may be appointed ministers of the crown.
TITLE V. T H E MEETINGS AND POWERS OF T H E CORTES

ART. 32. The Cortes shall meet every year. The King shall have power to convene, to suspend, and to close the sessions of the Cortes, and to dissolve, simultaneously or separately, the elective part of the Senate and the Congress of Deputies; in case of dissolution, the King is obliged to convene and assemble the dissolved body or bodies within three months. ART. 33. The Cortes must be convened as soon as the crown becomes vacant, or when the King is in any way incapacitated for governing.
country is divided. In districts choosing more than one deputy a system of limited voting prevails; if less than four deputies are to be chosen, each person votes for one less than the number to be elected; if more than four are to be chosen he votes for two less than the whole number; if more than eight are to be chosen he votes for three less than the total number; if more than ten are to be elected he votes for four less than the total number. 5 Twenty-five years is fixed as full age by the electoral law.

208

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS

ART. 34. Each of the legislative bodies shall adopt its own rules for its internal direction, and shall determine both the qualifications of its members and the legality of their election. ART. 35. The Congress of Deputies shall choose its president, vice-presidents, and secretaries. ART. 36. The King shall appoint, for each session, from among the senators themselves, the president and vice-presidents of the Senate; but the Senate shall elect its secretaries. ART. 37. The King shall open and close the Cortes, either in person or through the medium of his ministers. ART. 38. Neither of the legislative bodies shall be assembled without the other, except in the case in which the Senate exercises judicial functions. ART. 39. The legislative bodies shall not deliberate in joint session, or in the presence of the King. ART. 40. The sessions of the Senate and of the Congress shall be public, and secret sessions shall be held only when privacy is necessary. ART. 41. The King and each of the legislative bodies shall have the right to initiate laws. ART. 42. Laws relating to taxation and to the public credit shall be presented, in the first instance, in the Congress of Deputies. ART. 43. Resolutions may be passed in either of the legislative bodies by a majority vote; but the presence of one more than half of the total number of members is necessary in order to vote on laws. ART. 44. If one of the legislative bodies should reject any bill or should the King refuse his sanction thereto, no other bill upon the same subject shall be introduced in that session. ART. 45. In addition to the legislative power which the Cortes exercises with the King, it shall possess the following powers: 1) To receive from the King, from the immediate sue-

:ONS

SPAIN

209

bodies shall adopt its 1 shall determine both the legality of their 5 shall choose its presifor each session, from ;sident and vice-presielect its secretaries. close the Cortes, either ministers. bodies shall be assemse in which the Senate hall not deliberate in Zing. :e and of the Congress ill be held only when legislative bodies shall on and to the public tance, in the Congress d in either of the legispresence of one more s is necessary in order ! bodies should reject iction thereto, no other )duced in that session, itive power which the possess the following m the immediate suc-

cessor to the throne, and from: the regency or regent of the kingdom, the oath to maintain the constitution and the laws. 2) To elect the regent or regency of the kingdom, and to appoint a guardian for the minor King, under the provisions of the constitution. 3) To make effective the responsibility of the ministers, who may be impeached by the Congress and tried by the Senate. ART. 46. Senators and deputies are inviolable for their opinions and votes in the exercise of their functions. ART. 47. Judicial proceedings shall not be begun against senators, nor shall they be arrested without the previous determination of the Senate, unless they have been taken in the commission of an offense or when the Senate is not in session; but in every case a report shall be made to that body as soon as possible, in order that it may determine what action shall be taken. Neither shall judicial proceedings be begun against deputies nor shall they be arrested during a session without the permission of the Congress unless they have been taken in the commission of an offense; but in this event and in the event of their being proceeded against or arrested when the Cortes is not in session, a report shall be made as soon as possible to the Congress for its information and action. The Supreme Court shall take cognizance of criminal proceedings against senators and deputies in the cases and in the manner provided by law.
TITLE VI. T H E KING AND H I S MINISTERS

ART. 48. The person of the King is sacred and inviolable. ART. 49. The ministers are responsible.6 No order of the King shall be executed unless countersigned by a minister, who by this act alone becomes responsible for it.
Besides the president of the council, there are at present nine ministers, viz.: the ministers of state; of justice; of war; of marine; of the treasury; of government; of public instruction, fine arts,- and agriculture; of industry; and of commerce and public works.
6

2IO

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS

ART. 50. The power of executing the laws shall be vested in the King, and his authority shall extend to everything which conduces to the preservation of public order at home and the security of the state abroad, in conformity with the constitution and the laws. ART. 51. The King sanctions and promulgates the laws. ART. 52. He shall have supreme command of the army and navy, and direct the land and naval forces. ART. 53. He bestows ranks, promotions, and military rewards, in accordance with the laws. ART. 54. The King shall also have power: 1) To issue decrees, regulations, and instructions which may be conducive to the execution of the laws. 2) To see that justice is fully and promptly administered throughout the kingdom. 3) To pardon criminals in accordance with the law. 4) To declare war and to make peace, furnishing afterward a report with documents to the Cortes. 5) To conduct diplomatic and commercial relations with other powers. 6) To have control of the coinage of money, upon which shall be stamped his head and name. 7) To decree the distribution of the funds appropriated to each department of the administration, in accordance with the bu'dgetary law. 8) To confer civil employments, and to grant honors and distinctions of every class, in accordance with the law. 9) Freely to appoint and to dismiss his ministers. ART. 55. The King must be authorized by a special law: 1) To alienate, cede, or exchange any part of Spanish territory. 2) To incorporate any other territory with that of Spain. 3) To admit foreign troops into the kingdom. 4) To ratify treaties of offensive alliance, which relate especially to commerce, or which stipulate the payment of

SPAIN

211

subsidies to any foreign power, and all treaties which may be binding individually upon Spaniards. In no case shall secret articles of a treaty annul public ones. 5 ) To abdicate the crown in favor of the heir presumptive. ART. 56. The King, before contracting marriage, shall inform the Cortes, to whose approbation shall be submitted the marriage contracts and stipulations, which shall be the object of a law. The same formalities shall be observed with respect to the heir presumptive to the throne. Neither the king nor the heir presumptive shall contract marriage with any person who is by law excluded from the succession to the throne. ART. 57. The revenue of the King and of his family shall be fixed by the Cortes at the beginning of each reign. ART. 58. Ministers may be senators or deputies and may take part in the discussions of both legislative bodies, but shall vote only in the one to which they belong.
TITLE VII. T H E SUCCESSION TO T H E THRONE

ART. 59. The legitimate king of Spain is Don Alfonso XII of Bourbon.7 ART. 60. The succession to the throne of Spain shall follow the regular order of primogeniture and representation, the elder line always being preferred to the younger ones; in the same line the nearer degree of kinship to the more remote; in the same degree of kinship, the male to the female; in the same sex, the older to the younger person. ART. 61. If the lines of legitimate descendants of Don Alfonso XII of Bourbon should be extinguished, his sisters shall succeed in the established order; then his aunt, the sister of his mother, and her legitimate descendants, and those of his uncles, the brothers of Don Fernando VII, if they should not have been excluded.
7

Alfonso XIII who became of age in 1902 is the present king.

212

MODERN

CONSTITUTIONS

ART. 62. If all of the above-named lines should be extinguished the Cortes shall make such new choice as may be most suitable to the nation. ART. 63. Any doubts as to facts or rights which may occur in the order of the succession to the crown shall be settled by a law. ART. 64. Those who may be incapable of governing, or who may have committed some act for which they deserve to lose their right to the crown, shall be excluded from the succession by a law. ART. 65. When a woman reigns, the prince consort shall have no share whatever in the government of the kingdom.
TITLE VIII. T H E MINORITY OF T H E KING AND T H E REGENCY

ART. 66. The King shall be a minor until he has attained the age of 16 years. ART. 67. When the King is a minor, the father or the mother of the King, or in default thereof, the relative nearest to the succession to the crown, according to the order established in the constitution, shall at once enter upon the duties of the regency, and shall exercise them during the whole minority of the King. ART. 68. In order that the nearest relative may exercise the regency, he must be a Spaniard, have reached the age of twenty years, and not be excluded from the succession to the crown. The father or mother of the King shall exercise the regency only so long as they do' not remarry. ART. 69. The regent shall take before the Cortes an oath of fidelity to the minor King, and to preserve the constitution and the laws. If the Cortes is not assembled the regent shall convoke it immediately, and in the meanwhile shall take the abovementioned oath before the Council of Ministers, promising to repeat it before the Cortes as soon as it has assembled. ART. 70. If there be no person to whom the regency falls

IONS

SPAIN

213

;d lines should be exnew choice as may be or rights which may e crown shall be settled pable of governing, or which they deserve to secluded from the suc;he prince consort shall snt of the kingdom.
NG AND T H E REGENCY

3r until he has attained ttor, the father or the of, the relative nearest ing to the order estab: enter upon the duties lem during the whole t relative may exercise ive reached the age of n the succession to the King shall exercise the arry. fore the Cortes an oath reserve the constitution regent shall convoke it shall take the aboveMinisters, promising to has assembled, whom the regency falls

by right, the Cortes shall appoint a regency which may consist of one, three, or five persons. Until this appointment shall have been made, the Council of Ministers shall provisionally govern the kingdom. ART. 71. When the King is incapacitated for the exercise of authority, and his incapacity shall have been recognized by the Cortes, his eldest son, provided he be 16 years of age, shall exercise the regency during the incapacity of the King; if there be no son, the wife of the King, and in her default, those summoned to the regency. ART. J2. The regent or the regency, in case there is one, shall exercise the full authority of the King, in whose name the acts of the government shall be published. ART. 73. The guardian of the minor King shall be the person named in the will of the deceased monarch, provided that he be a Spaniard by birth. If no person should be so named, the father or mother shall be the guardian, so long as they do not remarry. If there be no father or mother, the Cortes shall appoint the guardian, but the duties of regent and of guardian of the King shall not be united in the same person, except in that of the father or mother of the King.
TITLE I X . T H E ADMINISTRATION OF J U S T I C E

ART. 74. Justice shall be administered in the name of the King. ART. 75. The same codes shall be in force throughout the whole monarchy, without prejudice to variations which the law may determine upon for particular circumstances. In the codes shall be established but one system of law for all Spaniards, in ordinary civil and criminal cases. ART. 76. The power of applying the laws in civil and criminal cases shall belong exclusively to the courts, which shall exercise no other functions than those of judging and of enforcing their judgments. ART. JJ. A special law shall determine the cases in which

214

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS

previous authorization shall be required in order to proceed before the ordinary courts against the public authorities and their agents. ART. 78. The laws shall determine what courts shall be created, the organization of each, its powers, the manner of exercising them1, and the qualifications which its members must possess. ART. 79. Proceedings in criminal matters shall be public, and in the form provided by law. ART. 80. Magistrates and judges shall be irremovable and shall not be removed, suspended, or transferred, except in the cases and in the manner prescribed by the organic law of the courts. ART. 81. Judges shall be personally responsible for any violation of the law which they may commit.

TITLE X.

T H E PROVINCIAL DEPUTATIONS AND T H E M U N I C I P A L COUNCILS

ART. 82. In each province there shall be a provincial deputation, elected in the manner provided by law and composed of the number of members fixed by law.8 ART. 83. In the towns there shall be mayors and municipal councils. The members of the municipal council shall be chosen by the inhabitants upon whom the law confers such right.8 ART. 84. The organization and powers of the provincial deputations and of the municipal councils shall be regulated by their respective laws. Laws for this purpose shall be based on the following principles:
The law of June 28, 1890, provides that all male Spaniards of the age of 25 may vote for members of the provincial deputations and municipal councils. The law of 1890 has been partially superseded by the law of August 8, 1907.
8

SPAIN

215

1) Government and direction of the local interests of the province or of the town by their respective deputations or councils. 2) Publication of the estimates, accounts, and official acts of such local bodies. 3) Intervention of the King, and in certain cases, of the Cortes, in order to prevent the provincial deputations and municipal councils from exceeding their powers to the prejudice of general and established interests. 4) Determination of their powers in the matter of taxation in order that the provincial and municipal corporations may never be in conflict with the financial system of the State.
TITLE XI. TAXATION

ART. 85. The government shall annually present to the Cortes, for its examination and approval, the general estimates of the expenses of the state for the following year, and the plan of taxation and means of meeting such expenses, as well as.the accounts of the collection of taxes and of the expenditure of the public funds. If the budget cannot be voted before the first day of the next fiscal year, that of the previous year shall remain in force, provided always that the latter had been discussed and voted by the Cortes and sanctioned by the King. ART. 86. The government must have authority by law in order to dispose of property of the state and to borrow money on the credit of the nation. ART. 87. The public debt shall be under the special protection of the nation.
TITLE X I I . T H E MILITARY FORCES

ART. 88. The Cortes shall annually fix, upon the proposal of the King, the permanent military force on land and sea.

2l6
TITLE XIII.

MODERN CONSTITUTIONS
T H E GOVERNMENT OF T H E COLONIES

ART. 89. The colonies shall be governed by special laws, but the government is authorized to apply to them, with the modifications which it may think proper, the laws promulgated or which may be promulgated for the peninsula, giving an account thereof to the Cortes. Cuba and Puerto Rico shall be represented in the Cortes of the kingdom in the manner to be determined by a special law, which may be different for each one of the two provinces.9
9 By the treaty of Paris of 1898 Spain renounced sovereignty over Cuba, and ceded to the United States Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippine Islands. The Caroline, Marianne (Ladrones), and Palaos Islands were sold to Germany by Spain on February 12, 1899.

