SYRIA

Constitution of the Republic of Syria. (June 21, 1953.)

PREAMBLE

We, the Arab people of Syria, Conscious of our need for a system of government which derives its principles from our aspirations and realities of life, which establishes our political sovereignty on the basis of unity . and strength, and which guarantees for us: a just and secure ,society, a prosperous and dignified living, a free and sovereign homeland and beyond our borders the opportunity of working for the perfection of the - liberation of the Arab Nation and for the realization of its unity and glory. We, therefore, hereby solemnly declare that we have accepted and ordained the following Constitution:

FIRST PART

Fundamental Principles

CHAPTER I

The Republic of Syria Article 1.-1. Syria is a democratic and fully sovereign Arab Republic. 2. It is an indivisible political unit. No part of its territory may be ceded. 3. The Syrian people form a part of the Arab Nation. The State shall, within the frame of sovereignty and republican regime, endeavour to realize the unity of this nation.

Article 2.-1. Sovereignty is vested in the people. No individual or group may claim it. 2. Sovereignty is based on the principle of the rule of the people, by the people, and for the people. 3. The people shall exercise their sovereignty within the forms and limits determined by the Constitution. Article 3.-1. The religion of the President of the Republic is Islam. 2. Islamic jurisprudence (high) shall be the main source of legislation. 3.a Freedom of belief shall be protected. The State shall respect all divine religions and shall guarantee the free exercise of their rites, provided this does not lead to a breach of public order. 4. Personal status affairs of religious communities shall be maintained and observed. Article 4.-1. Arabic is the official language of the State. 2. . The Syrian flag -shall take the form of an horizontal rectangle whose- length is double its height. It shall contain three horizontal and equal colour bands, the upper green, the middle white and : the lower black. The white portion of the flag shall bear, in an horizontal straight line in its middle, three red five-pointed stars, dividing its length into four equal parts and each having a diameter equal to one half of the width of the portion. 3. The emblem and the national anthem of , the Republic shall be determined by a law. Article 5.—Damascus is the capital of the Republic.
Article 6. - The territory of the Republic of Syria shall be divided into Muhafazat, whose number, subdivisions and boundaries shall be fixed by law.

CHAPTER

II

Democratic Safeguards
1. Public rights

Article 7.-1. The conditions of Syrian nationality shall be Syrian by a law in which special facilities shall be accorded to Syrian enn grants, their descendants and to citizens of all Arab countries.

2. The legal status of foreigners shall he defined by a law in which international usage and agreements shall be observed.
Article 8.—A11 citizens shall be equal in dignity and social status. and shall have equal rights and obligations before the law. Article 9.—The state shall guarantee for all citizens freedom, secu-. rity and equal opportunities. Article 10.—Personal freedom shall be guaranteed.

1. Every person shall have the right to petition the courts within the. limits of the law. Trials shall be held in public unless the law provides otherwise. 2. Every person shall be considered innocent unless be is proved guilty by a legal verdict. 3. No one shall be sought (hunted, investigated, interrogated) or kept in custody except by an order or warrant from the judicial authorities, or if he is seized "flagrante delicto", or for the purpose of bringing him before the judicial authorities on a charge of having committed a crime or a misdemeanor. 	 4. Every person who is arrested shall be informed in writing and within a period of twenty-four hours of the reasons for his arrest and of the legal text in accordance with which the arrest has been made. He shall be handed over to the. judicial authorities within . a period not exceeding forty-eight hours after his arrest. 5. Every detainee shall have the right to submit either in person or through a lawyer .or relative an application to the appropriate judge contesting the legality of his detention. The judge shall immediately consider the application, and may summon the official who has ordered the arrest and question him regarding the case. If he finds that the detention is unlawful, he shall order the immediate release of the detainee. 6. No one shall be subjected to torture or humiliating treatment. The penalty for contraventions of this provision shall be prescribed by law. 7. The right of defense shall be guaranteed throughout all the stages of investigation and legal proceedings and before all courts, in conformity with the provisions of the law. 8. Exceptional criminal courts may not be established, but special trial procedure may be prescribed for a state of emergency. 9. Military courts shall try army personnel only. Exceptions to -this rule shall be 'determined by law. no10. sentence' shall be passed against a person for a previous contravention or delinquency which, When it wa s committed, was not

punishable by the existing laws in force, nor, shall the penalty imposed upon him be more severe than that prescribed by the laws at the time of the contravention or delinquency. 11. A' punishment may not be extended beyond the convicted person and his rights to any other individual. 12. Every person against whom a sentence has been passed and executed shall, if it is proved later that he had been wrongly sentenced, has the right to apply for damages for the harm suffered by him. 13. Administrative authorities may not effect a precautionary detention of a person except under a law and in a state of emergency. 14. The prison is a place of punishment, and is a means for reforming a criminal and for giving him proper education. The implementation of this principle shall be guaranteed by law. Article 11.—Homes shall be inviolable; no one may enter or search them except in the case of " flagrante delicto,"or by permission of their owners, or in accordance with a judicial warrant, or in a state of emergency and in accordance with provisions of the law. Article 12.—Postal, telegraphic and telephonic communications and other means of correspondence shall be inviolable and may not be delayed, censored or confiscated, except in such cases as are prescribed by law. Article 13.-1. Freedom of opinion shall be guaranteed by the State. Every Syrian shall have the right to express his opinions freely in writing, speech, drawing and other means of expression. 2. No- person shall be persecuted for advocating his opinions, unless he has transgressed the limits prescribed by law. 3. Public opinion shall have its due sanctity, and the law shall protect it against elements that might lead it away from truth and the common good, or encourage dissension among citizens or call for a change of government by force. Article 14.-1. Printing and the press shall be free within the limits of the law and their social duties. 2. Journals and papers shall not he suspended nor their licence he c ancelled except in accordance with the provisions of the law. 3. The law may impose in matters connected with public safety and n ational defense only and in a state of emergency a limited censorhip on newspapers, publications and books. 4. The procedure of control over the revenues of newspapers shall be re gulated by law.

5. The state and concerned individuals shall have the right to ask for the publication of a denial or correction in accordance with provisions of the law.

Article 15.—Syrians shall have the right to gather and hold peaceful and unarmed demonstrations within the limits of the law. Article 16.-1. Syrians shall have the right to form and join societies, provided their objectives are not prohibited by law. 2. The procedure to be followed in informing the administrative authorities of the formation of societies and the system of control over their revenues shall be regulated by law. Article 17.-1. Syrians shall have the right to form and join political parties provided their objectives are legitimate, their methods peaceful and their rules democratic. 2. The procedure to be followed in informing the administrative authorities of the formation of political parties, and the system of control over their revenues shall be regulated by law. The law shall also require members of such parties to elect their responsible officers at least once every year. 3. The law regards political parties as institutes wherein sincere and enlightened citizens are democratically trained to undertake public duties as well as organizations providing the people with national guidance, helping them to perfect their civic consciousness and guiding them in the realization of their interests in Public affairs. Article 18.-1. Syrians shall not be deported from their national territory. 2. Every Syrian shall have the right to reside and move within the territory of Syria, unless forbidden to do so by a judicial order or by legal provisions relating to health or public safety. Article 19.-1. Refugees shall not be extradited because of their political beliefs or their defense of freedom. 2. The procedure for extraditing ordinary criminals shall be regulated by international laws and agreements. Article	 The family is the fundamental basis of society and shall be protected by the State. The State shall protect and encourage marriage and shall remove material and social obstacles which hinder it. 2. Mothers are entitled to the protection and help of society. 3. Childhood shall be protected by society. Bringing up children is the natural right and social duty of their parents, the performance of which shall be supervised by the State.

Article 21.-1. Every citizen shall be entitled to education and instruction. 2. Education shall have in view the building up of a generation, strong in body and mind, believing in God, possessed of moral virtues, proud of the Arab legacy, equipped with knowledge, aware of their duties, defending their rights and freedom, serving national and common Arab interests and imbued with the spirit of solidarity and fraternity among all citizens. Any teaching inconsistent with the aims cited in this paragraph shall be prohibited. 3. In order to realize the aims of education and teaching and to implement a stable educational policy, a "Council of Education" shall be formed in the State, whose duty shall be to propose plans and programs for the purpose of making education, throughout all its various stages and in all its branches, achieve its objectives. The number of members of the " Council of Education," their qualifications and the method of their appointment shall be defined by law. 4. The State shall have the right to supervise all educational institutions in the country. This supervision shall be regulated by law. The State alone shall have the right to grant school certificates and to determine their relative standards. 5. Elementary education is compulsory. It shall have uniform programs and in Government schools shall be free. Private elementary schools shall apply the programs adopted by the State; they may however teach such additional material as may be defined by law. Secondary and vocational training shall be free in Government schools. The State shall give priority in the budget to the spread and expansion of elementary, rural and vocational education with a view to re alizing equality among citizens, establishing national awakening on so und foundations, and facilitating the utilization of the country's land and industrial wealth. The law shall determine the obligatory subjects to be taught in private secondary schools in conformity with the programs adopted by the State. Religious teaching for each religion in all the aforementioned stages shall be in accordance with its own creed. The State shall work to make higher education accessible. Higher cation institutions shall enjoy financial and administrative indepen-dence. The State shall protect outstanding talent and shall facilitate ad3n anent for persons qualified for it. The State shall adopt athletic, scouts, and youth movements in sand ocieties clubs and shall strive to protect, to strenghten and to Promote them.

. 7. The State shall protect and promote arts and sciences and shall encourage scientific research.
8. The State shall place means of general education within the reach of the people. 9. The State shall protect monuments, historical sites and all objects of artistic or historical value.. 10. The .State shall protect and preserve the national cultural heritage and shall encourage its dissemination.

Article 22.-1. Every citizen together with his family has the right to be guaranteed either by the State directly or by organizations set up for the purpose in cases of emergency, sickness, disability, orphanhood, old age, and involuntary unemployment.
2. To realize this objective, a social security system shall be set up in which the State, organizations 'and individuals shall cooperate to secure the necessary funds. - The State shall protect the health of citizens and shall Article 23. .— establish hospitals, sanatoria, maternity homes, nurseries, and child homes for their benefit. It shall also facilitate for them means of medical treatment and shall attend to pregnant women, nursing mothers, and babies.

Article 24.—Forced work shall not he imposed on any person except in accordance with provisions of a law and in the following cases: a) Performance of cultural, constructional or health services.
b) c) Combatting public calamities. In a state of emergency..

Article 25.-1. Every Syrian shall have the right to occupy public. posts, subject to the conditions laid down by the law.
2. Appointment to public posts, whether temporary or permanent, in the State, in departments attached to it and in municipalities, shall be effected by the system of general competition, except in cases where the law provides otherwise. 3. Acquired rights of public officials shall be guaranteed and may be claimed in a court of law. A public official shall have the right to be reinstalled in his post after performing military service. 4. The law shall define conditions of imposing penalties upon public officials, of their dismissal, their retirement, and their placement on the unattached list. 5. Public officials are appointed for the benefit of the people,whose interests the law shall protect by excluding:_ political prejudice

from the work of such officials, by protecting their rights to dignity, and security, and by granting them adequate salaries and promotion according to seniority and efficiency. .Article 26.-1. Military service is compulsory and shall be regulated by a special law. 2. A "Council of National Defense" shall be established. Its powers and the number of its officials shall be determined by law. Article 27.—High treason is, in the strict sense, taking up arms against the country, joining its enemies or lending them help or assistance, Article 28.-1. The Constitution does not contain any provision enumerating the rights of citizens to the exclusion of other rights. Citizens shall be entitled to all rights not explicitely reserved to the State and the law shall confirm and protect all such rights in so far as they do not conflict with the rights of others of the interest of the society. 2. Every law related to a fundamental right of citizens or limiting such right in reliance on provisions of the Constitution shall refer to the specific right and the relative article. In no circumstances shall a law include a provision which in effect cancels any of these rights. 3. The judiciary shall protect a citizen against the encroachment by a public authority upon his rights.

2. Organizing national Wealth Article 29.-1. Ownership. capital and labor are the fundamental elements of national wealth. They are individual rights of service to They shall be organized and directed so as to secure strength for the country, and for citizens dignity, cooperation and a decent standard of living. The elements of national wealth shall he organized in a manner re alizing social justice. 3. Economic life shall he directed in accordance with the interests of the whole of the people. 4. Within the limits of these objectives, the law shall guarantee economic freedom for all citizens. Article 30.-1. A "Council of National Wealth" shall be establish. ed. Its duty shall be to propose plans and programs to develop the country's agricultural, industrial, and commercial potentialities and to provide work for all citizens.

.2. The law shall determine the number and the method of appointment of members of this Council.
Article 31.-1. The State may nationalize by a law any o rganization or project relating to public interest in return for just compensation. 2. Institutions enjoying financial and administrative independence may be established for the execution and administration of specific projects. This shall be effected by a law fixing the number and method of selection of members of such institutions, and the system of control over them. Article 32.—Funds which the State spends on irrigation and land development projects shall be refunded by those -who benefit from them within a period to be fixed by law, provided that it is commensorate with their financial ability. Article 33.-1. Taxes are imposed only with a view to public interest. 2. Taxes shall be fixed in money. No law may impose a tax in kind except under extraordinary circumstances. 3. No tax may be imposed, amended or cancelled except by law. 4.. No person shall be exempted from the payment of the whole or a part of a tax except in cases specified by law; 5. -No person shall be required to pay a tax except in the manner prescribed by law. 6. Taxes shall be imposed on a just and progressive basis and in such a manner as to ensure the principles of equality and social justice. In imposing taxes, the number of the members of the family for whose support the tax-payer is responsible shall be taken into consideration. Article 34.—Property is public and private.

1. The. State, legal persons, and individuals may own property within the limits of law. 2. The law shall regulate the ownership of foreigners together with its limits and conditions. - 3. Private ownership shall be guaranteed within the limits of compatibility with public interests and social justice. The ;methods of possession and disposal of property shall be determined by law such manner as to make is fulfil its social function and contribute to national production. 4. No person shall be permitted to use private property in manner inconsistent with public interest.

5. The-_ law shall guarantee the right of individuals to protect moral _and: material interests accruing to them as a result of 'their material or .mental effort 6. Expropriation in the general interest is permitted and shall be effected in accordance with a law providing for the payment of a just Compensation. 7. Mines, solid, liquid, and radioactive minerals and metalloids; the' hidden resources beneath the surface, mineral waters, waterfalls, public forests, public roads, and all natural resources, as well as atniospheric strata as from a height to be determined by law, are the-.property 'of the State. The law shall specify the conditions under which licences may be granted for the exploration of minerals and the like. The right to exploit minerals and the like shall be granted by a law which gives priority to defense considerations and the maintenance of the country's freedom. No monopoly or concession for the utilization of any of the natural resources of the country or the operation of a public service shall be granted except by a law for a limited period.

Article 35.-1. For the purpose of effecting a proper utilization of the land, special legislation shall be enacted based on the following principles:
a) An obligation to utilize the land shall be laid down, and if land is neglected for a period of time to be fixed by law, the right to its possession shall be forfieted. Small and medium ownership shall be encouraged. A maximum area of land _that may be owned, exploited or disposed of, shall be fixed according to districts by a law whose provisions shall not have a retroactive effect. 	 • Production and means thereof shall be developed and improved.	

b) c)

d)

2. The State shall disribute to landless peasants freely or against small payment state lands sufficient to insure their living. 3. , The State shall establish model villages and agricultural experiments centres.

hibited.
.4

Article 36.-1. General confiscation of property shall be pro-

2. Special confiscation of property may not be imposed except by Judicial order.	

3- Special confiscation may be imposed by a law on grounds of war, em ergency and public calamities.

Article 37.-1. Capital shall serve national economy, and its investment shall not be incompatible with the interests of the whole of the people.

2. The law shall prohibit monopolies.
Article 38.-1. No public or private loan may be contracted by the State except by a law defining its conditions, rate of interest and method of repayment.-

2.

The State may not grant or guarantee a loan except by a law.

3. The law shall define the procedure relating to contracts and tenders involving expenditurefrom the Treasury of the State.
Article 39.-1. Work is a right of all citizens and a duty dictated . by common living in the same homeland. It is the most fundamental element in the economic-and social structure of the country The State shall, therefore, guarantee employment for its citizens.

2.

Every Syrian shall be free to choose his work or profession.

3. The State shall protect employment and shall supervise the establishment of just social relations between citizens, for which pur-pose it shall enact a law based on the following principles: a) b) c) Workers shall be given wages commensurate with the volume and quality of their work. Weekly working hours shall be limited. Workers shall be granted weekly holidays, and annual leaves with pay. Special compensation shall he prescribed for workers supporting large families and for cases of discharge, sickness, disability and emergencies resulting from work. Special conditions shall be prescribed for the employment of women and young people, providing them with adequate protection. Wages of women for the same work performed under the same conditions shall be made equal to wages of men.
Profiteering, exploitation and all kinds of tithes shall be

d)

e)
f)

prohibited. g)
h)

Collective contracts and systems that allow workers a share of production or profits shall be encouraged.
• Factories shall comply with health and sanitary rules.

i) j)

Workers shall be provided with sanitary housing through means to be defined by law. Cooperative societies -shall, he encouraged and shall be
supervised by the State .

4. •Workers shall have the right to defend their trade and professional interests and to join unions for the purpose of facilitating the exercise of the said right. a) Unions shall have legal status, and shall be purely national and professional organizations. The State shall encourage labour organization, shall guarantee its freedom within the limits of the law, shall protect it from political influences and shall help in developing the contribution of trade unions to the advancement of national economy of the productive classes. ) The State shall promote federations of trade unions, shall dissuade them from harmful competition and shall direct them towards cooperation. 5. Workers in this article include labourers, peasants and agricultural workers. Principles of legislation stated therein shall be applied to each category according to circumstances.

SECOND PART

Sovereign powers
Article 40.—The people "shall exercise sovereignty through the Chamber of Deputies, the President of the Republic and the Judiciary.

CHAPTER -I

Legislative powers
Article 41.--1. Legislative power shall be exercised by the Chamber of Deputies, which shall be elected by public, secret, direct, and uniform ballot, in accordance with the provisions of the Electoral Law.

2. A deputy represents the entire people and his mandate may not he limited by any' restriction or condition. He shall exercise his Amandate rticle guided by his honour and experience.
42.-1. The term of the Chamber shall be four full years, beginning from the date of the Decree announcing the results of elec-tions. This term may not be extended except in time of war and by a law prop osed by the President of the Republic and approved by the vote of the absolute majority of the Deputies. 2. The chamber of Deputies may decide to dissolve itself by the vote of the absolute of its members.

Article 43.—Electors, males and females, are citizens who have completed 7.8 years of age on 1st January of the year in which the elections are held, who are registered in the Civil Affairs Register and who fulfil the requirements specified in the Electoral Law. Article 44.--Every person possessing the right to elect may stand as candidate for membership of the Chamber if he is educated, has completed twenty-five years of age and if lie fulfils the conditions prescribed in the Electoral Law. Article 45.-1. The Law shall determine electoral constituencies. The number of Deputies shall be such as to have one Deputy represent. ing 50 thousand of the Syrian inhabitants of the constituency or a part thereof exceeding one half of the said number. 2. Elections shall, be conducted on one degree basis and the candidate whining the highest number of the votes of electors shall be considered successful. 3. The electoral Law shall include provisions guaranteeing the following:
a) b) c) The validity of the elections. The equal right of candidates to participate in the supervision of electoral operations. Punishment of those who tamper with the wishes of electors.

Article 46.-1.	 Elections shall take place within the sixty days preceding the expiration of the term of the Chamber: 2. If the Chamber of Deputies dissolves itself, elections for the new Chamber shall take place within sixty days of the date of dissolution. 3. If the elections are not held within the prescribed period, the Chamber shall investigate the causes and , shall determine the responsi. bility for the delay. 4. The Decree announcing the results of the elections shall be issued within a period not exceeding ten days from the day of election. If for some reason or other, elections are not completed in some cons' tituencies, the seats allotted for such constituencies shall be considered temporarily vacant until the. results of their elections are announced in a later Decree. To be issued, the Decree announcing the results of the elections shall include the results of more than two thirds of the seats. 5. In all.. eases the Chamber shall retain its authority until the Decree announcing the results of the elections is issued. Article 47.•1. The Chamber of Deputies shall be convened by .a Decree within twenty days following the day on which elections were held. If the Chamber is not convened by Decree, it shall defi-

nitely meet on the twenty-first day or on the day following the date on which the term of the old. Chamber expires. If such term is not completed after twenty days referred to above. 2. At its first meeting the Chamber shall elect its President and members of its Bureau.
Article 48.--1. The Chamber shall meet in an ordinary annual session beginning on the first of October and ending on the last of February. 2. Outside this session, the President of the Chamber shall convene extraordinary sessions either following upon a decision of the Bureau of the Chamber or at the written request of one fourth of the Deputies, or of the Chamber's Standing Committee or of the President of the Republic. Invitation to such sessions shall specify items on the agendas. Article 49.-1. Deputies shall not he answerable in a criminal or a civil action for the .events they relate or the opinions they make or for their voting in public or secret meetings of the Chamber or in meetings of the Committees. 2: A deputy shall have the right to refuse to give evidence against persons who have confided to him certain events in his capacity as Deputy, or to stand as witness in connection with the same events. 3. Deputies shall enjoy immunity during the ordinary and extraordinary sessions of the Chamber, and shall not without permission from the Chamber be liable to criminal prosecution or to the execution of a criminal sentence. The Chamber, however, shall give its decision . within .ten days of the receipt of the request for such permission and its failure so to do shall be tantamount to the granting of permission. A Deputy may be detained only in the case of " flagrante delicto," and in such a case, the Chamber shall be promptly informed. 4. If a Deputy is prosecuted or detained when the Chamber is not in session, the President of the Chamber shall be promptly informed. To restore immunity to the prosecuted or detained Deputy, the mbeCrshalgivDcontsefwih rtndaysofe session • following the detention or the prosecution, and this only in cases other than those of flagrante delicto. '5. The immunity of members of the Chamber's Standing Committee shall be considered as extending to include the time when the amber is not in session. 6. A Deputy shall lose his seat in the event of a legal verdict or other e mergency making him fail to possess conditions of nomination pr ovided by the Electoral Law.

	 50.—Before assuming his duties, each Deputy shall publicly take take before the Chamber the following oath:

" I swear by God and my honour to he loyal to the Constitution and to the laws of the country, to respect these laws and protect them and to defend the freedoms, interests, property and dignity of the people. Il also swear to defend the independance of the homeland and its republican regime, to discharge my parliamentary mission with honour, truthfulness and devotion, and to work for the perfection of the liberation of the Arab Nation and for the realization of its unity."

Article 51.—A suitable remuneration shall be assigned to Deputies so as to protect their independance of opinion and to enable them to devote their full time to their parliamentary work.
. Article 52.—The resignation of a Deputy shall be considered effective from the time of its registration at the Bureau of the Chamber.

Article 53.-1. No Deputy shall exploit his parliamentary position in any business. 2. A Law shall define the kinds of work which a Deputy may combine with his parliamentary position. Article 54.—In the event of a vacancy occuring for some reason or other, a Decree shall be issued fixing a date for elections for the vacant seat which falls within two months of the occurrence of the vacancy, provided that the remaining period in the term of the Chamber is not less than six months. The new member's term in office shall expire with the termination of the mandate of the Chamber. Article 55.-1. The Internal Rules shall determine for the Chamber the method of conducting debates, discussions, interpellations, voting, the powers of the Bureau and the Committees and all other work of the Chamber. 2. The Internal Rules shall have the force of law and may not be amended except in accordance with their own provisions. Article 56.-1. Every year, at the opening of the October session, the Chamber, under the presidency of its oldest member and the two youngest members acting as secretaries, shall proceed immediately to elect its. President and the members of its Bureau in accordance with provisions of the Internal Rules. 2. The President of the Chamber shall be elected by the absolute majority of the total number of Deputies. The majority of Deputies present shall be sufficient at a second ballot and a relative majority at a third. Article 57.-1. The President of the Chamber shall maintain order inside the Chamber.

2. The Chamber shall have a special guard receiving orders only from the President. No other armed force may enter the Chamber, or be posted in its neighbourhood, except at the request of the President. Article 58.-1. The Chamber cannot hold a meeting unless the absolute majority of its members are present. 2. The Internal Rules of the Chamber shall determine the responsibility of any member who absents himself without legitimate excuse. Article 59.-1. The meetings of the Chamber shall be public. 2. The Chamber may decide at the request of the President of the Republic or of at least one fourth of 'the Deputies present, to sit in private to discuss certain matters. Such decision shall he taken by secret vote. 3. The minutes of public meetings shall be published in the " Official Gazette." 4. Provisions of this Article shall apply to the meetings of the standing Committee of the Chamber. Article 60.-1. Voting in the Chamber shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure prescribed in its Internal Rules. 2. Deputies' may vote only if they are present at a meeting. • 3. .Elections in the . Chamber shall be held by secret ballot. 4. Decisions shall be taken by a majority of those present, except where otherwise provided by the Constitution or the Internal Rules. Should the votes be equal, the proposal under discussion shall be rejected. Article 61.-1. Objections to the validity of the election of members of the Chamber shall be decided by the Chamber. The last date for accepting such objections shall be the 30th day after the date of the Decree announcing the results of the elections. The Chamber shall decide all such objections within three months after the last date whereon they may ' be accepted. The Chamber's recess shall not be i ncluded in calculating the said period of 3 months. t 2. Decisions of the Chamber on objections to the validity of elecions shall remain for two weeks capable of reference to the Supreme Court, provided the application for such reference is signed by at least one fourth of the members of the Chamber. 3. Upon the motion of at least two-thirds of its members, and the recommendation of at least one-fourth, the Chamber may deprive a d declar eputy of his parliamentary position on grounds of his acts or publiclycaling opinions directed against the indepen dance of the country or for a change of Government by force.

Article 62.-1. The Chamber shall have the right to delegate some of its members or to form Parliamentary Inquiry Commissions for the investigation of certain matters. In such case the Executive Power shall facilitate the task of the representatives of the Chamber and shall supply them with all the evidence, documents and information which they may require.
2. Every member of the Chamber is entitled to direct in the appropriate Committee and through the Presidency of the Chamber an interpellation to the executive Power, which shall reply orally or in writing within the period prescribed by the Internal Rules of the Chamber.

Article 63.-1. The Executive Power may delegate ministers or officials to represent it a meetings of the Committees of the Chamber and to explain its view-point on matters under study by the said Committees.
2. Committees of the Chamber may ask the Executive Power to delegate ministers or officials to represent it, to give its view-point and to present explanations falling within the jurisdiction of their offices on matters study by the said Committees.

Article 64.-1. Treaties affecting the safety or finances of the State or the status of persons or the property-rights of Syrians abroad, peace and trade treaties and any other treaty valid for more than one year and every treaty involving an amendment of some effective Internal Laws shall not be confirmed by the President of the Republic except after their adoption by the Chamber of Deputies by means of a Law.
2. Treaties adopted by the Chamber of Deputies and confirmed, and promulgated by the President of the Republic shall, from the time they become effective, be regarded as enacting an amendment of previous Internal Laws conflicting with them. 3. Effective Treaties adopted by the Chamber of Deputies shall have priority over Internal Laws. Provisions of such treaties may not be amended, cancelled or suspended except after notification in the manner prescribed therein or in conformity with international usage.

Article 65.—The Chamber of Deputies has the right by the vote of the absolute mojority of its members to grant an amnesty for crimes committed before the amnesty proposal was submitted. Article 66.-1. Introducing bills shall be equally the right of the President of the Republic and of every Deputy.
2. As to financial bills which involve cancellation or reduction of a tax or the remission of a part thereof or which involve the appropriation of part of the State funds to a certain project, or the contracting

or guaranteeing or expenditure of a loan, they may only be introduced by the President of the Republic or by at least one fourth of the Deputies of the Chamber.

Article 67.-1. The general budget shall be prepared by the Executive Power. The Chamber of Deputies shall alone. have the right to adopt it. 2. Each fiscal year shall have one 'general budget containing the ordinary revenues and expenditures. No special or additional budgets may be created except by Law.
3. The beginning of a fiscal year shall be fixed by a law. 4. At least three months before the beginning of the fiscal year, the President of the Republic shall submit to the Chamber of Deputies a project for the general budget of that year. 5. The Executive Power may,- in case of need, submit a project for an extraordinary budget: covering a period of more than one year and including extraordinary revenues and expenditures. Such a bugdet shall not come into force except after its approval by the Chamber of . Deputies. 6. The budget law may not include provisions other than those of purely financial nature nor may it provide for the imposition of new services involving new expenditures. Its provisions shall be implemented only within the period for which it was designated. 7. During the study of the budget, the Chamber of Deputies may not increase the estimates of the total amount of revenues and expenditures: 8. The Chamber's Budget Committee may amend the budget bill, provided due consideration is taken of the previous paragraph. 9. After the Budget Committee completes its report on the budget bill, Deputies may not propose an increase in a certain item of expenditure or the creation of a new item of expenditure. 10. Deputies shall vote 'on ordinary or extraordinary budgets article by article. 11. The Executive Power shall not exceed the limits of expenditure estimated for each public administration. The budget law may nicludeaporvsntbighExecuvPowrt dha L imit. No new, additional or transferred credit shall be opened except by a law. Ch The fiscal accounts of the fiscal year shall be submitted to the the amber of Deputies within a time limit not exceeding two years from end of the budgetary year in question. These accounts shall be closed by a law. If the Chamber of Deputies does not take a final decision on the
project of the budget before the beginning of the fiscal year for which

that budget was designated, provisional monthly credits, calculated on the basis of one-twelfth on the appropriations of the preceding year shall be opened by virtue of a Decree. In this case, revenues shall continue to be collected in accordance with the laws in force at the end of the previous year. 13. After approving the budget, the Chamber of Deputies may adopt laws providing for new expenditures and new revenues required to meet them.
Article 68.—The procedure for organizing, approving, implement. ing and closing the accounts of local budgets shall be fixed by a law. Article 69.—The President of the Republic shall send to the Chamber of Deputies, at least once every year, a statement on the financial situation of the country. Article 70.—The monetary system shall be regulated and official banks shall be established by a law. Article 71.-1. The Bureau of Accountancy shall be supervised by the Chamber of Deputies and shall be considered attached to it. 2. The Budget of the Bureau of Accountancy shall form part of the budget of the Chamber of Deputies. 3. The cadre, pre-requisite qualifications and the immunity of the -members of the Bureau of Accountancy as well as the method of control over cases subject to their control shall he defined , by a law, the draft of which is to be prepared by' the Bureau of the Chamber. 4. The Chamber of Deputies shall elect the members of the Bureau of Accountancy by a majority of the Deputies present. If such. majority is not obtained, the election shall be repeated and a relative majority shall then be sufficient. The election shall be made from a list of candidates prepared by the . Bureau of the Chamber containing double the number of members to be elected. • The same procedure shall be followed in case of one or more vacancies occuring in the membership of the Bureau of Accountancy. 'The Chamber of Deputies shall elect a President for the Bureau of Accountancy from the members of the said Bureau. The election shall be 'for four years and the president may be re-elected for his post. Election of the President of the Bureau of Accountancy shall be-by a majority of the Deputies present. If such majority is not obtained, the election shall be repeated and in this case a-relative majority shall be sufficient.	 The Chamber of Deputies may upon a proposal from the ",Bureau

	 of the Chamber and with the approval of the majority of its members present, terminate the service of a member of the Bureau of Accounnytac. 5. The Bureau of Accountancy shall, on behalf of the Chamber of Deputies, , examine the accounts of the State and submit to the Chamber a general report containing its views as well as observations indicating, violations committed and the responsability thereof. „The Chamber of Deputies may charge the Bureau of Accountancy with any investigation or, study relating to revenues and expenditure,, or the administration of the Treasury.
Article 72.—If a bill is rejected by the Chamber of Deputies, it may not be , reintroduced therein except after the commencement of the ordinary session of the Chamber that follows the session in which the rejection was made. Article 73.—If the Chamber of Deputies passes a bill, it shall be promulgated by the President of :the Republic within fifteen da y s after the day- on which the bill is sent to him. If, however, the Chamber decides by an absolute majority that the law is of an urgent nature, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it within the time percribed in it. Official holidays shall not be included in calculating the intervals' allowed for promulgation. 'Article 74.1. If the President of the Republic finds it necessary that a Certain law should be reconsidered, he will return it to the Chamber within the period fixed for its promulgation, together with a message containing reasons for his action. 2. If, however, the Chamber insists upon the returned law by a two -third majority of its members, the law shall be promulgated immediately.	 In such case, Deputies shall give their . votes publicly by	 and the names of the Deputies voting for and those "yes" or	 voting against the proposal shall be published in the "Official Gazette." Article 75.-1. If at least one fourth of Members of the Chamber

of Deputies or of its standing Committee object to a bill as uncostialpr omugtin,rfhePsdotRpublic refers it to the Supreme. Court on the grounds that it is inconsistent with the Constitution, its promulgation shall be suspended until the Supreme Court gives its decision thereon. 2. If the Supreme Court decides that the bill is inconsistent with the Co nstitution, it shall he returned to the Chamber or its Standing 3Committee .If for rectification of the constitutional infraction. the Supreme Court does not give its decision on the law 	 ten working days in the case of an ordinary bill and five days

in the case of a bill of an urgent nature, the President of the Republic shall promulgate the law. 4. If the Supreme Court decides that the bill is constitutional , it shall be deemed to have been promulgated from the date of the expiry of the constitutional interval allowed for its promulgation.

Article 76.—If the President of the Republic does not promulgate a bill within the prescribed constitutional interval, nor returns it to the Chamber nor refers it to the Supreme Court within the same interval, the President of the Chamber shall promulgate it and it shall thereupon become effective. Article 77.---The Chamber of Deputies shall not have the right to cede its legislative power. Article 78.---Before the end of each of its ordinary sessions, the Chamber of Deputies shall elect a. Standing Committee which shall consist of at least one fourth of its members and shall continue to function until the beginning of the next ordinary session.
al Election of members of the Standing Committee shall be effected by the absolute majority of Deputies. If such majority is not obtained, the election shall be repeated and a majority of the members present shall then be sufficient; in a third ballot, a relative majority shall suffice. In electing this Committee the need to include in it members from all the ordinary committees of the Chamber shall be taken into consideration. A Deputy elected to this Committee may not decline to serve on it without giving, legitimate justification. b) c) d) The President of the Chamber of Deputies shall be the Chairman of its Standing Committee. Outside the sessions of the Chamber, this Committee 'shall be in continuous session. The Standing Committee shall be charged with the task 01 representing tile Chamber vis-a-vis the Executive Power when the Chamber is not in session and shall have the power of conducting investigations.	

Whenever the Chamber is not in session, the Standing Com-mittee shall be vested with its legislative power and shall take decisions on Its behalf by an absolute majority of its members on all matters which the Government, either in order to facilitate its work or owing to the urgent nature of theMarislf,dmnceaythlwsoudbe promulgated in relation thereto. Such matters shall not include the ratification of treaties involving the amendment

of some effective Internal Laws, nor shall they include bills whose enactment requires at least an absolute majority of the votes of Deputies, nor shall the taking of decisions in execution of paragraphs e, f and g of Article 92 fall under the jurisdiction of the Committee.

i

f) If the President of the Republic finds it necessary that a
certain law, which has been adopted by the Chamber's Standing Committee should .be reconsidered, he will return it to the said Committee within the period fixed for its promulgation, together with a message containing reasons for his decision. The Chamber will then reconsider the returned law in accordance with provisions of paragraphs 2 • of Article 74. ) Laws adopted by the Standing Committee shall after promulgation be deposited at the Bureau of the Chamber. Motions by Deputies to amend or repeal such laws shall be • considered as being of urgent nature.

CHAPTER II

Executive Power

President of the Republic.

-Article 79.—The President of the Republic shall exercise the Executive Power on behalf of the people and within the conditions p rescribed by the Constitution.	
Arti cle 80.—The President of the Republic is the Chief' of State. he law shall prescribe the honours and privileges due to his office.

T

file

_Article 81.-1. The President of the Republic shall be elected by
People by general, secret, direct, and uniform ballot.
2.

shall possess the conditions cited in Article forty-three of this Electors Constitution. The candidate obtaining the highest number of the votes of electors shall be considered successful.
• 3.

Article 82.-1. A candidate to be eligible for the Presidency of the Republic shall fulfil the following conditions:
a) b) c) He must be Syrian by. birth. He must fulfil conditions of eligibility for candidature to the Chamber of Deputies. He must have completed his fortieth year of age:

2. The candidature of women shall not be accepted for the Presidency of the Republic. 3. •The Electoral Law shall contain special provisions for the nomination and election of the President of the Republic. 4. The election of the new President of the Republic shall effected before the expiry of the term of office of the holder of the Presidency by a period of a maximum of four months and a minimum of two.

Article 83.—The term of office of the President of the Republic shall be five years. The President-elect shall assume his office on the expiry. of the term of his predecessor. Article. 84.-1. The offices of the President of the Republic and of a Deputy may not be held simultaneously. 2. The President of the Republic may not fill any other office, nor may he engage in industry or trade, nor occupy any administrative post in any institution whose aim is profit-making. Article 85. Before assuming office, the President of the Republic shall take the following oath before the Chamber of Deputies: " I swear by God and my honour to be loyal to the Constitution and the laws of the country, to respect and defend these laws and to protect the freedoms, interests, property, and dignity of the people. I also swear to spare no means or effort to preserve the independence of the country, to maintain its republican system, to defend the integrity of its territory and to work for the perfection of the liberation of the Arab Nation and for the-realization of its 'Unity." Article 86.—The resignation of the President of the Republic shall be effected by means of a message addressed to the people 'and published by the President of the Chamber of Deputies. Article 87.-1. The President of the Republic shall be held responsible for violating the Constitution and for High Treason. .2. He shall also be responsible for ordinary. crimes. Article 88.-1. The President shall not be tried except by the
Supreme Court.

2. A motion to refer the President of the Republic for trial before the Supreme Court may not be discussed unless at least one fourth 'of the Deputies present a written request to the President of the. Chamber making the motion and giving reasons therefor. The request' he referred, before its discussion, to the Constitutional'; and Judicial Committees meeting jointly. The two Committees shall submit their report within three days of the receipt of the request. A special meeting shall then be fixed to discuss the request and no other matter may be discussed therein. 3. In no circumstance may the President of the Republic he referred for trial before the Supreme Court except by a two-third majority of the total number of Deputies. 4. When the President of the Republic is referred for trial by the Supreme Court, he shall relinquish his powers until the Supreme Court shall have given its decision.. The resignation of the President shall not be considered as barring his trial. Article 89.-1. The President of the Chamber of Deputies shalt exercise the duties of the President of the Republic on the latter's behalf a) in the following eases:.. a) b) c) At the request of the President of the Republic in the event of his sickness or temporary absence from the country. If the President of the Republic is referred for trial before the Supreme Court. When it is impossible for the President of the Republic to perform the duties of his "office owing to justificatory reasons that should be fully set out in a Decision of the Chamber of Deputies taken by a two-third majority of its members.

2. The .President of the Chamber of Deputies shall also perform the duties of the President of the Republic on the latter's behalf if the reasons referred to under paragraph c of the preceding Article are deemed permanent by a decision of the Chamber of Deputies, or if the Pr esident is dismissed from office by a verdict of the Supreme Court and in case of his death or resignation. In all these cases, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, in his capacity as Acting President of the Republic, shall call for. the election of a new President of the Republic, which election shall take place within a maximum period of two months from the time when the office of the Presidency has becom.e vacant for any of the aforementioned reasons.

3. The The President of the Chamber of Deputies. throughout the
od when he is performir , the duties of the President of the Repuhe- shall yield the Presidency of the Chamber to its Vice-President.

Article law.

90.—The emoluments of the President shall be fixed by a

Article 91.—The President of the Republic shall he Commander-in chief of the Army and Chairman of the Council of National Defense. Article 92.--In addition to the conduct of the general policy and administration of the State, and to other functions specifically mentiodhraclsfteConiu,hcfPresidntoh Republic shall include the. following functions:	 a) Inauguration of the legislative sessions of the Chamber of Deputies by statements explaining the internal and externalposition of the country, the problems facing it and the plans needed for dealing with these problems. b) . Communicating with the Chamber of Deputies by messages addressed to the Presdent i of the Chamber. These messages shall be .read at the first meeting following its receipt by 'the President of the Chamber. c) Appointment of officials who, according to law, must be appointed by a Decree. d) Accrediting Ambassadors and* Ministers to foreign States and	 receiving credentials of heads of foreign missions accredited to him, and in general conducting the various relations with foreign states. e) Declaration of war after consulting the Council of National Defense and obtaining the approval of the Chamber of Deputies. f) Taking the necessary defense measures after consulting the Council of National Defense. g) Conclusion of peace after consulting the Council of National Defense and obtaining the approval of the Chamber of. Deputies. h) Declaring a state of emergency with the approval of the Chamber of Deputies. In case of need, however, the President of the Republic, may declare a state of emergency for a period not exceeding one month, provided the Chamber is promptly informed and is given the exclusive right to extend the said period. Declaring a local or general state of emergency shall be made in cases of danger of war, the existence of a state of war, in time of war and in the event of internal disturbances and public calamities. Declaring a state of emergency may involve the impostnfrec ,othmpraysuenio-f, guarantees connected with the freedom of persons and

homes, with the freedoms of the press, of communications, of holding meetings and of forming societies. may, not, however, extend to any interference with judicial matters. The state of emergency and the results following upon its declaration shall be regulated by a law approved by, the absolute majority of Deputies. i) j) Proclamation of general or partial mobilization. Exercising the prerogative of. pardon.. This, prerogative shall not include pardoning persons sentenced by the Supreme Court under Article 117 b of this Constitution.

Article '93.-1. There shall be established a. "Bureau of Inspection!' attached to the. Presidency of the Republic:
2. The cadre, jurisdiction and immunities of members of this Bureau shall be defined by a law.

2.—Ministers. Article 94.-1. In exercising his Executive Power, the President of the Republic shall be assisted by Ministers.
2.' He shall appoint; dismiss, and accept the resignation of these ministers by a Decree which he shall communicate to the Chamber of Deputies.

Article 95.---1. A Minister must fulfil the conditions prescribed for nomination for the Chamber and must have completed his thirtieth year of age.	 •
• 2.. On assuming office, a Minister may 'not directly or indirectly, buy or rent anything which is State property, even at a public auction. - Re may not participate in the tenders or contracts entered into by p ublic departments, or any institution attached to, or falling under the control of, the State, nor may he serve on the Board of Directors of any company or he the agent thereof, or take part in any commercial enterprize. 3. No person may hold the offices of Minister and Deputy simultaneously. A Minister may not nominate himself for the Chamber ex cept after having resigned his office as Minister by a period to be fixed by law. 4. •	 The emoluments of Ministers shall be fixed by a law. 5. A Minister shall lose his office if a judicial verdict or an emer dis qualifies him under paragraph 1. of this article.

Article 96.—The law shall determine the mini her of Ministers and Directorates-General, their functions and the jurisdiction of each Minister. Article 97.-1. Each Minister shall sign Regulative Decrees and Decrees issued by the President of the Republic pertaining to questions falling within his jurisdiction.
2. Every Minister is responsible for his acts in his Ministry to the .President of the Republic. A Minister shall issue his decisions for the implementation of laws, regulations and decrees. A Minister may not independently of the President. of the Republic take in his Ministry decisions bearing upon the general policy of the State. 3. Ministers shall submit to the President of- the Republic reports on the conduct of affairs in their respective Ministries.

Article 98.--1. Ministers shall he held responsible for violation of the Constitution, for High Treason and for ordinary crimes.
2. A Minister may not to be detained except in the case of "flagrante delicto." or in the execution of a judicial verdict. . Article 99.-1. Ministers shall be tried by the Supreme Court for High Treason and for violations of the Constitution. In prosecuting them before the said Court, in referring them to trial, and in the trial itself, the same procedure shall be followed as in the case of the trial of the President of the Republic: Tre President of the Republic or one-fourth of members of the 'Chamber of Deputies may sign the impeachment and the application for reference for trial. Upon reference to trial before the Supreme Court, a Minister shall he suspended until the said Court shall have decided on the charge brought against him. His resignation, however, shall not prevent his trial. 2. In the case of ordinary crimes, Ministers shall he tried before the ordinary' courts in accordance with the provisions of the law. In such case, the appropriate court shall not, except in case of "flagrante delicto," look into the action brought against' him until it shall 'have obtained the permission of the Supreme Court.

Article 100.—The provisions of laws shall be inspired by the prin. ciple of extending the jurisdiction of heads of the 'administrative runts and the chiefs of departments in the Capital and the Muhafazat (dis tries).

Article	 In every Muhafazah a council shall be established ; three quarters of its members shall be elected and the other quarter appointed.
2. The law shall fix the term, number of members, procedure of election; and conditions of appointment of this Council. The Council of the Muhafazah shall elect its President, and the members of its executive office, whose term, duties and the procedure of exercising their functions shall be determined by law.

Article 102.—The main tasks of the Muhafazah Council shall be to contribute towards promoting the following: I. The combating of disease by expanding free medical aid and by protecting motherhood and child-hood.
2. The combating of ignorance by establishing kindergartens, primary, elementary and vocational schools, -by educating illiterates and • by disseminating education. 3. Securing potable water in villages. and towns, the opening of a local road network and the extension of the use of electricity. 4. 5. Defining limits of municipal areas in the Muhafazah. Setting up and organizing exhibitions .

6. Encouraging tourism and summer resorts and the supervision of hotels. 7. 8. 9. 10. Organization of local means of communications. Utilization of mineral waters. Promoting afforestation and the planting of trees. Promotion of, and participation in, charity activities.

11. Organization and utilization of fishing in seas and rivers and of inland hunting.

Article 103.-1. The Special revenues of the Muhafazah necessary or the implementation if its projects shall consist of:
a) b) A percentage of the levied general taxes to be fixed by law, which shall be taken therefrom or added thereto. Local duties which the Muhafazah Council shall impose within the limits of the law. These duties shall in no way affect the movement of persons or the transfer of capital between the Muhafazat and shall not restrict the right of citizens to practice their trades and professions and perform their work within the national territory.

2 • The law shall regulate the procedure of accountancy of the uh afazat Councils.

Article 104.--The Mi) afazah Council shall determine disburse ments in questions falling under its jurisdiction. Article 105.—The rules of discussion, adoption of decisions, the implementation of decisions and the supervision of the work of the Muhafazat Councils shall be determined by law.

CHAPTER

III

The Judiciary

Article 106.—The judiciary shall be independent. Article 107.-1. Judges shall be independent. In exercising their Judicial function, theiy shall not be subject to any authority other than law.
2. The honour, conscience, and integrity of judges are a guarantee of the rights and freedoms of the people.	 3. Before assuming office, a judge shall swear that he shall administer justice to the people with equity and shall respect the law. 4. Judgements shall be given in the name of the people of Syria and shall state the grounds on which they were based.

Article 108.—Judicial power in the State shall be exercised by:
a) b) c) The Supreme Court. The Court of Cassation. Other Courts.

Article 109.-1. Judges shall be appointed by a Decree based on a decision of the "Supreme Judiciary Council" and in accordance with the.
2. The,promotion, transfer, and dismissal of judges and disciplinary action against them shall be effected by a decision of the Supreme 'Judiciary Council and in accordance with the law. 	

Article . 110.-1. The "Public Prosecution" institution shall form one organization presided over by the Minister of Justice. The "Public Prosecution" institution shall safeguard justice
and watch over the enforcement of the laws. It shall also prosecute

offenders and execute penal sentences against them. 3. The cadre of "Public Prosecution" shall be determined by law. The appointment, transfer, promotion and dismissal of public prosecu- , tors as well as the taking of disciplinary measures against them shall come under the jurisdiction of tile Ministry of Justice. 	 Article 111.—The cadre of civilian and military courts, their classes and the salaries of judges shall be fixed by law. Article 112.—The cadre of "Judicial Assistants" shall be fixed by law. Their appointment, promotion, dismissal and the taking of disciplinary measures against them shall come under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice.

1.—The Supreme Court

Article 113.-1. The Supreme Court shall be composed of seven members, one of whom shall be named President. 2. A member of the Supreme Court shall fulfil the following .conditions: a) To possess. conditions of eligibility for tile membership of the Chamber. b) c) d) To hold a First Degree in Law "Licence" from the Syrian University or tile equivalent thereof. To have completed the fortieth year of his age. To have practiced judgeship, advocacy or university teaching, or any of these, for a period not less titan ten years.

Article 114.—The President of the Republic shall appoint the president and members of the Supreme Court with the approval of the Chamber of Deputies. 2. If a member-vacancy occurs in the Supreme Court when the andier of Deputies is not in session, the President of the Republic may fill it with the approval of the Standing Committee of the Chain:h

A member of the Supreme Court shall continue to be period of five years and may he reappointed.
A.

P,'
ae	

	

•

member of the Supreme Court tenders his resignatio, of the Republic. His resignation shall take immedia be communicated to the Chamber of Deputies..

A member of the Supreme Court may not be dismissed
▪ cision of the absolute majority of weathers of the Court.
Ott shall be communicated to the President of the Republic de	 ....:amber of Deputies.

the 115.—The President and members of the Supreme take the following oath before the Chamber of Deputies: she 	 of
tnf

by God and my honour to observe the Constitution swear the country 'and to uprightness- law discharge my duties with

.lawn adopted by the absolute majority of Del enacted to define:
o•s.Prfemtga4hivSnbdu1 Court and offices which they may not hold simulltane with the membership of the Court. b)

The crimes of violating the Constitution and of High son and the penalties thereof. ▪ Rules of prospection, objection, defense, and trial in Supreme Court, and procedure for examining and tak decisions on matters falling within its jurisdiction.

117.-1n its orignial jurisdiction the Supreme Court sl jofie and take final decisions on the following matters:
cuff r

y / Constitutionality of laws referred to it under Article 7,
Trial of the 'President of the Republic and of Ministers. Applications for the annulment of Decrees appoint Ministers, on grounds 'of inconsistency with the provisi, of the law or the Constitution. Such applications shall considered only if submitted by at least one fourth of CmeotDhmpaburi'scSfndog mittee and . within one week of their communication to I Chamber,ndslfiyce'bthSupr Court within one week of their submission.

d) Decisions of the Chamber of Deputies on the validity of elections in respect of which objections have been submitted to the Supreme Court under paragiaph 1 of Artie e) Applications for the annulment of Regulative Decrees consistent with the law or the Constitution, if submitted by at least one fourth of the Deputies of the Chamber or of its Standing Committee. 2. The Supreme Court shall also consider applications for permission to try Ministers for ordinary crimes before the ordinary courts. A decision shall be taken on such applications within a maximum period of one week. 3. The Supreme Court shall also consider as part of its original jurisdiction, and shall give final decisions on, applications for the annulment of administrative acts and decisions as well as of ,Decrees inconsistent with the law or the Constitution .or with .Regulative Decrees, if such applications are contained in petitions submitted by persons suffering injury therefrom or are submitted by at least one fourth of members of the Chamber of Deputies or of its Standing Committee.

Supreme Judicial Council

Article 118.-1. The Supreme Judicial Council shall be composed of seven members as follows:

a) The President of the Supreme Court, as President. b) Two members of the Supreme Court chosen by the said Court. c) The highest ranking four judges of the Court of Cassation. 2. This Council shall supervise the affairs of judges relating to the functions of their office.
Article 119.--The President of the Supreme Judicial Council and . the Minister of Justice may propose to this Council the appointment, pr omotion, transfer and dismissal of judges and the taking of disciplinary action against them in accordance with the provisions of the law. The Supreme Judicial Council shall decide finally upon these Pr oposals by an absolute majority of its members, and shall communicate such decisions to the Ministry of Justice, to be implemented by a De cree or Decision in accordance with the provisions of the law.

Article 120.—The Supreme Judicial Council may propose to the President of the Republic hills relating to judges, their immunity, the procedure for their appointment, promotion, transfer, dismissal, and the taking of disciplinary measures against them.

THIRD PART

Amendment of the Constitution

Article 121.—The President of the Republic as well as the Deputies may ask for the amendment of one or more of the articles of time Constitution, provided the 'following conditions are fulfilled : a) The application for amendment shall cite the articles which it is desired to. amend, the reasons for such amendment and •the new proposed text. If the application is submitted by Deputies, it shall he signed by at least one fourth of their , total number. The Chamber shall discuss the application for the amendment, which shall be adopted only by an absolute majority of the total number. of Deputies. If rejected, such a rejection shall be considered final. An application for the amendment of the same article may not be submitted again before the commencement of the ordinary session_ of the Chamber which follows the session in which . the application for amendment was rejected.
If the amendment is adopted by the absolute majority of the total number of Deputies, the vote Shall he considers as a motion in favour. of the amendment.

b) c)

d)

e)

In the ordinary session .of the Chamber which follows the session in which the motion in favour of the amendment is adopted, the Chamber shall discuss the articles whose amendment is proposed. If two thirds of members of the Chamber adopt the amendment, it shall become effective and shall be incorporated into the Consitution. 	

FOURTH PART

-Article 122.—No application for the amendment of this ciConstmuhalbgeidrfothlapsewyrf into force.

Article 126.—The Law of the Supreme Court provided for in this

Constitution shall he promulgated, the said Court shall he established. and the Supreme Judicial Council shall be formed before the end of the first ordinary session of the first Chamber of Deputies.
Article 127.—Existing legislation inconsistent with the provisions

of this Constitution shall remain in force until they are amended in conformity with provisions of this Constitution.
Article 128.—The Constitution declared on the 5th September, 1950 shall be considered cancelled as from the 29th day-of November, 1951 and all measures taken by the . authorities since that date shall be considered " acts of Authority. " Article 129.---This Constitution shall become effective immediately after the announcement of . its adoption by the referendum of the people provided for in article 123. Results of the referendum and the text of the Constitution shall then be published in the " Official Gazette. " (1)

