CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
by BRUN-OTTO BRYDE and ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN

Issued December 1979

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Translation by United Kingdom Foreign Commonwealth Office

© Copyright 1979 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT 18 APRIL 1977 THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA SECTIONS CONTENTS HEADINGS FOREWARD THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION CHAPTER 1 THE UNITED REPUBLIC, THE PARTY AND THE PEOPLE PART 1 THE UNITED REPUBLIC AND THE PARTY

1. 2. 3.

The United Republic. The area of the United Republic and the boundaries of regions, districts etc. The Party and its powers. PART 2 THE PEOPLE

4.

The right to vote. CHAPTER 2 THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC

5. 6. 7. 8. 9.

The President of the United Republic and his duties. The election of the President. The day on which the President will begin to exercise his duties. Execution of the work and duties of the President when he is absent. The salary and other emoluments of the President.

10. While in office the President shall be immune from criminal and civil proceedings against him in the courts.

-1-

CHAPTER 3 THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC PART 1 THE GOVERNMENT 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. Powers of the Government of the United Republic. The Vice President and Ministers. Appointment of Junior Ministers to assist the Ministers. Appointment of Ministers and Junior Ministers. Duration of the appointments of the Vice President, the Ministers and the Junior Ministers. The Cabinet of Ministers. The Vice President, the Ministers and the Junior Ministers to be sworn in before assuming their duties. Secretary to the Cabinet. The heads of Regions. Power to define the duties and to appoint persons to carry out those duties. Prerogative of Mercy. PART 2 THE PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC 22. Parliament.

23. Members of Parliament. 24.. Constituencies. 25. 26. 27. 28. Elections in the electoral districts. Qualifications to be a Member of Parliament and to represent a constituency. Procedure for the election of Members of Parliament who represent the constituencies. Persons holding any office in Government service to be given leave without pay while they are contesting an election. OTHER MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 29. National members who have been chosen by Parliament.

-2-

30.

National members who shall be chosen by Parliament from among those recommended by the Regions.

31. Members of Parliament who have been chosen by the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council. 32. 33. Members of Parliament appointed by the President from the Tanzania Islands. Other members of Parliament who shall be appointed by the President. OTHER PROVISIONS CONCERNING MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 34. 35. Members of Parliament to be sworn in. Formal declaration by Members of Parliament concerning the obligations of leadership.

36. Members of Parliament to give information concerning their property. 37. 38. Tenure of office of Members of Parliament. Arbitration when it is questioned whether a person is a Member of Parliament or not. THE SPEAKER AND DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT 39. 40. 41. The Speaker. The Deputy Speaker. The procedure for electing a speaker and his deputy. MEETINGS AND PROCEEDINGS OF PARLIAMENT 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. Summoning and dissoving Parliament. Meetings of Parliament. Presiding over the sittings of Parliament. Number of sittings of Parliament. Number of Votes required to arrive at a decision in Parliament. Parliamentary Committees. The President may address Parliament.

49. Vacant seats in Parliament and procedure for carrying on the work of Parliament.

-3-

POWER TO LEGISLATE 50. 51. 52. Parliament the sole authority to enact laws. Procedure for legislation. Conditions for altering the Constitution and some other laws.

53. Conditions for enacting laws concerning financial matters. 54. Work of Parliament to be guided by the doctrines of the Party. CHAPTER 4 THE GOVERNMENT OF ZANZIBAR AND THE REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL OF ZANZIBAR PART 1 THE GOVERNMENT OF ZANZIBAR AND THE PRESIDENT OF ZANZIBAR 55. 56. 57. The Government of Zanzibar and its powers. The leader of the Zanzibar Government and his responsibilities. The election of the Head of the Zanzibar Government. PART 2 THE REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL OF ZANZIBAR 58. 59. The functions of the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council. The work of the Revolutionary Council in relation to the Constitution of the Party. CHAPTER 5 THE HIGH COURT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC, THE JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION OF MAINLAND TANZANIA, THE HIGH COURT OF ZANZIBAR, AND THE SPECIAL COURT OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC. PART 1 THE HIGH COURT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC 60. 61. 62. 63. The High Court of the United Republic. Appointment of judges of the High Court. Tenure of Office of High Court judges. Oaths of Judges.

-4-

PART 2 THE AUTHORITY TO APPOINT JUDGES AND OTHER JUDICIAL OFFICERS OF THE COURTS OF MAINLAND TANZANIA AND THE JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION 64. 65. The Judicial Service Commission. Authority to appoint Judges and other judicial officers.

PART 3 THE HIGH COURT OF ZANZIBAR 66. 67. The High Court of Zanzibar. The jurisdiction of the High Court of Zanzibar. PART 4 INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION, AND APPEALS 68. 69. Interpretation of the Constitution. Appeals in routine cases. PART 5 PROCEDURE FOR DISPATCHING COURT PROCESSES AND FOR EXECUTING THE ORDER THEREIN MADE BY THE COURTS. 70. Execution of Court processes to be carried out throughout Tanzania. PART 6 SPECIAL CONSTITUTIONAL COURT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC 71. 72. 73. 74. Special Constitutional Court of the United Republic. Jurisdiction of the Special Constitutional Court. Composition of the Special Constitutional Court. Procedure during the sittings of the Special Constitutional Court.

-5-

CHAPTER 6 PART 1 PERMANENT COMMISSION OF ENQUIRY 75. 76. 77. The Permanent Commission of Enquiry. Members of the Permanent Commission. Authority and procedure of the Commission. PART 2 COMMISSION FOR THE LEADERSHIP CODE 78. The Commission for the Leadership Code. CHAPTER 7 FINANCIAL PROVISION RELATING TO THE TREASURY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88. Conditions for levying taxes. The Consolidated Fund of the Treasury of the Government of the United Republic. Conditions for withdrawing money for expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury. Procedure for authorizing expenditure of funds which are in the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury. Procedure for authorising the expenditure of funds before the Act covering expenditure has come into force. Contingencies Fund. The National Debt. Salaries of certain Government officials to be guaranteed by the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury. Controller and Auditor-General of the Government of the United Republic. Removal from office of the Controller and Auditor-General. CHAPTER 8 THE DEFENCE FORCES 89. Prohibition on forming armies which are not the armed forces of the State. -6-

90.

The powers of the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. CHAPTER 9 THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION

91.

The Electoral Commission. CHAPTER 10 MISCELLANEOUS

92. 93. 94. 95.

Explanations concerning various offices which have been created by the Constitution. Explanations concerning the procedure for appointments in the Government service. Interpretation. Title and date of commencement of this Constitution.

-7-

THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA FOREWARD THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE AIMS AND OBJECTS OF THIS CONSTITUTION ARE FREEDOM, JUSTICE, BROTHERHOOD AND PEACE, WHICH ARE THE PRECEPTS ON WHICH IT IS FOUNDED, AND ARE AS FOLLOWS: A. Thati. ii. iii. iv. all men are equal; every man is entitled to respect and to be recognized and valued as a human being; Every man has the right to receive from society the protection of his life, his freedom, and his lawfully acquired property; Every man has the right to freedom of worship, freedom to express his opinion, freedom to travel anywhere, and freedom of assembly, provided he does not break the law nor any lawful rules and regulations; By using established channels every citizen has the right to participate in arriving at a final decision on matters concerning the nation and himself; Every man has the right to a fair reward for his work;

v.

vi.

B. That Socialism and Self-reliance are the only way to build a society of men who are free and equal; C. That every community has the dutyi. ii. iii. To respect and value the humanity of every person and all his other rights; To uphold the laws of the country; To conduct the affairs of Government in ways which will guarantee that the wealth of the nation shall be developed, preserved and utilised for the benefit of all people, and also to prevent the exploitation of one man by another;

-8-

iv.

To ensure that in the State every man able to work does work, the meaning of work being any sort of lawful activity by which a man acquires the necessities of life; To establish and perpetuate the dignity of all men in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; To ensure that Government and all National Institutions give the same opportunities to all the people, women and men, without discrimination against the colour, tribe, religion or circumstances of any person; To ensure that in the country there is no kind of injustice and oppression whatsoever nor threats, racial discrimination, bribery, persecution or favouritism;

v. vi.

vii.

viii. To ensure that expenditure of the wealth of the nation is used strictly for the development of the people, and especially to strive to eradicate poverty, ignorance and disease; ix. x. D. To ensure that Government owns the principle resources of the economy; To ensure that Government rules on foundations of democracy and socialism; That it is the duty of every man to believe that work is the measure of a human being, and to fulfill the meaning of this by actions; That the rights of all men can only be maintained and protected properly and the responsibilities of every man can only be perfectly executed, in a democratic society which has a Government carrying out its duties under the directions of a Parliament representative of the People, and in a society which also has courts of law which dispense justice without fear or favour towards anyone.

E.

-9-

THIS CONSTITUTION HAS BEEN COMPLIED BY THE LAWFUL PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE BASIC PRINCIPLES OUTLINED ABOVE AND WITH THE OBJECT OF DEMONSTRATING WITHOUT ANY DOUBT THAT TANZANIA HAS A GOVERNMENT BASED ON THE PRINCIPLES OF DEMOCRACY AND SOCIALISM. CHAPTER 1 THE UNITED REPUBLIC, THE PARTY AND THE PEOPLE PART 1 The United Republic and the Party 1. Tanzania is a United Republic. 2. (1) The extent of the United Republic is the whole area of Mainland Tanzania together with the whole area of the Tanzania Islands. (2) For the better administration of Government business, the President may divide Tanzania into regions, districts and other areas, in accordance with arrangements which have been established or accepted by the Party of the Revolution. 3. (1) The Party of the Revolution (abbreviated "CCM") is the only political Party in Tanzania and is the final authority in all matters concerning the Constitution of the Party. (2) All political activity in the country of Tanzania shall be conducted either by the Party itself or under the leadership and direction of the Party. (3) All the business of all the Organs of State in the United Republic shall be carried out under the guidance and supervision of the Party. (4) All the terms And conditions which are incorporated in this Constitution are required to be executed bearing in mind at all times the responsibilities of the Party, as explained in sub-sections (1),(2) and (3) of this section. Part 2 The People 4. (1) Every citizen of Tanzania who has attained the age of 18 years is entitled to vote in an election performed in Tanzania by the people. This right shall be exercised in accordance with the terms and conditions laid down in sub-section (2) and other laws in force in Tanzania concerning electoral matters. (2) Parliament can make laws and rules which can disqualify a citizen from voting for the following reasons: a. b. that he is a citizen of another country; that he is mentally disordered; -10-

c. d.

that he has committed criminal offences; absence or failure to produce proof of evidence of his age, citizenship or registration as a voter.

Apart from these reasons there is no other reason whatsoever which can disqualify a citizen from exercising his right to vote. (3) Parliament shall make Electoral Laws and Rules concerning the following matters: a. the procedure for registering voters in an election for the President of the United Republic, and for Members of Parliament; to proclaim when and where voters will be registered and the time and place to vote; the procedure to enable a voter who is registered in one part (of the country) to vote in another part, and to publish rules for the implementation of the procedure; to proclaim the duties of the Electoral Commission and the procedures for every election, which shall be conducted under the leadership and supervision of the Electoral Commission. CHAPTER 2 THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC 5. (1) There shall be a President of the United Republic who shall be both Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. (2) Apart from bearing in mind the policies and directives of the Party, in the exercise of his functions, the President shall not be compelled to follow the advice of any other person, except when the law directs otherwise. 6. (1) The President shall be elected by the people in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and in accordance with the laws which shall be enacted by Parliament regulating the election of a President, as is provided for in this Constitution. (2) A Presidential election shall be held whenever any of the following events occur: a. b. after the dissolution of Parliament; after the President has resigned without first dissolving Parliament;

b. c.

d.

c.

after confirmation, in accordance with section 8 of this Constitution, that the President is unable to perform his duties and if this state of affairs has lasted for a period of 6 months; after the President has died.

d.

(3) When Parliament has been dissolved, or one of the other events described in sub-section (2) has occurred, giving cause for a Presidential election to be held, the National Executive Committee of the Party shall convene and nominate one citizen of Tanzania, who has reached the age of thirty, as the sole candidate for election as President. This choice shall be sent to the National Conference of the Party which, after receiving the nomination, whall convene to consider it and make the final nomination of the person who shall be the candidate for election as President. The National Conference of the Party must convene within 50 days after the dissolution of Parliament, or within 21 days after the occurence of any other event which has been the cause for the holding of a Presidential election. (4) This person who has been nominated for the office as the final selection of the National Conference of the Party shall present himself for election and the people shall vote either for or against the candidate, and depending on the results of the vote, the following shall happen: a. if more than half of all the voters are in favor of the candidate, then this person shall be elected President and the Electoral Commission shall declare that he has been elected; if more than half of all the voters have rejected the candidate, then this person shall not be elected President and the Electoral Commission shall declare that he has not been elected. In this event the National Executive Committee of the Party shall meet again and nominate another candidate and the National Conference of the Party shall also meet again to make the final choice as has been explained in sub-section (3), and finally another election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this sub-section.

b.

When a person has been declared by the Electoral Commission to have been elected President, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4)a., no Court of Law shall have jurisdiction to enquire into his election. The President shall assume his responsibilities as soon as possible after the announcement that he has been elected President, but in any event he must take up his duties within seven days.

-12-

Unless he resigns or dies earlier, the President shall continue his term of office until such time as another person shall be elected President at the next following Presidential election and shall have taken up his duties and responsibilities. When he takes office, the President shall be sworn-in and shall also take an oath that he will faithfully carry out all his duties in accordance with the laws which shall be enacted by Parliament. Whenever the Cabinet of Ministers perceives that the President is unable to perform his duties because of illhealth, then this Council may send to the Chief Justice a petition pleading that he (the Chief Justice) shall declare that the President is unable to exercise his powers because of ill-health. After receiving such a petition and after considering the doctor's certificate, the Chief Justice shall send to the National Executive Committee of the Party a report certifying that the President cannot perform his duties because of ill-health. Whenever such a report shall be issued, the National Executive Committee shall announce that the President's health has improved and he has returned to work, than it shall be deemed that the President is absent. In this state of affairs and also if it happens that the office of President is vacant, or that the President is absent his functions shall be carried out by one of the following persons, in the order in which they are listed: a. The Vice-President, or if he is also absent, the; b. c. The Minister who has been nominated by the President for this purpose, or if he also is absent, then A minister chosen for this purpose by the Cabinet of Ministers.

(2) Whenever it shall happen that the President's office is vacant, either because he has resigned or died, or because he is absent from Tanzania, or because he is unable to perform his functions on account of ill-health, and the Chief Justice, having considered the doctor's report, shall send to the National Executive Committee a notice certifying that the President is unable to carry out his duties, at a time when the Vice-President is absent as well as the Minister empowered to perform the functions of the President in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) and if there are no other Cabinet Ministers able to convene and take any action, then these circumstances the following steps shall be taken: a. the certificate which shall be sent by the Chief Justice to the National Executive Committee shall be deemed to be valid as if it has been issued by him after receiving a resolution from the Cabinet of Ministers that he should be requested to issue this notice, and it shall not be questioned in any Court of law, even though it was -13-

issued without the Chief Justice first receiving a. resolution from the Cabinet; and b. the National Executive Committee shall choose a. person who appears to be suitable to carry on the work and duties of the President while he is absent, or until either the Vice-President or the Minister empowered by sub-section (1) to perform Presidential duties shall be available. (3) In case it happens that: a. the President is absent from the town (which is) the Principal Seat of Government; b. the President is absent from Tanzania for a. period which he thinks will not be long; or c. the President is ill and is confident that he will recover in a. short time, and if the President thinks it expedient to delegate his powers for this period, then he may by order in writing appoint the Vice-President or, if for any reason he thinks that it would be preferable to appoint a. Minister, then he may appoint a. Minister, in order to carry out the work and duties of the President while he (the President) is absent, and the VicePresident or the Minister concerned, as it shall be, shall perform these Presidential functions in accordance with any conditions which shall be imposed by the President: With the exception that the provisions of this sub-section shall be under stood not to reduce or negate the authority which the President has under any other law to delegate his powers to any other person. (4) At his discretion the President may, if he considers it expedient, issue instructions in writing to any Minister to perform any Presidential functions which he shall specify in his instructions, and the Minister so directed under the provision of this sub-section, shall have the power to carry out those duties in accordance with any conditions imposed by the President, but notwithstanding the provisions of any other law. Except that: a. the President shall not have the powers to delegate to the Minister, in accordance with this sub-section, any duties specified in any law of the East African Community if by law the President is not permitted to delegate those duties to any other person whatsoever; b. when the President has instructed any Minister to carry out any Presidential duties under the provisions of this sub-section, then it is understood that these orders shall be prohibit the President from exercising those powers himself.

-14-

(5) The following Rules shall apply for the purpose of the interpretation of sub-sections (1) and (2): a. for the purpose of sub-sections (1) and (2), the President shall not be deemed to be absent from Tanzania only because he is on a. journey which takes him outside Tanzania while travelling from one part of Tanzania to another, or because he has issued instructions in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) and such instructions have not yet been cancelled; for the purpose of sub-section (1) only, a. meeting of the Cabinet held for the pur pose of sending a. request to the Chief Justice concerning the President's health shall be deemed to be a. lawful meeting even if one member among them is absent and his seat is vacant, and it shall be deemed that the Council (Cabinet) has passed this resolution if it is the expressed opinion of a. majority of those who have attended the meeting and voted.

b.

(6) Notwithstanding the provisions which have been explained at the beginning of this section, the person who shall carry out the functions of the President in accordance with this section shall not have powers to remove the Vice-President from office. (7) A Minister, a. Member of Parliament, or any other person who shall exercise the functions of the President in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall not lose his seat in Parliament, nor shall he forfeit his eligibility to be elected a. Member of Parliament, for the sole reason that he is carrying out the duties of the President in accordance with the provision of this section. 9. (1) The President shall receive a. salary and other emoluments, and when he shall retire shall receive a pension, a gratuity or other allowances, as shall be decided by Parliament and such salary, and those other allowances,_ pension and gratuity, shall all come from the Consolidated Fund of the Treasury of the Government of the United Republic and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2) The salary and all other emoluments shall not be reduced during the President's term of office, in accordance with the provision of this Constitution. 10. (1) At any time when the President shall be still in office, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, any accusations or criminal proceedings against him in the Courts shall be prohibited.

-15-

(2) At any time when the President shall be in office, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, it shall be forbidden to initiate any proceedings against him in the Courts concerning any errors or omissions he might have committed as an ordinary citizen, either before or after his installation as President, unless the following conditions have first been complied with, that is: a. the President must first be sent a. notice in writing of the claims (against him) at least 30 days before the institution of proceedings (against him) in the Court; this Notice must be sent to the President in accordance with the procedure prescribed by laws made by Parliament; this Notice must give information concerning the origin of this case, the cause of action (and) the name, address and place of residence of the plaintiff and what exactly he is claiming. Chapter 3 The Government of the United Republic and the Parliament of the United Republic Part 1 The Government 11. (1) The Executive Authority of the Government of the United Republic and of all Union matters shall be vested in the President. (2) Without prejudice to any other Provisions of this Constitution the duties of Government may be executed by the President himself directly, or may be delegated to other persons holding office in the service of the Government of the United Republic. (3) It should be understood that nothing in this section prohibits an act conferring executive powers on any organ of State or on any person who is not the President. 12. (1) There shall be a. Vice-President of the United Republic who shall be appointed by the President and shall be the principal assistant of the President in discharging his functions. (2) The Vice-President shall be nominated in accordance with the Rules that whenever the President of the United Republic, who has been elected in accordance with section 6 of this Constitution, shall be from Mainland Tanzania, then the President shall appoint a. Vice-President from the Tanzania Islands; and when the elected President is from the Tanzania Islands, then the President will nominate a. Vice-President from Mainland Tanzania.

b. c.

-16-

(3) There shall be Ministers of the Government of the United Republic who shall be in charge of Ministries which the President may establish from time to time by formal decree stamped with the Government seal. (4) The Vice-President and every Minister shall perform his function under the leadership and direction of the President, and he shall lead the Department on Government business with which he shall be entrusted by the President. 13. The President may appoint Junior Ministers who shall assist the Ministers in the exercise of their work and duties. 14. (1) The President shall appoint Ministers and Junior Ministers from among the members of Parliament. (2) The President may appoint a. Chief Minister from among the Ministers. (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), when it becomes necessary to appoint a. Minister or Junior Minister after Parliament has been dissolved, then the President may appoint a. person who was a. Member of Parliament immediately before Parliament was dissolved. The office of the Vice President or a. Minister or a. Junior Minister shall be vacant if any of the following contingencies occur: a. if the President removes the holder of the office by special written order bearing the Public Seal; or b. if the holder of the office shall cease to be a. Member of Parliament for any other reason except the dissolution of Parliament; or c. after the President has accepted the resignation of the holder of this office; or d. if it is the time when the President is taking office, then immediately before the President has assumed office. 16. (1) There shall be a. Council of Ministers of which the members shall be the Vice-President together with all the Ministers. (2) The Head of Government of Zanzibar shall also be a. member of the Council of Ministers by virtue of his office. (3) The President shall preside they shall be is absent, by this purpose. shall attend the meetings of the Cabinet and he over these meetings, or if he is absent, then presided over by the Vice-President, or if he the Minister appointed by the President for

-17-

(4) Without infringing the powers of the President, the Council of Ministers shall be the principal instrument for advising the President on all matters which are relevant to the exercise of his functions in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, and it shall advise the President concerning any matter whatsoever which shall be referred to it concerning special or general directives which shall be issued by the President. 17. The Vice-President, or a Minister or a Junior Minister shall not take office unless he has first taken an oath of allegiance, and also also any other oath concerning the performance of his duties in accordance with a Law enacted by Parliament. 18. There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet who shall be the principal executive in the Cabinet office and who shall carry out the following duties in accordance with the President's directives: a. to draw up a calendar of meetings of the Cabinet and to prepare an agenda for each meeting; b. to write the minutes of Cabinet meetings; c. to notify and explain the decisions of the Cabinet to every person and every organ of State concerned; d. to carry out any other duties which he shall be directed to do from time to time by the President. 19. (1) Every person appointed by the Chairman of the Party to be a Regional Secretary of the Party shall also be Head of that Region in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, and he shall hold office as Head of Region for as long as he shall be Regional Secretary of the Party. (2) Every Regional Head shall have powers in his Region to execute all the duties prescribed by law as the duties of the Head of Region. 20. Without prejudice to other provisions in this Constitution or any other law, the following responsbilities shall be vested in the President: a. the power to create or abolish any office in the service of the Government of the United Republic; b. the power to appoint persons to hold these offices, and also the power to promote these persons or to terminate their appointments, or to dismiss them, and disciplinary control over persons appointed to these offices. 21. (1) Without prejudice to other provisions in this section, the President may do any of the following things: a.. pardon any person who has been convicted of any criminal offense by the Courts, and he may confer this pardon with or without conditions, in accordance with the law; -18-

b. pardon unconditionally or for a. specified period any person who has been sentenced to be punished on account of any offence, so that this person's sentence is either wholly remitted or is suspended for a. specified period; c. substitute a. less severe punishment for any sentence which has been imposed on any person for any offence. d. quash any sentence or part of any sentence imposed on any person for any offence, or remit the whole or part of any sentence to forfeit or take possession of anything belonging to the convict which otherwise would be taken by the Government of the United Republic. (2) Parliament may legislate concerning the procedure which shall be followed by the President in the exercise of his duties in accordance with the provisions of this section. (3) The provisions of this section shall apply to persons convicted and sentenced in the Tanzania Islands, and to punishments imposed in the Tanzania Islands in accordance with the laws enacted by the Parliament of the United Republic which are in force in the Tanzania Islands, and likewise these provisions shall be applicable to persons convicted and sentenced in Mainland Tanzania and to punishments imposed in Mainland Tanzania in accordance with the law. PART 2 The Parliament of the United Republic Parliament 22. (1) There shall be a. Parliament of the United Republic. The legislature shall consist of two parts: the first component shall be Members of Parliament of all kinds as specified in this Constitution, who shall be known as Members of Parliament; the other component shall be the President in the execution his functions in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (2) When, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution or any other law, any matter requires to be decided or carried out by both sections of Parliament, then this matter shall not be deemed to have been decided or to have been carried out unless and until it has been decided and carried out by the Members of Parliament as well as the President in accordance with their respective powers concerning this matter. (3) Members of Parliament shall be those who are described in the following sections. 23. (1) Without prejudice to any other provisions which are in this section, Parliament shall consist of the following members:

-19-

a.

the Vice-President of the United Republic, who shall be a Member of Parliament by virtue of his office: Except that whenever a Member of Parliament of any other category described in this section shall be appointed Vice-President, in accordance with the provisions of section 12(1) of this Constitution, then this Member's seat shall be deemed to be vacant, and in these circumstances an election will he held in order to fill the vacancy, or if he was a nominated Member of Parliament, then the President may nominate another person.

b. one hundred and six Members of Parliament who are representing the Constituencies; c. fifteen National Members of Parliament who have been elected by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of section 29 of this Constitution; d. twenty five National Members of Parliament elected by Parliament in accordance with section 30 of this Constitution; e. all the Regional Heads of Tanzania who shall be ex-officio Members of Parliament; f. not more than 32 Members of Parliament elected by the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council from among the members of that Council, and from outside the Council; g. not more than twenty Members of Parliament who have been nominated by the President from the Tanzania Islands; h. not more than ten Members of Parliament nominated by the President. (2) The President shall not be a Member of Parliament. (3) Parliament may legislate in respect of the following matters: a. to alter the number of Members of Parliament who represent the constituencies, so that the new number of MPs shall coincide with the new number of constiuencies; b. whenever the number of Tanzania Regions is changed, then Parliament may increase or reduce, as it shall be, the number of National Members of Parliament who shall be chosen by Parliament in accordance with section 30 of this Constitution, and this law shall have the effect of altering the provisions of this section notwithstanding that a Bill has not received the support which has been prescribed in section 52 of this Constitution.

-20-

(4) Whenever a. Head of Region shall be elected to be a. Member of Parliament to represent a. constituency, or whenever a. Member of Parliament who represents a. Constituency has been appointed to be a. Head of Region, Parliament shall be deemed to have the number of Members required, and its business shall be lawful even though the normal total number of Members, in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall have been reduced arising from this election of the Head of Region to be a. Member of Parliament who represents a. constituency. 4. (1) Tanzania shall be divided into electoral constituencies the number of which must be the same as the number of Members of Parliament representing the electoral constituencies, and every constituency shall elect one Member of Parliament. (2) The Electoral Commission shall delineate the constituency boundaries, in accordance with the Act, after receiving the approval of the National Executive Committee of the Party. (3) The Electoral Commission shall from time to time enquire into the division of Tanzania into constituencies bearing in mind the decisions reached by the National Executive Committee of the Party concerning the question of the boundaries of the constituencies, and after receiving the agreement of this Committee, the Commission shall change the number of constituencies whenever considered necessary. (4) Parliament shall alter the number of who represent the constituencies, in provisions of section 23(3), so that in this category shall equal the new Members of Parliament accordance with the the new number of MPs number of constituencies.

(5) Changes in the number of MPs who represent the Constituencies, which shall be made by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4), shall begin to come into force at the same time when the changes in the number of constituencies, which were made by the Electoral Commission in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), shall begin to be implemented; and the alteration to the number of constituencies shall begin to have effect at the time when Parliament shall have been dissolved, and also after these changes in the number of constituencies have been approved by the National Executive Committee of the Party. 25. (1) Every time after Parliament has been dissolved, there shall be an election of Members of Parliament in every constituency. (2) Likewise, there shall be an election of an MP in a. constituency if the seat of the Member who was elected to represent this constituency has become vacant for any reason whatsoever except the dissolution of Parliament. Provided that if the date of the dissolution of Parliament has been announced or if it is known that events described in subsections (3) or (4) of section 42 have occurred, then an election of this seat shall not be held within a. period of the preceding six months calculated from this date.

-21-

26. (1) In order to be able to be elected a. Member of Parliament to represent a. Constituency a. person must have the following qualifications; a.. he should be a. citizen of Tanzania who has reached the age of 21 years; b. he should be a. Member of the Party who abides by the rules of membership which are set out in the Constitution of the party, and also should have the following qualifications of leadership: i. ii. he should be a. person who is self-sufficient, and not a. person who is governed by greed; he should be a. person who wants to add to the fruits of Independence for the benefit of all the people and for the progress of the whole nation; and

c. he is a. person who is not prevented from contesting an election on account of the following provisions of this section or on account of laws enacted by Parliament of the kind described in this section. (2) A person shall not be able to be elected to be a. Member of Parliament to represent a. constituency when he is affected by any among the following matters: a. if this person is a. citizan of any other country; b. if in accordance with the laws in force in Tanzania it is officially certified that this person is of unsound mind; c. if: i. this person has been convicted by any Court within Tanzania and given a. sentence or death, or imprisonment for a. period exceeding six months; or this person has been detained, in accordance with an order issued under the terms of the Preventive Detention Act, 1962, and he has been detained in accordance with this order for a. period exceeding six months; or This person has been compulsorial and lawfully deported under an order issued under the provisions of section 2 of the Deportation Act and when he has been living at the place to which he was deported for a. period exceeding six months and up to this time this order has not yet been cancelled;

ii.

iii.

-22-

d. if this person has any interest in any form of Government contract in which is included a. specific prohibition according to a. law enacted by Parliament, and if he has violated this prohibition; e. if in accordance with a. law enacted by Parliament this person has been prevented from contesting an election because he held office in the service of the United Republic (excluding an office which the President may or is required to confer on a. Member of Parliament in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution) when the Act has expressly pronounced that it is forbidden for a. person holding this office to contest an election: With the exception that a. person, who if he had not been prevented by an Act of the kind mentioned would have had all the qualifications required for election as a. Member of Parliament representing a. Constituency, shall not be prevented from submitting his name, as has been laid down down, so that it may be considered by all the bodies which are concerned with first nominations, until it reaches the time for it to be considered by the National Executive Committee of the Party, in accordance with the provisions of section 27 of this Constitution; f. if in accordance with a. law enacted by Parliament which applies to electoral offences of any sort, this person is prohibited from registering himself as a. voter or from voting in an election for Members of Parliament; g. if this person, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, has a. share or any other interest of this kind in any company; h. if this person, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, is a. director in any capitalist or feudal enterprise; i. if this person, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, owns a. house (which is) let to tenants; j. if this person, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, receive two or more salaries; k. if this person, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, earns his living by employing other people; Except that this person shall not be deemed to be disqualified from being elected as a. Member of Parliament if: i. this person employs another person in order to work for a. period and the person who is employed is paid daily wages in accordance with the time spent on the work or for any special work he did; or this person employs another person by reason of his occupation, and when this employee is a. doctor, a. lawyer, an architect, an engineer, a. dentist, or is a. person who earns his living by doing any other sort of work which shall be named and published by -23-

ii.

the President in the Government Gazette, after the President has obtained the approval of Parliament, which shall be made clear by a. declaration of Parliament. (3) A person shall not be able to contest an election to be a. Member of Parliament representing a. constituency in any General Election if at that time he has stood as a. candidate for election as President, nor shall he be able to contest an election to be a. Member of Parliament in a. by-election if he is the President. (4) Parliament may enact a. law for the purpose of imposing conditions which shall prevent a. person from being elected to be a. Member of Parliament to represent a. constituency if this person holds an office which is concerned with the work of conducting an election of Members of Parliament, of the work of registering voters for an election of Members of Parliament. Except that such an Act cannot impose conditions which shall prevent the Speaker of Parliament from being elected a. Member of Parliament to represent a. constituency, nor conditions which shall cause a. person who has been elected to be Speaker to lose this chair of Speaker or his normal seat in Parliament. (5) Parliament may enact a. law for the purpose of imposing conditions which shall prevent a. person from being elected to be a. Member of Parliament to represent a. constituency, for any length of time which shall be declared by Parliament (provided that this period does not exceed five years), if this person shall be convicted before a. Court on account of any kind of offence which shall be declared in this Act which is concerned with the election of Members of Parliament. (6) For the purpose of giving time for lodging an appeal in accordance with the Act to any person who has been lawfully certified to be of unsound mind or who has been convicted and given a. sentence of death or imprisonment or who has been found guilty of any offence declared in the Act in accordance with sub-section (5) of this section, Parliament may enact a. law in order to make rules which shall make clear that this judgement which is appealed against by this person shall not be executed in accordance with the provisions of sub-sectiions (2) or (5) of this section until the elapse of a. period which shall be specified in this Act. (7) The following rules shall apply for the interpretation of sub-paragraph c. of sub-section (2) of this section, that is: a.. if a. person has been given two or more sentences or imprisonment and he has been ordered to serve the sentences consecutively, then these punishments shall be deemed to be separate sentences when each one of them does not exceed six months, but if any one of those sentences exceeds six months then all these sentences shall be counted as one sentence;

-24-

(8) In sub-paragraph d. of sub-section (2) of this section, the meaning of "Government contract" is any contractual agreement in which one of the parties is the Government of the United Republic or any Government Department or any Government Officer who has participated on behalf of the Government. (9) In order to interpret sub-paragraph g. of sub-section (2) of this section, the word "SHARE" has the usual meaning of this word and shall also include a. Security Bond or any sort of receipt for money paid into a. deposit or which has been lent and also profits or possessions of any other sort whatsoever. (10) The following rules shall apply for the interpretation of sub-paragraphs g. and i. of sub-section (2) of this section, that is: a.. a. person shall not be deemed to have shares in a. company or to have a. house let for rent or to have any other profits in any company or any building if the property or profit which he has got from possession which have been held in trust on his behalf or he got in accordance with the terms of WAKF * (deceased estate held in trust for the benefit of the mosque under Muslim law), and if: i. he himself was not among those persons who made the arrangements to hand over the property to trustees, nor to put it in WAKF; and he did not have shares in the company concerned nor did he have the right to possess the house concerned during any period of the preceding five years if it is calculated from the time of holding the property in trust or the time of putting it in WAKF;

ii.

b. a. person shall not be deemed to have shares in a. company or to have a. house let for a. consideration if the property or dividends which he had concern any company or any building he has acquired by way of inheritance or in accordance with the Act, and in this event this person shall not be deemed to have lost his qualifications to be elected as a. Member of Parliament provided he complies with the following conditions:
i.

if the property or the dividends (profits) which he had was acquired within a. period of the preceding three momths calculated from the appointed day for first nominations, then this person should send to the Electoral Commission a. formal declaration on the prescribed form which shall be used for this purpose in accordance with the law enacted by Parliament that he will divest himself of this property or these profits before the expiration of three months from this day of first nomination;

* Note The words in brackets are the translator's comments, and are not in the text.
-25-

ii. if the property of the profits which he possesses has acquired after the day appointed for first nominations but before this person, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, has taken his office as a. Member of Parliament, then this person should send to the Electoral Commission a. formal declaration on the prescribed form which shall be used for this purpose in accordance with the law enacted by Parliament that he will divest himself of the property or these profits before the expiration of three months from the day on which this person, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, shall take his office as a. Member of Parliament.

(11) The following rules shall be applied for the interpretation of sub-paragraph j. of sub-section (2), that is: a.. the meaning of "SALARY" is: i. Payments which are made to a. person as his wages on account of the work he does as a. Member of Parliament, but does not include any allowances he is paid as an MP; receipts which come from his occupation as a. peasant or a. worker; wages which a. person is paid in accordance with an agreement in a. contract of service; wealth which a. person acquires from trustees who are holding property on his behalf in accordance with a. trust or WAKF;

ii. iii. iv.

b. if a. person is receiving two or more salaries, then he shall be deemed to be receiving only one salary if the total amount of all the money he receive does not exceed the amount of salary he is being paid as a. Member of Parliament; c. any person who is receiving a. salary shall not lose his qualifications to contest an election to be a. Member of Parliament to represent a. constituency only because if he is elected he will continue to receive his salary as a. Member of Parliament; but this person shall be compelled, before taking his office as an MP, to send to the Speaker a. formal declaration on the prescribed form which shall be used for this purpose in accordance with the law enacted by Parliament, that: i. he will stop receiving one out of these two salaries; Or

-26-

ii.

he will receive only part of the, salary which he is entitled to be paid as a. Member of Parliament so that this part if it is added to that other salary of his, the total amount of money shall not exceed the amount of salary which he is paid as a. Member of Parliament; and a.trusehipoWAKFfrmtwo esurc,thn the total amount of this income shall be counted as one salary.

iii. when a. person is acquiring income in ac ordance with

(12) Although in sub-paragraph a.. of sub-section (11) of this section there are provisions in respect of salary, the President may, after obtaining the approval of Parliament which shall be confirmed by a. resolution of Parliament, give notice in the Government Gazette to the effect that emoluments of any sort named in this notice shall not be counted as salary for the purpose of the interpretation of sub-paragraph j. of sub-section (2) of this section. (13) For the interpretation of the explanations concerning the qualifications for election which are included in the following sections, everything which shall be declared in this Constitution to the effect that the performance of any function requires a. person possessing the electoral qualifications or a. person who has not lost his electoral qualifications, then, even if information is needed or not, it should be understood that those qualifications which apply are those which enable a. person to be elected as a. Member of Parliament to represent a. constituency, as explained in sub-section (1) of this section. 27. (1) Members who represent constituencies shall be elected by the people in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and also the provisions of the law enacted by Parliament in accordance with this Constitution which imposes conditions concerning the election of Members of Parliament who represent constituencies. (2) Candidates for election in the constituencies shall be required to conform with the following conditions: a. they should be nominated in the primary nomination, that is each one of them should be supported by not less than twenty five persons who at this time should be registered voters in this constituency for the purpose of an election which is being held by the people; and b. after this primary nomination, they should have been approved by the National Executive Committee or the Party, or if the candidates exceed two, then they should have been nominated by the National Executive Committee of the Party, in accordance with the following provisions in this section.

-27-

(3) When only one candidate has been nominated in the primary nomination in a. Constituency, or only two candidates have been nominated, then the. National Executive Committee of the Party shall approve this one candidate, or it shall approve both those two candidates, for the purposes of this section, unless the National Executive Committee shall be satisfied that the electoral procedure which was used up to the time when the names of the candidates were sent to the Committee did not exactly conform with the provisions of the Elections Act or the provisions of the Party Rules which correspond to this Act. (4) When in a. constituency more than two candidates are nominated in a. primary nomination, then in this event the procedure shall be as follows: a. the Annual General Meeting of the District Party shall be convened in this constituency, and every member who has attended this Meeting may vote secretly to choose one of those electoral condidates who were nominated in the primary nominations; and b. the Supervisor of the Elections of this constituency shall send to the National Executive Committee of the Party the names of the candidates who were nominated in the primary nomination together with an official certificate which shall state the number of votes which each candidate got at the Annual General Meeting of the District Party, and the members of the National Executive Committee shall nominate two candidates only from among all those whose names were submitted to this Committee to be the approved candidates in this constituency, unless this Committee shall be satisfied that the electoral procedure which was used up to the time when the names of the candidates were submitted to this Committee did not correctly conform with the provisions of the Elections Act or the provisions of the Party Rules which correspond to this Act, and, unless the election shall be cancelled and held again in accordance with the Elections Act, those two persons who were nominated by the National Executive Committee in the manner explained above shall be the candidates in this constituency; there shall not be any other person who shall contest the seat in this election. (5) The following rules shall be observed by the National Executive Committee of the Party when exercising its powers in accordance with the provisions of this section, that is:a. when two or more persons have been nominated to contest an election in a. constituency, then the National Executive Committee cannot approve or nominate only one candidate in respect of this constituency; b. at the time of nominating candidates, the National Executive Committee shall not be compelled to follow the decision of the Annual General Meeting of the District as shall have been evidenced by the votes which have been cast by the delegates of that Meeting. -28-

28.

If any person holding office in the service of the Government, the kind of office described in section 26(2)e. of this Constitution, shall be accepted or nominated by the National Executive Committee to be a. candidate in accordance with the provisions of section 27 of this Constitution, then this person, after being accepted or nominated by the Executive Committee, shall be deemed to have been given leave without pay and this leave shall end either when he shall be defeated in the election or when he shall cease to be a. Member of Parliament. Other Members of Parliament

29. (1) For the purpose of electing National Members of the kind described in section 23(1)c of this Constitution, the following institutions, in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall recommend the names of persons who shall be elected to Parleament in accordance with the provisions of this section, and these are:a.. those institutions which are under the leadership of the Party, that is:i. ii. The Youth League; The Union of Tanzanian Women;

iii. The Tanzania Union of Workers; iv. v. The Union of Co-operative Workers; The Parents' Association.

b. any other institution which shall be declared and announced by the National Executive Committee of the Party in accordance with this section. (2) Every institution shall recommend the names of persons who shall be elected to be National Members of Parliament in accordance with the following Rules:a. if the election shall be held after the dissolution of Parliament, then each institution may recommend the names of not more than five persons; b. if the election shall be held in order to fill a. vacancy among the seats of those Members of Parleament who were elected in accordance with this section or to fill a. vacancy which has not had a. Member of Parliament from the beginning, then every institution may recommend the name of one person. Except that a. person shall not be able to be recommended for election in accordance with the provisions of this section except and until he has the electoral qualifications in accordance with the provisions of section 26 of this Constitution.

-29-

(3) The names of the persons who have been recommended in accordance with this section shall be sent to the National Executive Committee of the Party and the names of the persons who shall be accepted by this Committee shall be sent to Parliament for the purpose of election. (4) From these names of persons who have been recommended by the institutions and approved by the National Executive Committee of the Party, Parliament shall elect National Members of Parliament to the number required to fill the vacancies among Members of Parliament who have been elected in accordance with the provisions of this section. (5) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section, Parliament may enact laws stipulating the procedure which shall be followed by the institutions when recommending the names of candidates for election and the procedure to be followed by the National Executive Committee of the Party in order to consider and accept the names of persons recommended by the institutions. In Parliament the election of National Members of Parliament shall be done in accordance with the procedure which has been established under Standing Orders (Rules) of Parliament. 30. (1) For the purpose of the election of National Members of Parliament of the kind which has been described in section 23 (1) of this Constitution, the names of persons who shall be recommended in accordance with the provisions of this section and in accordance with the following procedure: a. the names of persons in the regions of Mainland Tanzania shall be recommended by the Regional Development Committees; b. the names of persons from the regions of the Tanzania Islands shall be recommended by the Regional Revolutionary Committees. Every committee which has been named in sub-paragraphs a.. and b. of this sub-section, shall in this section be abbreviated as "Regional Committee", and thus the following sub-sections should be understood in accordance with this interpretation. (2) Every Regional Committee shall recommend the names of persons who shall be elected to be National Members of Parliament in accordance with the following Rules:a. if the election shall be held after the dissolution of Parliament, then every Regional Committee can recommend the names of not more than five persons; b. If the election shall be held in order to fill a. vacancy which has occurred in the number of seats of Members of Parliament who have been elected in accordance with the provisions of this section or to fill a. vacancy which has not had a. Member of Parliament since the beginning, then the Regional Committee concerned with this vacancy shall recommend the names of persons not exceeding five: -30-

Except that a. person cannot be recommended for election in accordance with the provisions of this section unless and until he has the qualifications for election in accordance with the provisions of section 26 of this Constitution. (3) The names of persons who have been recommended in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be sent to the National Executive Committee of the Party, and the names of persons who shall be approved by this Committee shall be sent to Parliament for election. These provisions shall be observed in conjunction with the following provisions: a. without prejudice to the provisions of subparagraph b., from among the names of persons who have been recommended by the Regional Committee, the National Executive Committee shall send to Parliament the names of not less than two persons who have been approved by this Committee; b. if, from among the names of persons recommended by the Regional Committee, the National Executive Committee shall not approve anyone or if it shall approve of only one persons, then this Committee shall instruct the Regional Committee concerned that is should recommend the names of three other persons, and whenever such an order shall be issued, then the method and procedure described in this sub-section shall be reverted to. (4) From among these names of persons who have been recommended by the Regional Committee and approved by the National Executive Committee of the Party, Parliament shall elect a. National Member of Parliament for that Region whose Committee has recommended the name of this person. (5) The election of National Members of Parliament shall be performed by Parliament in accordance with the established procedure and with the Rules of Parliament but without prejudice to the provisions of this section. 31. A person shall not be able to be elected by the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council to be a. Member of Parliament in accordance with the provisions of section 23 (1) f. of this Constitution unless and until he has the electoral qualifications in accordancd with section 26 of this Constitution. (1) The President may nominate as Members of Parliament, in accordance with the provisions of section 23 (1) g. of this Constitution, not more than twenty persons who shall comply with the following conditions: a. each one of them should have the electoral qualifications in accordance with the provisions of section 26 of this Constitution; b. at the time of his nomination each one of them should be a.residntofhTaziIslndorwha.esidnt of the Tanzania Islands on April 6, 1964.

-31-

(2) In the exercise of his functions of nominating a. Member of Parliament, or of cancelling the nomination of a. Member of Parliament, in accordance with the provisions of this section, the President shall be required to consult first with the Chairman of the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council and with the President of Zanzibar. 33. (1) The President may nominate to be Members of Parliament, in accordance with the provisions of section 23 (1) h. of this Constitution, not more than ten persons who shall comply with the conditions which are described in sub-section (2) of this section. (2) A person shall be ineligible to be nominated by the President to be a. Member of Parliament in accordance with the provisions of this section unless and until he has the electoral qualifications in accordance with the provisions of section 26 of this Constitution, with the exception of these conditions which are described in sub-paragraph d. of sub-section (2) of this section 26. Other Provisions Relating to Members of Parliament 34. Every Member of Parliament shall be required to be sworn, before Parliament, an oath of allegiance before starting to participate in the business of Parliament; but a. Member of Parliament may participate in the election of a. Speaker before he has been sworn-in.

35. (1) Every Member of Parliament whom the provisions of this section concern and who on November 6, 1975 had been elected or nominated a. Member of Parliament, or who had been elected or nominated to be a. Member of Parliament after November 6, 1975, shall be required, before the expiration of fifteen days from the assumption of his Parliamentary duties as a. Member of Parliament, to send to the Speaker two copies of a. formal declaration that he has not yet lost his electoral qualifications in accordance with the provisions of subparagraphs g., h., i., j.or k. of sub-section (2) of section 26 of this Constitution. (2) The formal declaration which is required to be submitted to the Speaker in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be presented by using a. special form which shall be specified by Act of Parliament. (3) The terms of this section shall be applied to every Member of Parliament, except the Head of a. Region. (4) The Speaker shall send to the Chairman of the Commission for the Leadership Code one copy of every formal declaration which has went to him in accordance with the provisions of this section. (5) In this section and sections 36 and 39 the meaning of "The Commissioner for the Leadership Code" is that Commission which is referred to in section 78 of this Constitution.

-32-

36. (1) Every Member of Parliament who is affected by the terms of this section shall be required to send to the Speaker two copies of a. formal report describing his property and, as it shall be, the property of his wife or her husband. This report shall be presented by using a. special form which shall be specified by Act of Parliament and shall be presented from time to time as shall be required by this Act. (2) The terms of this section shall apply to every Member of Parliament, except the Head of a. Region. (3) The Speaker shall send to the Chairman of the Commission for the Leadership Code one copy of every formal report which has been sent to him in accordance with the provisions of this section. (4) Parliament may enact a. law to make provision for preserving the secrecy of every report of property which has been submitted by a. Member of Parliament in accordance with the provisions of this section, and these provisions may make clear the following matters: a. that a. declar tion of property may only be disclosed if it is needed as evidence before the High Court at a. time when it is hearing a. case which has been opened in the High Court in accordance with the provisions of section 38 of this Constitution; b. that if a. declaration of property has not yet been disclosed as evidence before the High Court, the only persons who can see this declaration or know what is in this declaration are the President, the Speaker, the Attorney-General, the Chairman of the Commission for the Leadership Code, the Members of the Commission for the Leadership Code, the Officials of the Commission for the Leadership Code and other persons who have been authorized in accordance with this Act; c. any other matters whatsoever which shall ensure that unauthorized persons do not get the opportunity to see a. declaration of property or to know what is in a. declaration of property. 37. (1) A Member of Parliament shall cease to be a. Member of Parliament and shall vacate his seat in Parliament when any of the following events occur: a.. if anything happens which, if he had not been a. Member of Parliament, would have caused him not to have electoral qualifications and to lose his electoral qualifications or to be unable to be elected or nominated in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution: With the exception that: 1. if a. Member of Parliament, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, has acquired property or assets of any other kind which come from a. right to possess shares in a. company or a. right to own a. house and if -33-

this property or these assets were obtained by him by inheritance or in accordance with the law, then this Member of Parliament shall not cease to be a. Member of Parliament nor shall he vacate his seat in Parliament because of the provisions of subparagraph g. or i. of sub-section (2) of section 26 of this Constitution if this Member of Parliament, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, shall take steps to divest himself of this property or these assets before the expiration of three months, from the date of acquiring this property or these assets; ii. a. person who has been nominated as a. Member of Parliament in accordance with the provisions of section 32 of this Constitution, shall not cease to be a. Member of Parliament nor shall he vacate his seat in Parliament only because after the date of his nomination he bacame a. non-resident of the Tanzania Islands; b. if this Member of Parliament shall be elected President; c. a. Member of Parliament who is not a. Head of Region, if he shall fail to attend three consecutive sittings of Parliament without the Speaker's permission; d. a. Member of Parliament nominated by the President, if his nomination shall be cancelled by the President in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution; e. whenever a. Member of Parliament or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, has issued a. formal declaration in accordance with the provisions of sub-paragraph b. of sub-section (10) or sub-paragraph c of sub-section (11) of section 26 of this Constitution, then if this Member of Parliament, or as it shall be, his wife or her husband, shall fail to fulfill what is in that declaration; f. a. Member of Parliament who is required to issue a. formal declaration concerning the obligations of leadership in accordance with the provisions of section 35 of this Constitution, if any of the following things occur: i. if he shall fail to issue this formal declaration in accordance with the provisions of this section 35 within the period stipulated for this purpose; or if he shall be convicted of perjury contrary to section 107 of the Penal Code, in connection with this formal declaration;

ii.

g. for a. Member of Parliament who is required to issue a. formal report of property in accordance with the provisions of section 36 of this Constitution, if he shall fail to issue this formal declaration within the period stipulated by an Act of Parliament.

-34-

But whenever a Member of Parliament shall not cease to be aMembrofPliant coufanythesmr which have been declared and if he shall not resign or die prematurely, then the Member of Parliament shall continue to hold his office as a Member of Parliament until the dissolution of Parliament. (2) Parliament may enact a law in order to make provisions which shall enable a Member of Parliament to appeal, in accordance with the law, against a judgement certifying him to be a. person of unsound mind, or against a sentence of death or imprisonment, or against conviction for an offense of any kind described in accordance with the provisions of subsection (5) of section 26 of this Constitution, or the offense of perjury, contrary to section 107 of the Penal Code, in connection with the formal declaration which was issued in accordance with the provisions of section 35 of this Constitution; and this Act may declare that this judgement which has been appealed against by this Member of Parliament shall not lawfully be executed until after the expiry of a period of time which shall be specified in this Act. 38. (1) The High Court of the United Republic is the sole authority to hear and decide questions concerning the following matters: a. if the election or the nomination of any person to be a. Member of Parliament has been lawful or not; or b. if the Member of Parliament has ceased to be a. Member of Parliament and whether his seat is vacant or not: With the exception that when the Electoral Commission, in the course of carrying out its duties in accordance with the provisions of section 6(4) of this Constitution, has announced that any Member of Parliament has been elected to be President, then the High Court shall not investigate further any question concerning the vacancy of this Member of Parliament's seat. (2) Parliament may enact laws in order to make provisions concerning the following matters: a. persons who can file a case in the High Court in order to get a ruling with regard to any question in accordance with the provisions of this section; b. the reasons and the time limit for filing a case of this kind, the procedure for filing a case, and the rules which must be observed for every case of this sort; and c. to declare the jurisdiction of the High Court concerning any case of this kind, and to describe the procedure for hearing the case itself. (3) The decision of the High Court in any case which has been heard in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be final; there shall be no right of appeal anywhere against this decision. -35-

The Speaker & The Deputy Speaker of Parliament 39. (1) There shall be a. Speaker of Parliament who shall be elected by the Members of Parliament from among those who are Members of Parliament of those having electoral qualifications. (2) A Minister, a. Junior Minister or a. person having any other sort of authority which shall be declared by a. law enacted by Parliament for the purpose of this section, shall be unable to be elected Speaker. (3) A person who shall have held the office of Speaker on November 6, 1975 shall be required before the expiry of fifteen days from that date of November 6, 1975 to send to the President two copies of a. formal declaration that he has not yet lost his electoral qualifications in accordance with the provisions of sub-paragraphs g., h., i., j. or k. of sub-section (2) of section 26 of this Constitution. This declaration shall be issued by using the special form which shall be designated in accordance with an Act of Parliament. (4) Any person who shall be elected Speaker on 6 November 1975 or any other day after that date, shall be required, before the expiry of fifteen days after his election, to send to the President a. formal declaration that he has not yet lost his electoral qualifications in accordance with the provision of sub-paragraphs g., h., i., j. or k. of sub-section (2) of section 26 of this Constitution. This declaration shall be issued by using the special form which shall be designated in accordance with an Act of Parliament. (5) The President shall send to the Chairman of the Commission for the Leadership Code one copy of every formal declaration which has been sent to him in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of this section. (6) The Speaker shall be required to send to the President two copies of a. formal notice describing the property of this Speaker, or as it shall be, the property of his wife or her husband. The Speaker shall issue this notice by using the special form designated for this purpose in accordance with an Act of Parliament and he shall issue such notice from time to time as shall be ordered by this Act. (7) The terms of sub-section (4) of section 36 shall be applied also, so far as it shall be possible, to any declaration of property which shall be issued by the Speaker in accordance with the provisions of this section. (8) The Speaker shall cease to be Speaker and shall relinquish his post, if any of the following things happen: a.. when this person has been elected from among Members of Parliament, then if he shall cease to be a. Member of Parliament for any other reason than the dissolution of Parliament; or

-36--

b. if anything should occur which, if he were not Speaker, would result in this person not having electoral qualifications or to lose the electoral qualifications of the Speaker; or c. when Parliament shall convene for the first time after a. General Election has been held after the dissolution of Parliament, but the terms of this paragraph shall be applied without prejudice to the terms of sub-section (5) of section 42 of this Constitution; or d. if this person shall be removed from the office of Speaker by a. resolution of Parliament which has been approved by Members of Parliament whose number shall be not less than two-thirds of all the Members of Parliament; or e. if this person shall fail to send to the President a. formal declaration in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of this section; or f. if this person shall be convicted of the offense of perjury, contrary to section 107 of the Penal Code, concerning any formal declaration which has been issued in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (3) or (4) of this section; or g. if this person shall fail to send to the President a. notice of property in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (6) of this section before the expiry of the time specified for this purpose in accordance with an Act of Parliament. (9) No business whatsoever shall be executed by Parliament (except the election of a. Speaker) at any time when the office of Speaker shall be vacant. (10) Any person who is not a. Member of Parliament, who shall be elected to be Speaker, shall be required, before assuming is duties, to take an oath of allegiance before Parliament. 40. (1) There shall be a. Deputy Speaker of Parliament who shall be elected by the Members of Parliament from among the Members of Parliament. (2) A Minister, a. Junior Minister or a. person holding any other sort of office which shall be declared by Act of Parliament for the purpose of this section, shall be unable to be elected as Deputy Speaker. (3) Members of Parliament shall elect a. Deputy Sepaker at the following times: a.. when Parliament shall convene for the first time after a. General Election has been held after the dissolution of Parliament, or as soon as possible after this time; and

-37-

b. during the first sitting of Parliament after the office of Deputy Speaker has become vacant for any reason other than the dissolution of Parliament, or as soon as possible after this sitting. (4) The Deputy Speaker shall cease to be Speaker and shall relinquish his office as Deputy Speaker when any of the following matters shall arise: a. if this person shall cease to be a. Member of Parliament; Or b. if anything shall happen which, if he were not Deputy Speaker, would cause this person not be possess electoral qualifications or to lose the electoral qualifications of the Deputy Speaker; or c. if this person shall be removed from the office of Deputy Speaker by a. resolution of Parliament. 41. In the election of Speaker or Deputy Speaker, the votes of Members of Parliament shall be secret.
Meetings of Parliament & The Procedure of Meetings

42. (1) After a. General Election which has been held after the dissolution of Parliament, the President shall convene a. Meeting of the new Parliament to be held within seven days from the announcement of the results of this General Election in all the constituencies except those constituencies in which the elections have been annulled and are to be held again. (2) The President may dissolve Parliament at any time. (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (4) of this section, if Parliament has not been dissolved earlier, the life of Parliament shall continue for a. period of five years from that date when its first meeting was convened after a. General Election, and when this period of five years is completed Parliament shall be deemed to be dissolved. (4) At any time when the United Republic is at war, Parliament may from time to time extend this period of five years declared in sub-section (3) of this section for a. period not exceeding twelve months at a. time, but the life of Parliament cannot be extended in accordance with the provisions of this sub-section for a. period exceeding five years. (5) If an emergency arises or if there is a. dangerous situation which the President considers would justify convening a. Meeting of Parliament, and if at that time Parliament has been dissolved and the outcome of the majority of votes in a. General Election which has been held after the dissolution of Parliament has not yet been announced, then the President may issue a. Special Notice to convene a. Meeting of Parliament and order that the Speaker and all persons who were Members of Parliament at the time of the dissolution of Parliament should assemble at this Meeting of -38-

Parliament, and those persons together with the Speaker shall be deemed to be valid Members of Parliament for the purpose of this Meeting and shall be deemed to be such, until midnight of the day on which the results of the voting in the General Election shall be announced. 43. (1) Parliament shall hold its Meetings at the place which is customary to hold such meetings or any other place in the United Republic which shall be declared by the President for this purpose. (2) The first session of Parliament in the life of a. Parliament shall begin on that day on which the new Parliament has been convened, and every meeting thereafter shall begin on any day which shall be appointed by Parliament itself or any day which shall be appointed by the Standing Orders of Parliament. (3) The President may convene a. meeting of Parliament at any time. 44. Every sitting of Parliament shall be presided over by any one among the following persons, that is: a. the Speaker; or b. if the Speaker is absent, the Deputy Speaker; or c. if the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are both absent, any Member of Parliament who has been elected by Parliament for this purpose, but a. Minister, a. Junior Minister, or any person holding any other office which has been specified by Act of Parliament for the purpose of this section, shall be unable to be elected in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph, 45. At every sitting of Parliament a. quorum is half the total number of all Members of Parliament.

46. (1) Unless otherwise stated in this Constitution, every question which shall arise needing a. decision of Parliament shall be decided by a. majority of the votes of those Members of Parliament who have attended and voted. (2) The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker or any other person who shall preside over a. sitting of Parliament shall normally not have a. vote but he shall have a. casting vote if it happens that the voting is equal. (3) The Standing Orders of Parliament may make provision that any Member of Parliament who shall vote on any matter in which he himself has a. vested interest shall be considered not to have voted.

-39-

47. (1) There shall be Permanent Committees of Parliament as follows: a. b. c. d. e. f. a. Committee of Finance & Economics; a. Committee of Political Affairs; a. Public Accounts Committee; a. Social Services Committee; a. Parliamentary Standing Orders Committee; and a. Miscellaneous Affairs Committee.

(2) Parliament may establish other Committees of any kind as it shall consider desirable. (3) The Standing Orders of Parliament may define the procedure for establishing Parliamentary Committees and describe the work of every Committee established in accordance with the provisions of this section. 48. The President may at any time address Parliament or send to Parliament a. Notice which shall be read by a. Minister.

49. (1) Parliament may execute its business during its sittings notwithstanding that there is a. vacancy among the seats of Members of Parliament (that is, this seat has been vacant from the time when Parliament assembled for the first time after a. General Election which was held after the dissolution of Parliament, or it became vacant after this first Meeting) and when during this business any person shall participate who has no right to participate of if during this business there shall be any person who has no right to be present, then the participation of this person or his presence shall not have invalidated this business. (2) Parliament may, but without prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution, establish Rules of procedure for executing its functions. Powers of Legislation 50. All authority to enact laws in the United Republic concerning all Union matters shall be vested in Parliament.

51. (1) Without prejudice to any other provisions in this Constitution, Parliament shall exercise its authority to enact laws by following the procedure of discussing and passing Bills which ultimately must receive the President's assent, and a. Bill shall not become an Act until it has been passed by Parliament and assented to by the President in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2) After a. Bill has been sent to the President in order to obtain his consent, the President may either accept it or refuse to accept it and if the President shall refuse to accept a. Bill, then he shall return it to Parliament with his explanations and reasons for refusing to accept this

Bill.

-40-

(3) After a. Bill has been returned to Parliament in accordance with the provisions of this section, it cannot be sent to the President again in order to obtain his assent before the expiry of a. period of six months from the date when it was sent back, unless during its final stages in Parliament before being sent to the President again this Bill has been passed by Members of Parliament whose number is not less "than two thirds of all Members of Parliament. (4) If a. Bill has been sent back to Parliament by the President, and afterwards it has been passed in Parliament by Members of Parliament whose number is not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament as has been explained in subsection (3) and it is sent to the President for his assent for the second time before the expiry of six months from the date when it was sent back, then the President shall be required to assent to this Bill within a. period of twenty one days from the date when it was sent to him, and if he does not then he is obliged to dissolve Parliament. (5) The provisions which are in this section and in section 50 of this Constitution shall not prevent Parliament from enacting laws or making regulations which can delegate to any person or any government department the authority to make regulations with the force of law or to give the force of law to any regulations which have been made by any person or any department of Government. 52. (1) Parliament may enact laws in order to change any of the provisions of this Constitution by complying with the following Rules: a. the Bill of the Act to change any of the provisions of this Constitution (except those with which paragraph b. of this sub-section is concerned) or any of the provisions of any Act which is published in the First Schedule of the Appendix which is at the end of this Constitution, shall only be passed if it shall be approved by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the Members of Parliament; b. the Bill of an Act to change any of the provisions of the Constitution or any provisions of any Act concerned with any matter among those quoted in the Third Schedule of the Appendix which is at the end of this Constitution, shall only be passed if it shall be approved by the votes of Members of Parliament whose number is not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament from Mainland Tanzania and two-thirds of all Members of Parliament from the Tanzania Islands. (2) For the purpose of the interpretation of the provisions of sub-section (1), to amend the provisions of this Constitution or the provisions of an Act should be understood at the same time as meaning to reconstruct or correct these provisions or to delete them and put other provisions in their place or to amend or to give force to the usage of these provisions.

-41-

53. (1) Parliament shall not concern itself with any of those matters with which this section is concerned unless the President has resolved that this matter shall be dealt with by Parliament and this resolution should be sent to Parliament by a. Minister. (2) The matters which are affected by this section are as follows: a.. the Bill of an Act or any amendments to the Bill of and Act in respect of any matter among the following: i. ii. the levy of taxes, or the alteration of taxation in any other way except reduction; the estimates of expenditure of money which shall come from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury or any other Government funds, or the alteration of these estimates in any other way except reduction;

iii. directing that payments or the expenditure of money be made from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury or any other Government funds at a. time when it is known that the money which is in these funds has not been allocated for issue for these payments or expenditures, or to order that payments or expenditures which are made from these funds shall be increased; iv. cancelling or writing-off any debt which is required to be paid to the Government of the United Republic;

b. a. Motion or any amendments to a. Motion in respect of anything among those matters which have been described in sub-paragraph a.. of this sub-section. (3) The provisions of this section shall not be applied to any Bill which has been sent to Parliament or any Motion which has been presented to Parliament by a. Minister or a. Junior Minister. 54. (1) Parliament is the Committee of the National Conference of theParty, in accordance with section 59 (11) of the Party, Constitution, whose work is to support fully the execution of Party policy which is being done by Government and other organs of State. (2) As well as using other ways to execute its functions as has been described in this Constitution, Parliament shall carry out its work which has been described in sub-section (1) of this section in the following ways: a. to ask the Government every kind of question in Parliament; b. to question the performance of every Ministry at the time of the Annual Meeting of Parliament for the Estimates of Expenditure; and -42-

c. to enact laws where the exercise of its functions require there to be an Act.

Chapter 4 The Government of Zanzibar and the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council Part 1 The Government of Zanaibar and the President of Zanaibar 55. (1) There shall be a. Government of Zanzibar which shall have authority in Zanzibar over all matters which are not Union matters in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (2) Without prejudice to the intentions which are in this section and which follow in this Constitution, a. Government of Zanzibar shall be formed and it shall exercise its powers in accordance with the Law enacted and in force in Zanzibar which concerns the Government of Zanzibar and its powers. 56. (1) There shall be a. leader of the Government of Zanzibar who shall be the President of Zanzibar and the Head of the Government of Zanzibar and also the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council. (2) The Leader of the Government of Zanzibar shall hold and exercise his authority in accordance with the Law enacted and in force in Zanzibar concerning the powers of the Leader of the Government of Zanzibar and the exercise of these powers. (3) In addition to all his other powers, the Leader of the Government of Zanzibar shall himself nominate and delegate authority to Ministers and Junior Ministers of the Zanzibar Government. 57. (1) The Leader of the Government of Zanzibar shall be elected by the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council in,accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and in accordance with the procedure which shall be established in accordance with the Law which has been enacted, and which is in force concerning the election of the Leader of the Government of Zanzibar. (2) At the time appointed to elect the Leader of the Zanzibar Government, a. Special Committee of the Executive Committee, a. Special Committee of the Executive Committee of the Party which has been formed under section 63 (2) of the Party Constitution (in order to supervise the control all Government business in the Islands' division of Tanzania) shall convene and choose one person who is suitable to be the only person who shall stand for election as the Leader of the Zanzibar Government.

-43-

(3) The name of this person who has been recommended in the first nomination which was performed by the Special Committee in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), shall be sent to the National Executive Committee of the Party, which shall hold a. meeting in order to make the final nomination of the person who shall stand for election as Leader of the Zanzibar Government in accordance with the provisions of this section. (4) After the National Executive Committee has ratified the nomination of the person whose name has been sent to it, this Committee shall send the name of this person to the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council, and this Council shall hold an election either to accept or to reject the person who has been recommended to be the Leader of the Government of Zanzibar. (5) If the Revolutionary Council shall accept this person, then it shall announce that he has been elected as Leader of the Zanzibar Government, but if the Revolutionary Council shall reject him, then the electoral procedure which has been described in this section shall be repeated. Part 2 The Zanzibar Revolutionary Council 58. (1) There shall be a. Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar whose members shall be as follows: a. The Chairman of the Revolutionary Council; b. All the Ministers of the Zanzibar Government; c. Other Members who shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council in accordance with the Law enacted and in force in Zanzibar. (2) The Revolutionary Council possesses all the powers to enact Laws in Zanzibar and over all matters which are not Union matters in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Likewise, the Revolutionary Council has full responsibility of leadership and supervision over the Zanzibar Government and also complete authority over all Government business concerning all matters which are not Union matters. 59. (1) The Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar is a. Committee of the National Converence of the Party, in accordance with section 59 (12) of the Party Constitution, whose work is to supervise in full the execution of Party Policies which is being done by the Zanzibar Government. (2) The Revolutionary Council shall perform its duties which have been described in sub-section (1) of this section in exactly the same way which shall be used in the execution of its other duties as has been explained in section 58 of this Constitution. -44-

Chapter 5 The High Court of the United Republic, the Judicial Service Commission of Mainland Tanzania, the High Court of Zanzibar and the Special Constitutional Court of the United Republic. Part 1 The High Court of the United Republic 60. (1) There shall be a. High Court of the United Republic whose jurisdiction shall be as has been described in this Constitution or in any other Acts. (2) There shall be a. Chief Justice of the High Court and other Judges of the High Court whose number shall be not less than fifteen. (3) The office of (a.) Judge shall not be abolished while there is a. person holding that office. (4) The High Court is the Court superior to all others and unless a. Law shall be enacted by Parliament directing otherwise, the High Court shall have the power of dealing with all business which normally pertains to Courts having such status. 61. (1) The Chief Justice of Tanzania shall be appointed by the President. (2) Other Judges of the High Court of the United Republic shall be appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice. (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (5) a. person may only be appointed to be a. Judge of the High Court if he has the specified qualifications as have been clarified in sub-section (4) of this section and he must be a. person who has possessed one among these specified qualifications for a. period of not less than five years. (4) For the purpose of the interpretation of sub-sections (3), (5) and (7), the meaning of "specified qualifications" is those qualifications which have been specified in the Advocates Act (or any other Act which amends this Advocates Act of which has taken its place) which makes it obligatory for a. person to have one of these qualifications in order to enable (him) to be accepted for registration as an Advocate of Mainland Tanzania. (5) If the President shall be satisfied that although a. person holding one of these specified qualifications did not have this qualification for a. period of not less than five years, but this person has ability (and) knowledge and is suitable in every respect to be given the powers of a. Judge of the High Court and there are special (valid) reasons to make this person merit receiving these powers, then the President may waive that condition of having specified qualifications for a. period of not less than five years, and after -45-

consulting the Chief Justice in the usual way the President may appoint this person to be a. Judge of the High Court. (6) If it happens that the office of Chief Justice shall be vacant or that the Chief Justice shall be incapable of carrying out his duties for any reason, then these duties shall be performed by one of the Judges who shall be nominated by the President for this purpose, and this Judge shall execute these functions until another Chief Justice shall be appointed to exercise the powers of the office of Chief Justice or until the Chief Justice himself who had not been able to perform his duties shall return to work. (7) If it happens that the office of any Judge shall be vacant or if any Judge shall be appointed to be Acting Chie f Justice or if he is incapable of performing his functions, or if the Chief Justice shall advise the President that the work of the High Court at that time requires an Acting Judge to be appointed, then the President may appoint an Acting Judge from among those persons having the specified qualifications: With the exception that: a. a. person shall not be deemed to be disqualified from appointment in accordance with the terms of this subsection for the sole reason that he has reached the age which has been declared in sub-section (1) of section 62 of this Constitution;

b. for the purpose of the appointment of an Acting Judge in accordance with the provisions of this sub-section, the President may waive that condition of having the specified qualifications for a. period of not less than five years for reasons which have been declared in sub-section (5) of this section. (8) Any person who shall be appointed to be an Acting Judge in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (7) of this section, shall continue to perform his functions as Acting Judge for any length of time which shall be declared at the time of his appointment or, if no period of time was stated, until his appointment shall be cancelled by the President, but notwithstanding that his term of office has ended or that his appointment has been cancelled, this person may continue his work as Acting Judge until he finishes preparing and delivering judgement or until he completes any other business concerning cases which he has already started to hear before his term of office came to an end or before his appointment was cancelled. 62. (1) Every Judge of the High Court shall be compulsorily retired when he shall reach the age of fifty five years, but the provisions of this sub-section shall be applied without prejudice to the terms which follow in this section. (2) Any Judge of the High Court may resign from his work in the service of the Government of the United Republic at any time after reaching the age of forty five years unless the -46-

President shall direct that he shall not retire, and if the President so directs, the Judge who shall be affected by these Presidential directives shall not have the right to resign until the expiry of any period which shall be declared by the President for this purpose. (3) If the President considers that in the Public Interest it is expedient for a. Judge who has reached the age of fifty-five years to carry on with his work, and this Judge himself agrees in writing to carry on with his work, then the President may direct that this Judge continues in office for any length of time which shall be declared by the President. (4) Notwithstanding that a. Judge has reached the age of compulsory retirement in accordance with the provisions of this section, a. person who performs the functions of a. Judge of the High Court may carry on with his work after reaching this age until he has finished the preparation and delivery of judgement or until he finishes any other business concerning cases which he had already started to hear before he reached this age of retirement. (5) A Judge of the High Court may only be removed from the office of Judge because he is incapable of performing his duties (either as a. result of sickness or for any other reason) or because of mis-conduct, and he may not be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (7) of this section. (6) If the President considers that the question of removing a. Judge from office requires investigation, then in these circumstances the procedure shall be as follows: a. The President shall appoint a. Special Commission which shall consist of a. Chairman and not less than two other Members. The Chairman and not less than half of the other Members of this Commission must be persons who are Judges or persons who have been High Court Judges or Appeal Court Judges in any Commonwealth country. b. This Commission shall investigate the whole matter and shall afterwards advise the President if the Judge concerned should be removed from office in accordance with the provisions of this section because of his inability to perform his functions on account of sickness or for any other reason or because of mis-conduct. (7) If the Commission which was appointed in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (6) shall advise the President that the Judge whose reputation has been investigated by this Commission should be removed from office because of being incapable of performing his duties on account of illhealth or any other reason or because of mis-conduct, then the President shall remove the Judge concerned from office.

-47-

(8) If the question of removing a. Judge from office has been referred to the Commission for investigation in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (6) of this section, the President may suspend the Judge concerned from duty, and the President may at any time annul this decision to suspend this Judge from duty, and in any circumstances this decision shall be inaffective if the Commission advises the President that this Judge should not be removed from office. (9) The provisions of this section shall be applied without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (8) of section 61 of this Constitution. 63. A Judge of the High Court shall not take office unless and until he has first taken an oath of allegiance and also any other oath concerning the performance of his duties which shall be prescribed by Act of Parliament. Part 2 The Power to Appoint Magistrates and Other Judicial Officers of Mainland Tanzania and the Judicial Service Commission 64. (1) There shall be a. Service Commission for Magistrates and other Officers of the Courts of Mainland Tanzania. The Members of this Commission shall be as follows: a. The Chief Justice of Tanzania, who shall be the Chairman; b. One Judge of the High Court of the United Republic who shall be nominated for this purpose by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice; c. One member who shall be appointed by the President. (2) A person cannot be nominated to be a. member of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of paragraph c. of sub-section (1) of this section if this person is a. Member of Parliament or a. person holding office of any other kind which has been named for this reason by a. Law enacted by Parliament. 65. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of any Law enacted by Parliament which is concerned with the question of appointing Magistrates and other Judicial Officers the division of powers for the purpose of this question shall be as follows: a. the power to appoint persons to hold office of the kind named in sub-section (2) of this section (as well as the power to confirm these persons in their appointment and to promote them) shall be vested in the President; b. disciplinary control of these persons and the power to terminate their appointments shall be among the powers of the Service Commission which is mentioned in section 64 of this Constitution.

-48-

(2) The offices to which the provisions of this section apply are the office of the Registrar and the Deputy Registrar of the High Court of the United Republic, the office of Resident Magistrate and any other kind of Magistrate, and an office of any other kind which is concerned with any Court (except a. Military Court) as shall be named by a. Law enacted by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (3) The power of the President to abolish any office in the service of the Government of the United Republic shall not be exercised for the purpose of abolishing any of the officers named in sub-section (2) of this section at any time when there is a. person holding this office, unless the Service Commission agrees that this office should be abolished. Part 3 The High Court of Zanzibar 66. For the purpose of the interpretation of this Chapter of this Constitution, it should be understood that the provisions which are in this Chapter do not prevent the continuation or the establishment, in accordance with the Laws in force of Zanzibar, of the High Court of Zanzibar or of the Courts which are subordinate to the High Court of Zanzibar.

67. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 38 and 68 of this Constitution, the jurisdiction of the High Court of Zanzibar shall be as it shall be described by the laws in force in Zanzibar. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution or any other law enacted by Parliament, if any Law enacted by Parliament which is in force in Mainland Tanzania as well as the Tanzania Islands, has conferred any powers on the High Court, then the High Court of Zanzibar may exercise these powers in the same manner as they can be exercised by the High Court of the United Republic. Part 4 Interpretation of the Constitution and Appeals 68. (1) The provisions which are in this section and in section 69 of this Constitution shall not be concerned with the resolution of any question which shall be dealt with under provisions of section 72 of this Constitution. (2) If any Court in the country of Tanzania has delivered a. final decision regarding any question concerning the interpretation of this Constitution of if any Judge in the country of Tanzania has delivered a. similar decision, then there shall be a. right of appeal to contest this decision. This appeal shall be sent direct to a. Special Sitting of the High Court of the United Republic whose decision shall be final; there shall be no right of appeal elsewhere. -49-

(3) Parliament may enact Laws for the purpose of making provision concerning the following matters: a. the procedure for dealing with appeals which are going to the Special Sitting of the High Court in accordance with the provisions of this section; b. the procedure for sending to the Special Sitting of the High Court any question which concerns the interpretation of this Constitution for the purpose of getting a. ruling from this Special Sitting. (4) In this section, the meaning of Special Sitting of the High Court means a. bench of not less than five Judges of the High Court of the United Republic. 69. (1) A Law which has been enacted by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution or by the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council may specify the procedure for appealing against a. decision of the High Court or of a. Magistrate and for sending this appeal to another Court which is in East Africa if this appeal concerns a. question which does not involve the interpretation of this Constitution or a. question which is dealt with in accordance with the provisions of section 72 of this Constitution. (2) The provisions which are in this section shall be used without prejudice to the provisions of section 38 of this Constitution. (3) A Law enacted by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution or by the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council may make rules which shall prescribe the period of time and the reasons for filing an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section and make rules for dealing with these appeals. Part 5 Procedure for the Transmission and Execution of Warrants and Orders Issued by the Courts 70. (1) Orders issued by the Courts of Mainland Tanzania and the Courts of the Tanzania Islands in civil proceedings of any kind and in criminal proceedings of any kind (including warrants of arrest) may be sent to any place within Tanzania and these orders may be executed at any place within Tanzania in accordance with the following provisions: a.. when a. Court has issued an order which shall be executed at a. place where this Court has no jurisdiction, then this order shall be sent there and the directions which are in this order shall be executed in accordance with the procedure which is in use there in respect of the transmission of warrants and the execution of the orders therein which have been issued by a. Court having (the same) jurisdiction as the place to which the warrant has been sent; and -50-

b. if the Law in force at that place to which the warrant has been sent has made conditions that orders which have been issued by a. Court at another place must first be endorsed by a. Court having jurisdiction at the place where this Law is in force, then every order which has been issued by a. Court of another place must first be endorsed in accordance with this Law before the directions therein can be executed. (2) If a. person has been arrested anywhere within Tanzania in accordance with a. warrant of arrest which has been issued by a. Court which has no jurisdiction at the place where this person was arrested, then this person shall be deemed to be in lawful custody and he may be brought before the Court which issued this warrant, but the provisions which are in this sub-section must be used without prejudice to the provisions of the Law which is in force at the place where this person was arrested. (3) The provisions which are in this section shall not preclude an Act to establish the procedure for sending warrants outside Tanzania which have been issued by the Courts of Mainland Tanzania or the Courts of the Tanzania Islands. Part 6 The Special Constitutional Court of the United Republic 71. There shall be a. Special Constitutional Court of the United Republic whose powers, structure and working procedure shall be such as are described in sections 72, 73 and 74 of this Constitution.

72. (1) The sole function of this Special Constitutional Court is to hear cases brought before it, and to arbitrate over any question which concerns the interpretation of this Constitution when the interpretation thereof or its execution is in dispute between the Government of the United Republic and the Government of Zanzibar. (2) In performing its funcitons in accordance with the provisions of this section, the Special Constitutional Court shall not have jurisdiction to enquire into and to change a. decision of the High Court of the United Republic which has been delivered in accordance with the provisions of sections 38 or 68 of this Constitution, and if at the time of hearing the case the Special Constitutional Court shall need an interpretation of this Constitution of the kind which is issued by a. Special Sitting of the High Court in accordance with the provisions of section 68, then the Special Constitutional Court may adjourn the hearing until this interpretation is available. (3) Every arbitration decision which shall be delivered by the Special Constitutional Court in accordance with this section shall be final; there shall be no right of appeal to be sent anywhere.

-51-

73. (1) The Special Constitutional Court shall have members of whom half the total of all members shall be nominated by the Government of the United Republic and the other half of this total shall be nominated by the Government of Zanzibar. (2) The only person who is eligible to be appointed to be a member of the Special Constitutional Court is one who is a Judge or who has been a Judge of the High Court of the United Republic or of the High Court of Zanzibar or who has the ability and experience of a Judge and who merits being appointed a Judge or an Acting Judge in accordance with the Law in force in Mainland Tanzania and the Law in force in the Tanzania Islands, or as it shall be. (3) A person may be appointed to be a member of the Special Constitutional Court either for the purpose of hearing only one case or two or more cases as shall arise. A member shall continue to exercise his functions as a member of the Special Constitutional Court until the case with which he is concerned shall be completed or until his appointment shall be cancelled or until he shall become incapable of carrying out his duties as a Member because of ill-health or for any other reason. 74. (1) The Special Constitutional Court shall only sit when there is a case to be heard, and it shall hold its sittings at any place which shall be decided upon in accordance with the procedure which shall be in force for cases which shall be heard by the Special Constitutional Court. (2) The quorum for every sitting of the Special Constitutional Court is all members, and if any member shall be absent or if the seat of any member shall be vacant then the Government which appointed this member who is absent or whose seat is vacant shall appoint another member to take his place. A temporary member who has been appointed in accordance with this sub-section shall continue to carry out his duties in the Special Constitutional Court until the usual member shall return to work or until a person shall be appointed to fill the vacancy or until the case shall be finalized, depending on which among these options shall happen first. (3) Every question which requires a decision of the Special Constitutional Court shall be arbitrated by following the expressed opinion of two-thirds of the members from Mainland Tanzania and two-thirds of the members from the Tanzania Islands. (4) Parliament may enact a Law for the purpose of making provision regarding the procedure for the election of the Chairman of the Special Constitutional Court, the procedure for sending disputes to this Court, the procedure for presenting the case in the Court and the procedure for sending the decision of the Special Constitutional Court to the Government. With the exception that when any case shall be brought before the Special Constitutional Court at a. time when there is no law of any kind which has been described in this -52-

sub-section, then the case shall be heard and determined in accordance with the procedure which shall be established by the Court itself before starting to hear the case, or if the Members of the Court shall be unable to agree mutually on this procedure, then the case shall be heard and determined in accordance with a. procedure which shall be decided upon by the Government of the United Republic in conjunction with the Government of Zanzibar. Chapter 6 Part 1 The Permanent Commission of Enquiry 75. (1) There shall be a. Permanent Commission of Enquiry which shall have powers to investigate the behavior of any person to whom the provisions of this section apply, and this investigation shall be carried out regarding the behavior of this person in the normal execution of his powers or the execution thereof which exceeds his powers. (2) The Commission shall carry out its investigation in accordance with the provisions of this section, and it shall carry out its investigation regarding any person concerned whenever it shall be directed to do so by the President; and also, unless the President directs otherwise, the Commission may carry out an investigation at any time when it considers that there ought to be an investigation of the conduct of any person to whom the provisions of this section apply and who is suspected of having exceeded the powers of his office or to have abused the powers of his office. (3) After its investigation, the Commission shall send to the President a. report on the enquiry it has made, the findings of the Commission regarding the whole matter and its recommendations. (4) The provisions of this section shall apply to servants of the Government of the United Republic, employees and Leaders of The Party, members and employees of all Government Commissions, Government Departments, State Corporations and any other organs of State, as shall be described in an Act of Parliament, but these provisions shall not apply to the President nor to the President of Zanzibar. (5) The Permanent Commission shall not have any powers, either in accordance with the provisions of this section or the ' provisions of any Law enacted by Parliament for the purpose of this Chapter of this Constitution, to enquire into the decision of any Judge, any Magistrate or of the Registrar of the Court if this decision has been delivered in the execusion of the duties of his office; the Commission shall also not have any powers to enquire into any decision which has been issued by any organ having judicial origin which has been established in accordance with the Act if this decision was announced during the performance of its duties.

-53-

76. (1) The Permanent Commission shall have a. Chairman and other members not exceeding four who shall be appointed by the President. (2) If any person is appointed to be a. member of teh Permanent Commission he shall be compelled to resign immediately from the office of Minister, Junior Minister; any office in the Party or any other sort of office which shall be declared for this purpose by a. Law enacted by Parliament. (3) Any person who shall resign from the office of Member of the Permanent Commission may be re-appointed, but, notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 91 of this Constitution, a. person who has held the office of Member of the Permanent Commission for a. period of four consecutive years cannot be re-appointed to be a. Member until after the expiry of a. period of two years from the time when he resigned the office of Member of the Permanent Commission. (4) Without prejudice to the provisions which are in this section, a. member of the Permanent Commission shall cease to be a. member and shall resign this office when there shall occur any among the following matters: a. if a. period of 2 years has elapsed since he was appointed; Or b. if this member shall take any office of any sort which, if he had not been a. member of the Commission, would have precluded him from being appointed a. member of the Permanent Commission. (5) The President may only remove a. member of the Permanent Commission from office because he is incapable of performing his duties (either on account of ill-health or for any other reason) or because of mis-conduct. (6) The Commission may perform its functions notwithstanding that there is a. vacancy among the members' seats or that one of the members is absent. 77. Parliament shall enact a. Law in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution in order to make rules concerning the powers of the Commission, the procedure for performing its functions and concerning the legal protection shall be accorded to the members for the purpose of enabling them to carry out their duties without legal difficulties. Part 2 The Commission for the Leadership Code 78. (1) There shall be a. Commission for the Leadership Code which shall have powers to investigate the conduct and behavior of any Leader for the purpose of making sure that the rules of Leadership are being implemented as they should be.

-54-

(2) For the purpose of this section, the meaning of Leadership and of the rules of Leadership should be understood in accordance with the provisions of the Party Constitution, the provisions of this Constitution or the provisions of any other Act of Parliament, to the extent that these provisions are concerned with the question of Leadership and its interpretation. (3) The Commission for the Leadership Code shall have a. Chairman and other Members whose number shall be declared by Act of Parliament. All the Members of the Commission for the Leadership Code shall be appointed by the President who may nominate a. Vice Chairman of the Commission from among the Members of the Commission. (4) Parliament shall enact a. Law in order to make rules concerning the structure of the Commission, the powers of the Commission and the procedure for the performance of its duties. Chapter 7 Provisions Relating to Financial Matters of the Treasury of the Government of the United Republic 79. (1) No taxation of any kind shall be levied except in accordance with a. procedure established by law and given legal force by an Act of Parliament. (2) The provisions which are in sub-section (1) of this section shall not prevent the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council from using its powers to levy any sort of taxation in accordance with the powers of this Council. 80. (1) All funds which shall be obtained from any source for the expenditure of the Government of the United Republic, except funds of the kind which is declared in sub-section (2) of this section, shall be put into one specified fund which shall be called the "Consolidated Fund" of the Government Treasury. (2) Funds which shall not be put into the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury are all those which have been declared by any Law should be spent for a. specific purpose or should be put into another Fund for specified expenditure. 81. (1) Funds shall not be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury except in accordance with the following provisions: a.. these funds should be for expenditure which it has been authorized shall come from funds in the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury and this authority should have emanated from this Constitution or any other Law;

-55-

b. these funds should be for the purpose of expenditure which has been authorized either by a. Law relating to Government Expenditure which has been especially enacted by Parliament or a. Law which has been enacted in accordance with the provisions of section 84 of this Constitution. (2) Money which has been put into any Government specified fund, apart from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury, shall not be withdrawn from this fund for the purpose of expenditure unless and until this expenditure has been authorized by an Act. (3) Money which is in the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury shall not be withdrawn from this Fund for the purpose of expenditure unless and until this expenditure has been authorized by the Controller and Auditor General of Government Accounts and also on condition that these funds should be withdrawn following the procedure which has been established for this purpose in accordance with an Act of Parliament. 82. (1) The President shall issue directives to the person concerned that they should prepare and send to Parliament during every financial year of Government, Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure of the Government of the United Republic covering the period of the following financial year. (2) After Parliament has accepted the Estimates of Expenditures (other than expenditure which has been authorized either by this Constitution or by any other Law out of funds which are in the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury) a. Bill shall be presented to Parliament, which shall be called a. Bill for the Expenditure of Government Funds, in order to authorize the expenditure of money from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury, and these funds shall be issued for the payment of the different expenses and commitments of Government which are covered by these estimates. (3) If during any financial year it is apparent that: a. the money for expenditure which has been authorized by the Act for the Expenditure of Government Funds in respect of a. certain project is not enough or if it has become necessary to pay the expenses of work which was not allocated expenditure fund in accordance with Act; or b. there are funds which have been spent on a. certain project to an amount which exceeds the amount of .expenditure which was authorized by the Act for the Expenditure of Government Funds for this purpose or that funds have been spent to pay the expenses of work which had not been allocated expenditure funds in accordance with the Act,

-56-

there shall be presented to Parliament Supplementary Estimates of Expenditure or, as it shall be, Explanations of Excess Expenditure, and after Parliament has approved these Supplementary Estimates of Expenditure or Explanations of Excess Expenditure, there shall be sent to Parliament a. Bill for the Expenditure of Government Funds in order to sanction the expenditure of funds from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury, and these funds shall be spent on paying the expenses of the works to which these Estimates or Explanations are relevant. 83. (1) Parliament may enact a. Law in order to make provision for the authorization of expenditure of money out of the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury in accordance with the procedure which has been described in sub-section (2) of this section. (2) If the Government financial year has started and the Act for the Expenditure of Government Funds in respect of this year has not yet come into force, then the President may authorize the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury in order to pay for the necessary expenses of Government business, and these funds shall be used until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or until an Act for the Expenditure of Government Funds shall begin to come into force, depending on which of these alternatives shall happen earlier. 84. (1) Parliament may enact a. Law in order to establish provisions concerning the following matters: a. to institute a. Contingencies Fund and to enable the President or a. Minister nominated by the President for this purpose to borrow money from this fund to pay for the expenses of an unexpected emergency which has not been forseen and for which no funds have been allocated for expenditure; and b. to enable the President or a. Minister nominated by the President for this purpose to spend money which has been especially set aside for a. certain purpose to pay for the expenses of a. sudden emergency as has been described in sub-paragraph a.. of this sub-section. (2) If funds have been borrowed from the Contingencies Fund or from funds which were expecially ear-marked for a. certain project have been spent for the payment of the expenses of a. sudden emergency, then Supplementary Extimates of Expenditure shall be sent to Parliament, and after Parliament has accepted these Estimates a. Bill for the Expenditure of Government Funds which shall be presented to Parliament for the authorization of this Supplementary Expenditure shall certify that any funds which have been borrowed from the Contingencies Fund shall be paid back into this Fund out of the money for expenditure which shall be authorized by this Bill.

-57-

85. (1) The National Debt shall be guaranteed by the Consolidated Fund of the Treasury of the Government of the United Republic (2) For the purpose of interpretation of this section, the meaning of the National Debt is the debt itself and also the interest which is paid on this debt, money which is put on deposit in order pay the debt by instalments (gradually) and all charges which are consequent to the servicing of this debt. 86. (1) Government employees to whom the provisions of this section apply shall be paid salaries and allowances as shall be prescribed by a. Law enacted by Parliament. (2) Money for the payment of the salaries and allowances of Government employees to whom the provisions of this section apply together with pensions and gratuities for those among these employees who are entitled to these payments shall be paid from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury. (3) The salary which is paid to a. Government employee to whom the provisions of this section apply together with his terms and conditions of service shall not be altered, after this employee has been appointed, in a. manner which shall decrease the emoluments of this employee, but this does not apply to the allowances which are paid to this employee. (4) If a. Government employee to whom the provision of this section apply has an option to choose his rate of salary or the terms and conditions of his employment, then for the purpose of interpretation of the provisions of sub-section (3) of this section, this rate of salary which he shall choose and this kind of terms and conditions of employment which he shall choose shall be deemed to have more advantage to him than any other rate of salary which he would have been able to choose or any other terms and conditions of service which he would have been able to choose. (5) The provisions of this section shall be applied to a. Judge of the High Court of the United Republic, the Chairman and every Member of the Permanent Commission of Enquiry and the Controller and Auditor General of the Accounts of the Government of the United Republic. 87. (1) There shall be a. Controller and Auditor General of the Accounts of the Government of the United Republic. (2) The Controller and Auditor General of Accounts shall have the following duties and responsibilities: a.. to certify that the expenditure of any funds which are intended to be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury has been authorized and that they will be withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of section 81 of this Constitution, and when he shall be satisfied that these provisions will be implemented as they should be, then he shall authorize these funds to be withdrawn;

b. to certify that all funds whose expenditure has been authorized out of monies which were in the Consolidated Fund of the Government Treasury or funds whose expenditure has been authorized by an Act of Parliament, and which have been spent for the purposes for which the expenditure of these funds was intended, and that this expenditure was incurred in accordance with the authorization issued concerning this expenditure; and c. at least once a. year to audit and to issue a. report on the audit of the accounts of the Government of the United Republic, the accounts which are superintended by all the officers of the Government of the United Republic and the accounts of all the departments of the Government of the United Republic, the accounts of all the Courts of the United Republic and the accounts which are superintended by the Clerk to the National Assembly. (3) The Controller and Auditor General of the Accounts and every Government official who has been authorized by the Controller and Auditor General of Accounts shall have the right to inspect the books, the records, the returns, the reports and all the other documents which are concerned with the accounts of any sort which has been referred to in sub-section (2) of this section. (4) The Controller and Auditor General of Accounts shall send to the President every report which he shall issue in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of this section. After receiving this report the President shall direct those persons who are concerned to send this report to the first sitting of Parliament which shall be held after the President has received this report and it must be sent to this sitting before the expiration of seven days from that day when this sitting had begun. If the President shall not take steps to send this report to Parliament, then the Controller and Auditor General of Accounts shall send this report to the Speaker of Parliament (or the Deputy Speaker if the Speaker's seat is vacant at this time or if for any reason the Sneaker is unable to perform the duties of his office) who shall present this report to Parliament. (5) The Controller and Auditor General of Accounts shall also have the responsibility of carrying out other duties, and he shall have other powers of various kinds, as has been described in the Act, concerning the accounts of the Government of the United Republic or the accounts of organs of State or the accounts of corporations. (6) While executing his responsibilities in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of this section, the Controller and Auditor General of Accounts shall not be compelled to comply with the orders or directions of any other person or any Government department, but these provisos in this sub-section shall not preclude a. Court from exercising its jurisdiction for the purpose of investigating whether the Controller and Auditor General of Accounts has

-59-

carried out his responsibilities in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution or not. 88. (1) Without prejudice to the other provisions which are in this section, it shall be compulsory for the Controller and Auditor General of the Accounts of the United Republic to resign his appointment when he shall reach the age of 60 years or any other age which shall be declared by a. Law enacted by Parliament. (2) The Controller and Auditor General of Accounts may only be removed from his office on account of being unable to carry out his duties (either arising from ill-health or for any other reason) or because of mis-conduct, and it shall not be possible to remove him from office except in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) of this section. (3) If the President perceives that the question of removing from office the Controller and Auditor General of Accounts needs to be enquired into in accordance with the provisions of this section, then in these circumstances the procedure shall be as follows: a. the President shall appoint a. Special Commission which shall have a. Chairman and not less than two other Members. This Chairman and at least half the other members of this Commission must be persons who are Judges or persons who have been Judges of the High Court or the Court of Appeal in any Commonwealth country; b. this Commission shall enquire into the whole affair and afterwards shall issue a. report to the President concerning (its) findings in the whole matter and it shall advise the President if this Controller and Auditor General of Accounts should be removed from office in accordance with the provisions of this section on account of being unable to perform his duties arising from illhealth or for any other reason or because of mis-conduct. (4) If the Commission appointed in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) shall advise the President that this Controller and Auditor General of Accounts should be removed from office because he is incapable of doing his work arising from sickness or for any other reason or because of mis-conduct, then the President shall remove him from office. (5) If the question of removing the Controller and Auditor General of Accounts from office has been submitted to the Commission for investigation in accordance with the provisions of this section, the President may suspend from duty this Controller and Auditor General of Accounts, and the President may at any time cancel this decision of suspending him from duty, and in any event this decision shall be annulled if the Commission shall advise the President that this Controller and Auditor General of Accounts should not be removed from office.

-60-

(6) A person who is the Accounts or who has of Accounts may not other office in the United Republic.

Controller and Auditor General of been Controller and Auditor General be appointed to take or to hold onto any service of the Government of the

Chapter 8 The Defense Forces 89. (1) It is prohibited for any person or any organization or any group of people except the Government, to form or establish (in) Tanzania armed forces of any sort. (2) The Government of the United Republic may, in accordance with the Law, form and establish (in) Tanzania armed forces of different kinds for the defense and security of the country and people of Tanzania. 90. (1) Without prejudice to provisions which shall be established by any Law which has been enacted by Parliament, among the powers of the President acting as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces are to order the country's armed forces to take appropriate action to fight in the defense of the United Republic, action to preserve the lives and property of the people during a. state of emergency and any other actions which the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces perceives to be required, and for this purpose the Commanderin-Chief of the Armed Forces may order these armed forces to take such action either inside or outside Tanzania. (2) Without prejudice to provisions which shall be established by Act of Parliament, powers over the following matters shall be in the hands of the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, that is: a. the power to appoint officers in the Defense Forces of the United Republic; b. the power to appoint persons who shall join the Defense Forces and the power to dismiss members of the armed forces; c. the power to appoint members of the armed forces who shall command various units of the Defense Forces; and d. the power to direct any member of the armed forces not to exercise any of the authority conferred on him and which he holds by virtue of his being a. member of the armed forces. (3) Anything which any member of the armed forces shall do in contravention of an order which was issued by the Commanderin-Chief of the Armed Forces in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section shall be invalid.

-61-

Chapter 9 The Electoral Commission 91. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission of the United Republic which shall have members as follows: a. the Speaker of Parliament, who shall be Chairman; and b. not less than three and not more than five other members who shall be appointed by the President. (2) The. President may appoint a. Vice Chairman of the Electoral Commission from among the members whom he appointed in accordance with the provisions of sub-paragraph b. of subsection (1) of this section. (3) The Vice Chairman of the Electoral Commission shall continue to be Vice Chairman all the time that he shall be a. Member of the Commission, but the President may cancel the appointment of the Vice Chairman and appoint another Member of the Commission to be Vice Chairman of the Electoral Commission. (4) The following persons shall not be eligible to be appointed to be Members of the Electoral Commission, that is: a. Ministers or Junior Ministers; b. a. person holding an office of any kind which has been specifically declared by a. Law enacted by Parliament that it is forbidden for a. person holding this office to be a. Member of the Electoral Commission; a.MembrofPliantr.pesohldingafceo any kind (except the office of Clerk or Assistant Clerk to the National Assembly) which has been named in a. Law enacted by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of sub-paragraph e. of sub-section (2) of section 26 of this Constitution.

c.

(5) Without prejudice to other provisions which are in this section, a. Member of the Electoral Commission shall cease to be a. Member if any among the following matters shall occur: a. if a. period of five years has elapsed since he was appointed; or b. if anything shall occur which, if he had not been a. Member of the Commission, would have disqualified him from being appointed to be a. Member of the Electoral Commission. (6) The President may only remove from office a. Member of the Electoral Commission for the reason that he is incapable of carrying out his duties (either on account of ill-health or for any other reason) or because of mis-conduct.

-62-

(7) The Electoral Commission may perform its functions notwithstanding that there is a. vacancy among the seats of its members or that one among the members is absent, but every decision of the Commission must have the support of members who are a. majority of all the members of the Commission. (8) Parliament may enact a. Law in order to make provision for establishing a. procedure for appointing deputies to supervise the election of Members of Parliament who are representing constituencies and, without prejudice to an Act such as this or to the directives of the Electoral Commission, the powers of the Electoral Commission to supervise an election may be exercised by these deputies. (9) While exercising its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, the Electoral Commission shall not be obliged to comply with the orders or directives of any person or of any Government department. (10) There is no Court which shall have jurisdiction to enquire into any matter which has been done by the Commission during the performance of its duties in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Chapter 10 Miscellaneous 92. (1) Any person having a. title to any office which was established by this Constitution (including the office of Minister, Junior Minister or Member of Parliament, but excluding a. Member of Parliament who is a. Member of Parliament by virtue of the office he holds), may resign by issuing a. notice which has been written and signed by his own hand, in accordance with the following provisions: a. if this person was nominated or selected by one person, then he shall send this notice of resignation to the person who nominated or selected him, or if he was nominated or selected by a. body of persons, then he shall send this notice of resignation to that body; b. if this person is the President, then he shall send this notice of resignation to the National Executive Committee of the Party; c. if this person is the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, then he shall send this notice of resignation to Parliament; and d. if this person is a. Member of Parliament, then he shall send this notice of resignation to the Speaker.

-63-

(2) A person who has issued a. notice of resignation in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section, shall be deemed to have resigned from that day on which his notice of resignation shall be received by the person concerned or the body concerned or when it shall have been received by any person delegated to receive this notice by the person concerned or the body concerned, but if this notice of resignation has stated that this person will resign at a. later date after this notice of resignation has been received by the person or body concerned, then this person shall be deemed to have resigned after this later date. (3) If any person holding a. right to any office which was established by this Constitution (including the office of Minister, Junior Minister of Member of Parliament, but excluding a. Member of Parliament who is a. Member of Parliament by virtue of the office he holds) has resigned, then if he has all the qualifications required and deserves it in every way, he may be nominated or selected again to hold this office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (4) The provisions which are in sub-section (3) of this section shall not prevent a. person who is President from being elected again to be President while he is still holding the office of President. 93. (1) For the purpose of the interpretation of the provisions of this Constitution concerning the procedure of holding office in the service of the Government of the United Republic, it should be understood that any person with the power, in accordance with this Constitution, to appoint or select another person to hold a. certain office also has the capability to appoint or to select (someone) to act (in this office) or a. person who shall hold (it) for a. period and exercise these functions. With the exception that these provisions shall not be applied to the office of a. Minister, a. Junior Minister, a. Judge of the High Court, a. Member of the Permanent Commission of Enquiry or a. Member of the Electoral Commission. (93.(2) Translator's note: The first word of this sub-section is "KAMATA" which means "Committee." As there is no reference whatsoever to any sort of Committee in this sub-section, it can be assumed that the word "KAMATI" is another misprint. The word "MASHARITI" -provisions, terms, conditions, might be appropriate.) (2) The following Committees (?) shall also be used for the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this Constitution concerning the procedure for holding office in the service of the Government of the United Republic, that is:

-64-

a. if there is a. person holding a. certain office which was conferred on him in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and this person is on leave pending retirement, then another person may be appointed to hold this office, notwithstanding that there is that person who is waiting to retire from this office: b. if there are two or more persons who all at the same time hold a. certain office arising from their appointment which was made in accordance with the Rules which are explained in sub-paragraph a.. of this sub-section, then in these circumstances if there should arise a. need to exercise any function which is related to the responsibilities of this office that person (who) was last appointed is the one who shall be deemed to be the only person having the title to this office; c. if a. person has been appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, to be Acting or to hold the powers of a. certain office while the actual person who was appointed to hold this office is incapable of carrying out the duties, which pertain to this office, then it shall be forbidden to criticize or to question in any way the appointment of this Deputy for the reason that the real person who was appointed to hold this office was not unable to perform the duties which are assigned to this office. 94. Interpretation (1) In this Constitution, unless otherwise construed: "Party" for the purposes of this Constitution, means the Party of the Revolution; "The Party of the Revolution" (abbreviated "CCM") means the only political party in Tanzania which has been declared in section 3 of this Constitution; "Chief Justice" means the Chief Justice of Tanzania or, if the Chief Justice is absent or incapable of performing the functions of his office and if the person who was appointed to be Acting Chief Justice is also absent or incapable of carrying out the duties of his office, a. Judge of the High Court who can execute the functions of the Chief Justice and who is present (and) has a. status senior to the appointments of all the other Judges present; "The Commonwealth" means an association whose members are the United Republic and every country (to) which the provisions of section 7 of the Citizenship Act of 1961 apply, and any country which is being governed by a. country which is a. member of the association; the meaning of "oath" should be understood in accordance with the usual meaning of this word and includes a. formal declaration of any kind permitted by law to be used instead of an oath; "oath of allegiance" means an oath to be loyal to the country and Government of the United Republic. -65-

the meaning of "office in the service of the Government of the United Republic" should be understood in accordance with the usual meaning of these words and includes service in the Defense Forces of the United Republic and in the Police Force which has been lawfully established; "Union matters" means all matters which are included in the Second Schedule of the Appendix which is at the end of this Constitution; "Mainland Tanzania" means all the area of the United Republic which formerly was the area of the Republic of Tanganyika; Tanzania Islands" means all that area of the United Republic which was formerly the area of the People's Republic of Zanzibar; "election which is held by the citizens (people)" or "General Election" means the election of the President and the election of a. Member of Parliament who represents a. constituency; "Minister" means a. Member of Parliament who has been appointed to the officeof Minister, but excludes a. Junior Minister, and this meaning shall also be applied to the Vice President; "Zanzibar" has the same meaning as Tanzania Islands. (2) The following Rules shall apply for the purpose of the interpretation of the provisions of this Constitution, that is: a. Whenever the office of President is mentioned, it should be understood that the office concerned includes the power to carry out various functions as well as the duties of performing various functions as Head of State of the United Republic, and also other powers and duties such as these if it has been prescribed in this Constitution or in any other Law that these other powers and duties are the President's. b. Whenever office in the service of Government is mentioned, it should be understood that the office concerned is an office in the service of the Government of the United Republic unless it is otherwise described; and whenever a. department of Government is mentioned, it should be understood that the department concerned is a. department of the Government of the United Republic unless otherwise described. c. When in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution there is any matter which requires to be carried out or executed by a. sitting of the Party, then, without prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution or any other Law enacted by Parliament for this purpose, this matter shall be carried out and executed in accordance with the provisions of the Party Constitution and in -66-

accordance with any Rules which have been formulated by the Party for this purpose. d. For the purposes of this Constitution, a. person shall not be considered to hold office in the service of the Government of the United Republic only for the reason that he receive a. pension or other payments of this sort on account of his former service in the Government of the United Republic or any former Government of Mainland Tanzania or in the Defenxe Forces or in the Police Force of the Government of Mainland Tanzania or of Zanzibar. e. In this Constitution, unless the meaning requires otherwise, whenever a. person holding a. certain appointment is mentioned by naming his office, it should be understood to be the person concerned including any person who is Acting or who has been lawfully appointed to hold the title of this office. f. In this Constitution, whenever the power to remove a. person from office in the service of the Government of the United Republic has been mentioned, it should be understood that the power concerned includes the powers which have been conferred in accordance with the provisions of any Law which require or permit this person to retire. With the exception that the meaning of this Rule should not be construed as giving any person the power to require a. Judge of the High Court or the Controller and Auditor General that he retires. g. In this Constitution, whenever a. Law which amends or repeals another Law is mentioned, it should be understood that the Law concerned includes the Law which re-enacts this other Law or which causes the continuation in force of the other Law referred to, either without amendments or after amendments or re-enactment, or a. Law which puts new provisions into another Law. h. Any law which has been enacted by Parliament concerning any matter shall not be applied to the Tanzania Islands except in accordance with the following provisions: i. It has been openly proclaimed that this Law will be in force in Mainland Tanzania as well as the Tanzania Islands or that it causes the amendment, the re-enactment or the repeal of a. Law which is in force in the Tanzania Islands; or

ii. This Law is amending or re-enacting or repealing a. Law which had been in force in the past in Mainland Tanzania and which had been in force as well in the Tanzania Islands in accordance with the Agreement of the Union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar, of 1964, or in accordance with any Law which openly declared that it will be applied to Mainland Tanzania as well as to the Tanzania Islands; or
-67-

iii. This Law concerns Union Matters; and whenever Tanzania is mentioned in the Act, it should be understood that this Law shall be applied to the (whole) country of Tanzania in accordance with the interpretation which has been published in this sub-paragraph. 95. (1) The full name of this Constitution is the Constitution of of Tanzania, 1977. (2) This Constitution shall come into force on 26 April 1977.

Appendix First Schedule (Referred to in Section 52 (1) a..) Laws whose amendment requires the unanimous approval of twothirds of all the Members of Parliament) 500 the Act declaring Tanganyika to be ) Sections 3, 17, 18, a. Republic, of 1962 ) 23 & 26 . 509 the Public Service Act, of 1962 Cap. 508 Judicial Service Act, of 1962 Cap. 512 the Citizenship Act, of 1962 Cap. 557 the Declaration of the Agreement of the Union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar Act, of 1964 Second Schedule (Referred to in section 94 (1)) (Union Matters) 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. The Constitution of Tanzania and the Government of the United Republic. Foreign Affairs. Defense. Police. Emergency Powers. Citizenship. Sections 22, 23 & 24 Sections 22, 23 & 24 The whole Act

The whole Act

-68--

7. 8. 9. 10.

Immigration. External Trade and borrowing. The Public Service of the United Republic. Income Tax paid by individuals and corporations, customs and excise duties and duties on goods manufactured in Tanzania which are administered by the Department of Customs.

11. Harbours, civil aviation, posts and telecommunications. 12. All matters concerning currency and coinage for the purpose of all legal payments (including notes; banks (including savings banks) and all business of banks; foreign exchange and the control of all matters concerning foreign exchange). 13. Industrial licences and accounts.

14. Higher Education. 15. All matters, apart from these already mentioned above, which have been mentioned in Appendix X of the Contract of the East African Community. Natural resources of oil, including unrefined oil from which petrol and other kinds of oil and products are derived, and natural gas. 17. The National Council of Examinations of Tanzania and all matters which concern the business of this Council. Third Schedule (Reference to Section 52 (1) b.) (Matters whose amendment requires the unanimous approval of twothirds of all the Members of Parliament from Mainland Tanzania and two-thirds of all the Members of Parliament from the Tanzania Islands) 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. The existence of the United Republic. The existence of the Office of President of the United Republic. The duties (and responsibilities)of the Government of the United Republic. The existence of the Parliament of the United Republic. The number of Members of Parliament from Zanzibar. The duties (and responsibilities) of the Government of Zanzibar. The High Court of Zanzibar. The Schedule of Union Matters.

16.

Note: Pages 72 to 78, "Explanation of Objects and Reasons", have not been translated. -69-

