BRITISH AND FOREIGN

STATE PAPERS
WITH WHICH IS INCORPORATED HERTSLET'S COMMERCIAL TREATIES

193 2
VOL. CXXXV

Compiled and Edited in the Librarian's Department of the Foreign Office Crown Copyright Reserved

LONDON PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE . To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses : Adastral House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2 ; 'so George Street, Edinburgh 2 ; 26 York Street, Manchester x ; x St. Andrew's Crescent, Cardiff ; 8o Chichester Street, Belfast ; or through any bookseller 1 937

.

TEMPORARY CONSTITUTION of the Kingdom of Siam.—June 27, 1932. (Translation.)
BY THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. WHEREAS the People's Party, has requested His Majesty to come under the constitution of Siam, to assist the progress of the country, and

Whereas His Majesty has been graciously pleased to accede to the request of the People's Party, It is hereby enacted as follows:— Chapter I.—General.
ART. 1. The supreme power of the country is vested in the whole people. 2. The following persons and bodies shall exercise this power on behalf of the people, in accordance with what is hereinafter laid down in the constitution, namely :— (1) The Monarch. (2) The People's Senate. (3) The Committee of the People's Party. (4) The law courts.

Chapter II.—The Monarch. 3. The Monarch is the highest person in the country. Acts, findings of the law courts and special decisions of law affecting other matters shall issue in the name of the Monarch. 4. The Monarch of the country is His Majesty King Prajadhipok. Succession to the throne shall be in accordance with the Law of Succession, B.E. 2467, and with the agreement of the People's Senate. 5. If the Monarch is temporarily and unavoidably unable to carry out his duties or is absent from the capital, the Committee of the People's Party shall exercise his powers instead.	 • 6. The Monarch cannot be prosecuted on a criminal charge in the courts. It is for the Senate of the People to decide such a matter. 7. Any Act of the Monarch must bear the signature of some one member of the Committee of the People's Party, and if it has received the consent of the whole Committee of the People's Party it shall be enforced. Otherwise it is null and void. Chapter III.—The People's Senate. Part 1.--Powers and Duties. 8. The People's Senate has the power to issue all Acts. Such Acts shall be enforced when the Monarch has proclaimed them to be in force. If the Monarch has not proclaimed such Acts to be in force within 7 days from the day on which he received such Acts from the People's Senate for the reason that he does not wish to affix his signature thereto, he has the power to return such Acts to the Senate to be again considered. If

the Senate adheres to its original opinion and the Monarch does not agree therewith, the Senate has the power to promulgate such Acts as law. 9. The People's Senate has the power of control over the affairs of the country, and has the power to remove from office, after meeting in consultation, any member of the Committee of the People's Party or any Government official. Part 2.—Representatives of the People. 10. Membership of the Senate shall follow the division into periods here shown:— First Period. From the date of the corning into force of this constitution until such time as members under the second period shall have taken up their duties, the People's Party, whose power is exercised by the military' control of the capital, shall appoint temporarily 70 representatives of the people to be members of the Senate. Second Period. Within a period of 6 months or until the time when the affairs of the country are normal and in order there shall be two classes of senators sitting together, namely: Class 1.—A representative for each changvad who shall be elected by the people. If any, changvad has over 100,000 members, such changvad shall elect an additional representative for each extra 100,000 or fraction (being over one-half) of 100,000: Class 2.—Members of the first , period to a number equal with members of class 1. If there are more class 2 members than required, they shall themselves choose those of their number who shall sit; and if there are less, than required, they shall elect members to the full number needed.

Third Period.
When more than half of the people throughout the country shall have passed a preliminary educational examination, and in any case within period , of 10 years from the coming into force of this constitution, members of the People's Senate must be only those who have been elected by the people themselves; thereafter there shall cease to, be class 2 members. 11. Qualifications demanded of persons seeking election as class 1 representatives are:— (1) That they shall have passed an examination in Government administration according to a syllabus to be prescribed by the Senate.

(2) That they shall have attained the age of 20 full years. (3) That they shall not be incapable or defective. (4) That they shall not have been sentenced by a court to lose their right to be elected. (5) That they must be persons of Siamese nationality by law. (6) Those who stand for election as class 1 representatives in the second period must first receive the recommendation of members in the first period that they are persons about whose future good behaviour there need be no doubt. 12. The election of members of class 1 and class 2 shall be carried out thus :— (1) The inhabitants of a village shall elect a representative to vote for a representative of a commune. (2) The representatives of the villages shall elect a representative of a commune. (3) The representatives of communes shall then elect the members of the People's Senate. The election of members in the third period shall take place in the manner prescribed in a law which will be promulgated later, establishing direct election. 13. Representatives of class 1 shall hold office for 4 years at a time from the date of taking up their appointment. But when the third period is reached, representatives of the second period, even if they have not held office for 4 years, must retire from the date of entry into office of representatives of the third period. If any representative vacates his seat for any reason, other than on the expiry of his term of office, the members shall elect some other person to take his place, but the new representative shall hold office only for the balance of the period remaining to the original representative. 14. The people, without distinction of sex, provided they possess the qualifications set out below, have the right to vote in the election of representatives of the villages: .. (1) That they have attained the age of 20 full years. (2) That they are not incapable or defective. (3) That they have not been subject to a court judgment withdrawing their right to vote. (4) That they are persons of Siamese nationality according to law. The qualifications for representatives of villages and for representatives of communes shall be the same as those set out in section 11. 15. In an election the candidate with the greatest number of votes shall be held to be elected. If the voting is equal, a second election shall take place, and if the voting

is again equal, an arbitrator shall be appointed by the electors to cast a deciding vote. 16. Representatives, apart from completion of their term, must vacate office, and they shall be held to have vacated office when they no longer fulfil all the conditions laid down in section 11, or when they die, or when dismissed from office by the Senate for behaviour damaging to the Senate's reputation. 17. When a criminal action is brought against a member of the People's Senate the court must receive the sanction of the Senate before receiving the charge. Part 3.—Procedure at Meetings. 18. The members shall elect one of their number to be President of the Senate, whose duty it shall be to order the affairs of the Senate, and there shall be a Vice-President to act for the President when the latter is temporarily unable to fulfil his functions. 19. When the. President is absent, or is unable to be present, the Vice-President shall see that orderliness is observed and that the Senate's deliberations are conducted in conformity with the usual custom. 20. If both the President and the Vice-President are absent from a meeting, the members present shall appoint one of their number to preside at that meeting. 21. The Senate shall have the duty of fixing the dates of ordinary meetings. Special meetings shall be held when not less than 15 members or when the Committee of the People's Party ask that a meeting be called. The President or the VicePresident shall fix the dates of such special meetings. 22. At all meetings a quorum shall consist of not less than half the total number of members. 23. All matters shall be decided by the majority of votes, each member having one vote. If the votes are equal, the person presiding over the meeting shall have a deciding vote. 24. Members shall not be held responsible for any statement or opinion advanced or for any vote cast at a meeting, and no one may prosecute them on that account. 25. The President shall order that a record be kept of the proceedings of every meeting, which shall be submitted to the members for confirmation and shall then be signed by the person presiding at the meeting. 26. The Senate has the power to appoint subcommittees to perform any act, or to investigate, consider and make recommendations on any matter for consideration by and decision of the whole Senate. The chairman of a

sub-committee, if not appointed by the Senate, shall be chosen by the members of the sub-committee. Sub-committees have the power to invite any individual to give evidence and to express opinions before them; members of the sub-committees and persons appearing before them have the privileges of speech as laid down in article 24. At all	 meetings of sub-committees not less than three. members must b be present before the sub-committee proceeds to its deliberations. But if a sub-committee is composed of only three persons, then two shall form a quorum. 27. The Senate has power to make rules of procedure, to enable it to conform to this constitution. (At first it will. follow the rules of the Privy Council, but only in so far as they do not conflict with this constitution.) Chapter IV.—The Committee of the People's Party. Part 1.—Powers and Duties. 28. The Committee of the People's Party has the right and the duty of acting in accordance with the wishes of the Senate. 29. If an emergency arises and the Committee of the People's Party is unable to call a meeting of the Senate in time, the Committee of the People's Party may, if it thinks it necessary to do so, issue a law to deal with the emergency. But it shall hasten to submit any such law for the approval of the Senate. 30. The Committee of the People's Party has the power of pardon, but it must first submit the case for royal sanction. 31. The heads of the various Ministries are responsible to the Committee of the People's Party in all matters. Anything not in accordance with the orders or regulations of the Committee of the People's Party, or done contrary to the provisions of the constitution, shall be held to be null and void. Part 2.—The Committee of the People's Party and its

Officers.
32. The Committee of the People's Party is composed of one President of the Committee of the People's Party and 14 members of Committee, being 15 in all. 33. The Senate shall elect one of its number to be President of the Committee, and the President so appointed shall choose 14 other members of the Senate to form the Committee. When his choice has received the approval of the Senate, those so chosen shall be the Committee of the

Senate. If the Senate considers that the Committee is not carrying out the Senate's policy, it has the power to dismiss the Committee from office and appoint a new one as laid down above. 34. If any member of the Committee for any reason fails to comply with the requirements laid down for representatives in article 11, or if he dies, the Senate shall choose a substitute to fill his place. When the Senate, having appointed a Committee, itself expires at the termination of its period of office, the Committee shall be held to have expired also. 35. The appointment and dismissal of Ministers are the prerogative of the Monarch; this prerogative shall, however, be exercised in accordance with the advice of the Committee of the People's Party. 36. Negotiations with foreign countries shall be in the hands of the Committee of the People's Party, and the Committee shall appoint representatives for this purpose. The Committee shall submit a report of any development of such negotiations to the Monarch for his information. The power of ratification of treaties lies with the Monarch, but shall be in accordance with the advice of the Committee of the People's Party. 37. The declaration of war is the prerogative of the Monarch, but this prerogative shall be exercised in accordance with the advice of the Committee of the People's Party. Part 3.—Procedure at Meetings. 38. Procedure at meetings of the Committee of the People's Party shall be in accordance with the regulations laid down in title III . Chapter V.—Courts. 39. The hearing of questions at issue shall be in conformity with the laws at present in force. Given the 27th June, B.E. 2475, and to be put into force immediately.
PRAJADHIPOK,

REX.

CONSTITUTION of the Kingdom Siam. —December 10,
1932. (Translation.) 	

General Provisions.
The Kingdom of Siam is one and indivisible. The Siamese people of whatever race or religion are all equally entitled to the protection of this constitution.
ART.
1.

2. The sovereign power emanates from the Siamese nation. The King, who is the head of the nation, exercises it in conformity with the provisions of this constitution. Chapter 1.—The King. 3. The person of the King is sacred and inviolable. 4. The King shall profess the Buddhist faith and is the upholder of religion. 5. The King is the head of the Siamese forces. 6. The King exercises legislative power by and with the advice and consent of the Assembly of the People's Representatives. 7. The King exercises executive power through the State Council. 8. The King exercises judicial power through the courts duly established by law. 9. Subject to the approval of the Assembly of the People's Representatives, succession to the Throne shall be in accordance with the Law of Succession, B.E. 2467. 10. If the King intends to be absent from the Kingdom or for any reason whatever should be unable to carry out his functions, he shall appoint a Regent or a Council of Regency with the approval of the Assembly of the People's Representatives. If the King does not make such appointment or is unable to do so, the Assembly shall itself proceed to make the appointment. Pending the appointment of a Regent or a Council of Regency by the Assembly the State Council shall temporarily perform the duties of the .Regent, 11. Members of the Royal Family from the rank of Mom Chao upwards, whether so born or created, are above politics. Chapter II.—Rights and Duties of the Siamese. 12. Subject to the provisions of this constitution, all persons are equal before the law. Titles acquired by birth, by bestowal or in any other way do not confer any privilege whatever. 13. Every person is entirely free to profess any religion or creed and to exercise the form of worship in accordance with his own belief, provided that it is not contrary to the duties of a national or to public order or public morals. 14. Subject to the provisions of the law, every person enjoys full liberty of person, abode, property, speech, writing, publication, education, public meeting, association and vocation. It is the duty of every person to respect the law, to defend the country and to assist the Government by the payment of taxes and in other ways, under the conditions and in the manner prescribed by law.

Chapter III.—The Assembly of the People's
Representatives.

16. The Assembly of the People's Representatives shall be composed of members who are elected by the people. 17. The qualifications of the electors and of the candidates for election, the mode of election and the number of members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives shall be in accordance with the provisions of the electoral law. 18. Members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives shall be elected for a period of 4 years. If a vacancy occurs among the members otherwise than by the expiration of the prescribed period, a new member shall be elected to fill the vacancy; but he shall hold office only for the remainder of the unexpired period. 19. Members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives must, before assumption of office, make solemn declaration in the Assembly that they will uphold and observe this constitution. 20. Members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives are representatives of the whole Siamese nation and not merely representatives of those who elected them. They must perform their duties in accordance with the honest dictates of their conscience and are not bound by any imperative mandate. 21. Membership of the Assembly of the People's Representatives comes-to an end :— (1) by expiration of the prescribed period or by dissolution of the Assembly; (2) by death; (3) by resignation; (4) by loss of any of the qualifications of the candidate for election in accordance with the electoral law; or (5) by dismissal from office pronounced by the Assembly whenever the Assembly considers that the conduct of the member concerned is likely to be detrimental to its interests. Such a resolution requires a majority of twothirds of the members present. 22. The King will appoint such members of the Assembly .of the. People's Representatives as may be selected by the Assembly to be the President and VicePresidents of the Assembly. 23. It shall be the duty of the President of the Assembly of the People's Representatives to conduct- the proceedings of the Assembly in accordance with the rules of procedure. The Vice-President shall act in the place of the President when the President is absent or unable to perform his duty.

24. If both the President and the Vice-President or Vice-Presidents are absent from a meeting of the Assembly, the members present shall elect among themselves a temporary chairman to preside over that meeting. 25. At every meeting of the Assembly of the People's Representatives the presence of one-third of the total number of its members shall constitute a quorum. 26. Unless otherwise specially provided in this constitution, all questions in the Assembly of the People's Representatives shall be decided by majority vote. Each member shall have one vote. In case of a tie, the presiding officer of the meeting shall have a casting vote. 27. bIn the meeting of the Assembly of the People's Representatives words uttered by members, whether in making :a statement of fact or in expressing an opinion or in explaining a vote, are absolutely privileged. No legal proceedings whatever can be taken against them. This privilege extends to the printing and publication of the minutes of the meeting by authority of the Assembly and also to statements of fact and opinions expressed in the Assembly by persons invited by the Assembly to do so. 28. The Assembly of the People's Representatives shall hold one or more regular sessions in each year in accordance with the decision that will be taken. The first regular session must be called not later than 90 days after the election. The date of the regular sessions shall be fixed by the Assembly. 29. A regular session of the Assembly of the People's Representatives shall last 90 days, but its duration may be prolonged by the King. The King may, during' the period of 90 days, prorogue the session. 30. The King convokes the Assembly of the People's Representatives for its regular session, and opens and closes it. The King may open the session in person or command the Heir to the Throne, if he is of age, or the President of the State Council to perform the ceremony in his place. 31. Whenever the interests of the State so require, the King may call an extraordinary session of the Assembly. 32. Members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives of not less than one-third of their total number may, whenever they deem it necessary in the interests of j the State, submit a joint application to the President of the Assembly requesting him to petition the King to summon an extraordinary meeting of the Assembly. In 'such case the President of the Assembly shall so petition the King and countersign the Royal command. 33. During the session of the Assembly of the People's

Representatives, when a criminal action is brought against any one of its members, the court must obtain the prior permission of the Assembly before the case can be tried. The proceedings of the court must not interfere with the liberty of the member concerned to attend the meetings of the Assembly. However, the proceedings of the court prior to the plea of membership remain valid. 34. During the session of the Assembly, none of its members shall be arrested or summoned for detention except when arrested while in the act of committing an offence, in which case the matter must be reported without delay to the President of the Assembly. The President may order the release of the prisoner. 35. It is the King's prerogative to dissolve the Assembly of the People's Representatives in order that new elections may be held. The decree for such dissolution shall provide for the new elections to be held within a period of 90 days. 36. All laws can be promulgated only by and with the advice and consent of the Assembly of the People's Representatives. 37. The annual budget of the State must be made in the form of a law. If the budget is not passed in time for the new year, the Government may carry on temporarily with the budget of the preceding year. 38. After a bill has been passed by the Assembly of the People's Representatives, the President of the State Council shall submit it to the King for signature, and it shall come into force after its publication in the GovernmentGaz. 39. If the King disapproves of the bill, the Assembly shall, after the lapse of one month from the date when the bill was submitted to the King by the President of the State Council and irrespective of whether or not the bill was returned to the Assembly within the stated period, reconsider the bill by secret voting taken by roll call. If the Assembly reaffirms the bill, it shall once more be submitted to the King. If the King fails to append his signature to it within 15 days, it may forthwith be promulgated and published as law. 40. The Assembly of the People's Representatives has the power of control over the affairs of the State. At a meeting of the Assembly every member' of the Assembly has the right to interpellate the State Councillors on all matters within the scope of their duties. But the State Councillors may refuse to reply if they are of opinion that the matter should not yet be made public for reasons of public safety or of vital State interests. [cxxxv]	 2B

41. The Assembly of the People's Representatives reserves the right to pass a vote of non-confidence in the State Councillors either individually or collectively. Such a motion shall not, however, be put to the vote on the day on which it is discussed. 42. The meetings of i the Assembly of the People's Representatives are public in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Assembly. But secret meetings may be held upon the request of the State Council or of not less than 15 members. 43. The Assembly of the People's Representatives has power to appoint an ordinary commission composed of its members or a special commission composed of members and non-members of the Assembly for the purpose of dealing with or enquiring into any matter within the scope of the work of the Assembly and then submitting their' report to the Assembly. Such commissions are empowered to summon any person to explain or give his opinion on the matter being dealt with or enquired into. The privilege of the Assembly as provided in article 27 of this constitution also extends to the persons who perform their duty in conformity with the provisions of this article. 44. At the meetings of a commission referred to in article 43, the presence of one-half of the total number of its members shall constitute a quorum. 45. The Assembly of the People's Representatives is empowered to establish rules concerning the conduct of its meetings and deliberations in pursuance of the provisions of this constitution. Chapter IV.---The State Council. 46. The King appoints a State Council, composed of one President and from 14 to 24 other State Councillors. The appointment of the President of the State Council shall be countersigned by the President of the Assembly. The State Council is charged with the duty of conducting the government of the State. 47. The President and 14 other State Councillors shall be selected from among the members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives. The remaining State Councillors may be selected from among persons who possess. special knowledge or experience. These persons need not he members of the Assembly, but they must be persons. who are capable of holding a political position. 48. State Councillors who are not members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives may attend and express their opinion in the meeting of the Assembly, but. they have no right to vote.

The privileges referred to in article 27 shall apply mutatis mutandis. 49. The appointment of a member of the Assembly of the People's Representatives as State Councillor does not oblige him to resign his membership of the Assembly. 50. The State Council must possess the confidence of the Assembly of the People's Representatives in conducting the government of the State. A State Councillor who has been appointed to take charge of any Department of State shall be constitutionally responsible to the Assembly of the People's Representatives for acts performed in the exercise of his functions. But every State Councillor, whether or not he has been appointed to take charge of any Department of State, shall be collectively responsible for the general policy of the Government. 51. The State Council shall resign as a body when the Assembly of the People's Representatives has passed a vote of want of confidence in the Council or when the Assembly which gave it a vote of confidence has ceased to exist. In both cases the retiring State Council shall remain in office till the newly appointed Council assumes its functions. Apart from this, membership of the State Council comes to an end individually (1) by death; (2) by resignation; (3) by loss of the qualifications prescribed in article 21 (4); or (4) by a vote of want of confidence passed by the Assembly. 52. In case of emergency when a meeting of the Assembly of the People's Representatives cannot be summoned in, time, the King may issue emergency decrees which shall provisionally have the force of law. Such decrees shall be submitted to the Assembly at its next meeting for its approval. If the Assembly gives its approval, they shall forthwith become laws, otherwise they shall cease to have force. But such a decision of the Assembly shall not affect the validity of any act done during the period the emergency decrees were in force. The approval or disapproval of the Assembly shall be signified in the form of a law. 53. The King proclaims martial law under the conditions and in the manner prescribed by the Martial Law Act. 54. It is the King's prerogative to declare war, make peace and conclude treaties with foreign States. [cxxxv]	 2a2

A declaration of war will only be made when it is not contrary to the provisions of the Covenant( 1) of the League of. Nations. Treaties which provide for a change in the territories of Siam or which require the promulgation of a law to enforce their provisions must receive the approval of the Assembly of the People's Representatives. 55. It is the King's prerogative to grant pardon. 56. The King may issue Royal decrees not conflicting with the law. 57. Subject to the provisions of articles 32 and 46, every law, Royal rescript and Royal command relating to the affairs of the State shall be countersigned by a member of the State Council who shall thereby assume the responsibility. Chapter V.—The Courts. 58. The judicial power shall be exercised by the courts according to law in the name of the King. 59. All courts can be established only by means of a law. 60. Judges are independent in holding trials and giving judgments according to law. Chapter VI.—Final Provisions. 61. The provisions of any law which are contrary to or in conflict with this constitution are null and void. 62. Absolute right to interpret this constitution is vested in the Assembly of the People's Representatives. 63. This constitution can be amended only under the following conditions : (1) A motion for an amendment can only be made either by the State Council or by members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives collectively of not less than onequarter of their total number. (2) When a motion has once been passed, it should be left in abeyance for a period of one month. On the expiration of this period the motion shall again be submitted to the Assembly. (3) Voting shall be by roll call, and the number of votes in favour of the amendment must not be less than threequarters of the total number of members of the Assembly. When the voting on both occasions has been made in the manner above described, the matter shall be proceeded with in conformity with articles 38 and 39. ( 1) Vol. CXX, page 780.

Chapter VII.—The Operation of the Constitution and Transitory Provisions. 64. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, this constitution shall come into force from the date of its publication. 65. Until the time when the people who are entitled to vote for the candidates of the Assembly of the People's Representatives under this constitution shall have passed their examination in primary..education in excess of half of their total number, and at the latest not more than 10 years from the date on which the provisional constitution of Siam B. E. 2475(2) came into force, the Assembly of the People's Representatives shall be composed of two categories of members of equal number :— (1) Members of the 1st category are those who are elected by the people under the conditions laid down in articles 16 and 17. (2) Members of the 2nd category are those who are appointed by the King in accordance with the Law on the Election of Members of the Assembly of the People's Representatives during the period when the transitory provisions of the constitution of Siam B. E. 2475 are in force. 66. If during the period referred to in article 65 there should be a dissolution of the Assembly of the People's Representatives in accordance with the provisions of article 35, such dissolution shall apply only to the members of the 1st category. 67. Subject to the provisions of article 21 (2), (3), (4), (5), members of the 2nd category shall retain their seats throughout the period prescribed in article 65, but they may not meet as an Assembly when the latter is dissolved under article 35. 68. From the date when this constitution comes into force till the time when members as provided in article 65 shall have assumed their functions, the Assembly of the People's Representatives shall still be composed of the 70 members who were nominated under the provisional constitution of Siam B. E. 2475.

