CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

THAILAND
by MARUT BUNNAG

Issued October 1979

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1979 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

Translation CONSTITUTION OF THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND

SOMDET PHRA PARAMINTHARAMAHA BHUMIBOL ADULYADEJ SAYAMINTHARATHIRAT BOROMANATTHABOPHIT Enacted on the 22nd day of December B.E. 2521 Being the 33rd Year of the Present Reign. May there be virtue. Today is the eighth day of the waning moon in the first month of the year of Goat under the lunar calendar, being Friday, the twenty second day of December under the solar calendar, in the 2521st year of the Buddhist Era. Phrabat Somdet Phra Paramintharamaha Bhumibol Adulyadej Mahitalathibet Ramathibodi Chakkri Narubodin Sayamintharathirat Borommanatthabophit is graciously pleased to proclaim that He was advised by the National Legislative Council that since the grant of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand B.E. 2475 by His Majesty King Prajadhipok Phra Pok Klao Chao Yu Hua, His Majesty's Uncle, there had been amendment to the Constitution and promulgation of new Constitutions on several occasions, and sometimes the changes of situation in the country had resulted in the promulgation of an Interim Constitution, pending the drafting of a permanent Constitution. All Constitutions and Interim Constitutions that had been promulgated were in unity with one another in adhering to the democratic regime of government with the King as Head of the State who should exercise the legislative power through the National Assembly, the executive power through the Council of Ministers, and the judicial power through the Courts. The essential differences between them lied in the forms of the National Assembly and in the relationship between the legislative and the executive powers, depending on the changing situation of the country for the time being. This revealed the faithful adherence of the Thai people to the democratic regime of government with the King
as Head of the State, which was in accordance with the will of His

Majesty's Uncle, King Prajadhipok Phra Pok Klao Chao Yu Hua, in granting the power to administer the State affairs to the Thai people. The adherence to the democratic regime of government with the King as Head of the State had been inherited until the present time. Even the Constitution for the Administration of the Kingdom B.E.2520 had demonstrated such will and entrusted the task of drafting the Constitution to the National Legislative Council so that a general election should be held within the 2521st year of the Buddhist Era. Published in the Government Gazette Vol.95, Part 146, Special Issue, dated 22nd December B.E.2521 (1978)

2 The National Legislative Council had appointed a Committee charged with the duty of drafting the Constitution. When the Constitution had been completely drafted, the National Legislative Council considered the Draft Constitution in three readings in accordance with the common will of the Thai people in upholding the independence and security of the Nation, preserving the religion to become everlasting, enthroning the King as Head of the State and in the hearts

of the Thai

people, adhering to the democratic regime of government with the King as Head of the State as the means of administering the State affairs, upholding and protecting the right and liberties of the Thai people, and uniting to secure justice, prosperity and happiness for all Thai people. Having carefully determined and revised the Draft Constitution in the light of the situation of the country, the National Legislative Council passed a resolution approving the presentation of the Draft Constitution to the King for His Royal Signature to promulgate it as the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand. Having thoroughly examined the Draft Constitution, the King deemed it expedient to grant His Royal assent in accordance with the resolution of the National Legislative Council. Be it, therefore, commanded by the King that the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand be promulgated to replace, as from the date of its promulgation, the Interim Constitution for the Administration of the Kingdom B.E.2520 promulgated on 9th November B.E.2520. May the Thai people unite in protecting the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in order to maintain the democratic regime of government and the sovereign power of the Thai people in the province of the Kingdom, and to bring about happiness, prosperity and dignity to His Majesty's subjects according to the will of His Majesty in every respect.. Chapter I General Provisions Section 1. Thailand is a unified and indivisible Kingdom. Section 2. Thailand adopts a democratic regime of government with the King as Head of the State. Section

3. The sovereign power is derived from the Thai

people. The King as Head of the State shall exercise such power through the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the Courts in accordance with the provision of this Constitution.

3
Section 4. The Thai people, irrespective of their birth or religion, shall enjoy equal protection under this Constitution. Section

5. The provision of any law, which

is

contrary

to or inconsistent with this Constitution, shall be unenforceable.

Chapter II The King Section 6. The King shall be enthroned in a position of revered worship and shall not be violated. No person shall expose the King to any sort of accusation or action. Section religions. Section 8. The King holds the position of Head of the Thai Armed Forces. Section

7. The King is a Buddhist and Upholder of

9. The King has the prerogative power to create

titles and confer decorations. Section 10. The King selects and appoints qualified persons President of the Privy Council and not more than fourteen Privy Councillors to constitute the Privy Council. The Privy Council has a duty to render such advices to the King on all matters pertaining to His functions
as

He may

consult, and has other duties as provided in this Constitution. Section 11. The selection and appointment as well as the removal of a Privy Councillor shall depend entirely upon the Royal prerogative. The President of the National Assembly shall countersign the Royal Command appointing or removing the President of the Privy Council. The President of the Privy Council shall countersign the Royal Command appointing or removing other Privy Councillors. Section 12. A Privy Councillor shall not be a senator,. member of the House of Representatives, government official holding a permanent position or receiving a salary, official of a manifest loyalty to any political party.
State

enterprise, or member or official of a political party, and must not

4

Section 13. Before taking office, a Privy Councillor must make a solemn declaration before the King in the following words: "I, (name of the declarer), do solemnly declare that I will be loyal to the King and will faithfully perform my duties in the interests of the country and of the people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect." Section 14. A Privy Councillor vacates his office upon death, resignation, or removal by a Royal Command. Section 15. The appointment and the removal of officials of the Royal Household and of the Royal Chief Aide-de-Camp shall depend entirely upon the Royal prerogative. Section 16. Whenever the King is absent from the Kingdom or unable to perform His functions for whatever reason, He will appoint a person Regent with the approval of the National Assembly, and the President of the National Assembly shall countersign the Royal Command. Section 17. In the case where the King does not appoint a Regent under section 16, or in the case where the King is unable to appoint a Regent owing to His not being sui juris or to any other reason whatever, the Privy Council shall submit the name of a person suitable to hold the office of Regent to the National Assembly for approval. Upon approval by the National Assembly, the President of the National Assembly shall make an announcement in the name of the King, of the appointment of such person as Regent. Section 18. In the absence of the Regent under section 16 or section 17, the President of the Privy Council shall be Regent
pro tempore.

In the case where the Regent appointed under section 16 or section 17 is unable to perform his duties, the President of the Privy Council shall temporarily act as Regent. While being Regent under paragraph one or acting as Regent under paragraph two, the President of the Privy Council shall not perform his duties as President of the Privy Council. In such case, the Privy Council shall select a Privy Councillor to act temporarily es President of the Privy Council.

5

Section 19. Before taking office, the Regent appointed under section 16 or section 17 shall make a solemn declaration before the National Assembly in the following words: "I (name of the declarer), -do solemnly declare that I will be loyal to :xis Majesty King (name of the King) and will faithfully perform my duties in the interests of the country and of the people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect." Section 20. The succession to the Throne shall be in accordance with the Palace Law on Succession B.E. 2467 and in accordance with the approval of the National Assembly. In the absence of a Prince, the National Assembly may approve the succession by a Princess. The amendment of the Palace Law on Succession B.E. 2467 shall be made in the same manner as an amendment of the Constitution. Section 21. In the case where the Throne beoomes vacant, the Privy Council shall, in accordance with section 20, submit the name of the Heir to the Throne to the National Assembly for approval. Upon the approval of the National Assembly, the President of the National Assembly shall invite such Heir to ascend the Throne and proclaim him King. Pending the proclamation of the name of the Heir to the Throne under paragraph one, the President of the Privy Council shall temporarily be Regent. In the case where the Throne becomes vaoant while the Regent has been appointed under section 16 or section 17 or while the President of the Privy Council is acting as Regent under section 18 paragraph ono, such Regent, as the case may be, shall continue to be Regent until the proclamation of the name of the Heir to the Throne. In the case where the Regent who has been appointed and continues to be Regent under paragraph two is unable to perform his duties, the President of the Privy Council shall act temporarily
as Regent.

In the case where President of the Privy Council is Regent under paragraph two or acts temporarily as Regent under paragraph three, the provision of section 18 paragraph three shall apply.

6

Rights and

Chapter III Liberties of the Thai

People

Section 22. All persons shall enjoy rights and liberties subject to the provision of the Constitution. Section 23. All persons are equal before the law and shall enjoy equal protection under the law. Section 24. All persons shall enjoy political rights. The exercise of political rights shall be in accordance with the provision of law. Section 25. Every person shall enjoy full liberty to profess a religion, a religious sect or creed, and to exercise a form of worship in accordance with his belief; provided that it is not contrary to his civic duties or to public order or good morals. In exercising the liberty referred to in paragraph one, every person is protected from any act of the State, which is derogatory to his rights or detrimental to his due benefits, on the ground of professing a religion, a religious sect or creed, or of exercising a form of worship in accordance with his belief different from that of others. Section 26. No person shall be inflicted with a criminal punishment unless he has committed an act which the law in force at the time of commission provides it to be an offence and imposes a punishment therefor, and the punishment to be inflicted on such person shall not be heavier than that provided by the law in force at the time of commission. Section 27. An alleged offender or an accused in a criminal case shall be presumed innocent. Before the passing of a final judgment convicting a person of having committed an offence, such person shall not be treated as a convict. Section 28. Every person shall enjoy the liberty of his person. The arrest, detention or search of a person, irrespective of the circumstances, shall not be made except by virtue of la,.

7
Section 29. In the case where the alleged offender or the accused is poor and unable to pay for his own advocate, that person is entitled to obtain legal aid from the State as provided by law. Section 30. In the case where any person was inflicted with a criminal punishment by a final judgment., if it appears in the judgment of the court re-openin g the case thereafter that he did not commit the alleged offence, he shall be entitled to compensation and to recover any right he had lost by virtue of the results of the judgment upon the condition and in the manner provided by law. Section

31.

Forced labour shall not he im p osed except by

virtue of law specifically enacted for the purpose of averting imminent public calamity or by virtue of the law which provides for its imposition during the time when the country is in a state . of armed conflict or war, or when a state of emergency or martial law is declared. Section 32. Every person shell enjoy the liberty of dwelling. Every person is protected for his peaceful habitation in and for possession of his dwelling. The entry into a dwelling without the consent of its possessor or the search thereof shall not be made except by virtue of law. Section

33.

The property right of a person is protected.

The extent and restriction of such right shall be in accordance with the provision of law. The succession is protected. The right of succession of a person shall be in accordance with the provision of law. The expropriation of immovable property shall not be made except by virtue of law specifically enacted for the purpose of public utility, national defence, exploitation of national resources, town and country planning, agricultural or industrial development, land reform, or other

public

interests, and fair compensation shall be paid in due

time to the owner thereof as well as to the person having the right thereto, who suffers loss by such expropriation, as to be specified by law. The amount of compensation under paragraph three shall be assessed with due to the node of acquisition, nature and situation of the immovable property as well as the cause and purposes of the expropriation so as to secure social justice.

The immovable property, acquired by way of expropriation for a certain purpose, if not being used to fulfil that purpose within the period of time prescribed by law, shall be returned to the original owner or his heir unless it is used for other purposes according to paragraph three pursuant to. the provision of law. The return of immovable property to the original owner or his heir under paragraph five and the claim of compensation paid shall be in accordance with the provision of law. Section 34. Every person shall enjoy the liberty of speech, writing, printing and publication. The restriction on such liberty shall not be imposed except by virtue of law specifically enacted for the purpose of maintaining the security of State or safeguarding the liberties, dignity or reputation of other persons or maintaining public order or good morals or preventing deterioration of the mind or health of the public. The press owner shall be a Thai national subject to the conditions prescribed by law. No grant of money or other properties shall be made by the State as subsidy to a private newspaper. Section 35. Every person shall enjoy the liberty of education; provided that such education is not contrary to his civic duties under the Constitution, and to the law relating to compulsory education and the law relating to the organization of educational establishments. Section 36. Every person shall enjoy the liberty to assemble peacefully and without arms. The restrictions on such liberty shall not be imposed except by virtue of law specifically enacted for the case of public meetings and for securing public conveniences in the use of public places or for maintaining public order during the time when the country is in a state of armed conflict or war, or when a state of emergency or martial law is declared. Section 37. Every person shall enjoy the liberty to form en association, union, league, co-operative or any other group. The formation, incorporation, management and dissolution of an association, union, league, co-operative or any other group shall be in accordance with the provision of law.

9
Section 38. Every person shall enjoy the liberty to form a political party for the purpose of performing the political activities through the means of a democratic regime as provided in this Constitution. The formation, incorporation, management and dissolution of a political party shall be in accordance with the provision of the law on political parties. A political party shall openly disclose its sources of income and the expenditure. Section 39. Every person shall enjoy the liberty of communication by lawful means. The censorship, detention or disclosure of communication between persons including any other act disclosing a statement in the communication between persons, shall not be effected except by virtue of law specifically enacted for public order or good morals, public safety, or for maintaining the security of the State. Section 40. Every person shall enjoy the liberty of travelling and the liberty of making the choice of his residence within the Kingdom. The restriction on such liberties shall not be imposed except by virtue of law specifically enacted for the purpose of maintaining the security of the country, public order, public welfare, town and country planning or welfare of the youth. No person of Thai nationality shall be deported or prohibited from entering the Kingdom. Section 41. Family rights are protected. Section 42. Every person shall have a right to present a petition upon the conditions and in the manner provided by law. Section 43. The right of a person to sue a Government agency which is a juristic person to be liable for an official is protected. Section 44. Persons who are in the armed forces and the police force, government officials, local government officials and employees of State organizations shall enjoy the same rights and liberties under the Constitution as those accorded to the people unless such enjoyment is restricted by law, bye-law or regulation issued by virtue of law specifically enacted in so far as it is concerned with politics, efficiency or discipline.
done by

10
Section 45. No person shall exercise the rights and liberties under the Constitution against the Nation, religion, the King and Constitution.

Chapter IV Duties of the Thai People

Section 46. Every person shall have a duty to uphold the Nation, religion, the King and the Democratic Regime of Government under this Constitution. Section 47. Every person shall have a duty to defend the country. Section 48. Every person shall have a duty to serve in the armed forces as provided by law. Section 49. Every person shall have a duty to comply with
the law.

Section 50. Every person shell have a duty to pay taxes and duties imposed by law. Section 51. Every person shall have a duty to render assistance to the official service as provided by law. Section 52. Every person shall have a duty to receive education and training under the conditions and in the manner provided by law.

Chapter V Directive Principles of State Policies

Section 53. The provision of this Chapter is intended to be used as directive principles for legislating and determining the policies, and shall not give rise to any cause of action against the State. Section 54. The State shall maintain the institution of kingship, the independence and integrity of its territories. Section 55. The State should promote friendly relations with other countries and adopt the principle of reciprocity.

11
Section

54.

The State shall arrange for the maintenance of

the armed forces for safeguarding its independence, security of the State and national interest. The armed forces shall be employed in an armed conflict or a war, for the protection of the institution of kingship, for suppressing a rebellion and a riot, for maintaining the security of the State and for national development. Section

57.

The State shall enforce the law and order so

that the people may be assured of the safety in their lives, persons and property an well as in their peaceful existence. Section 58. The State should organize the systems of official service and other State affairs for the achievement of efficiency and should take every measure to prevent and suppress corruption. Section

59.

The State should organize the system of judicial

process to ensure justice to the people and to meet the requirement of expediency. Section 60. The State should promote and support education end professional training according to the suitability and to the demand of the country. The organization of educational system is an exclusive duty of the State. All educational establishments shall be under the control and supervision of the State. The State should provide the indigent persons with grants and requisites in their education and occupational training. Compulsory education in the educational establishments of the State is to be provided without charge. As for higher education, the State should allow educational establishments to manage their own affairs within the limits provided by law. Section 61. The State should encourage researches in arts and sciences and should promote the application of science and technology in the development of the country. Section 62. The State should support and promote national youth development so that they may be physically mentally and intellectually sound for the purpose of economic and social development end for the security of the State.

12

Section 63. The State should promote public understanding of and public belief in the democratic regime of government with the King as its Head as well as the local government. The State should ensure the local people to enjoy the right of self-government as provided by law. Section 64. The State should promote and conserve the national culture. Section 65. The State should conserve the balance of environment and eliminate pollution. which jeopardizes the health and hygiene of the people. Section 66. The State should proceed to raise the economic and social status of individuals to the level of comfortable livelihood. Section 67. The State should, by means of land reform or by other means, secure land ownership or rights in land to all farmers for engaging in agriculture. The State should protect and preserve the interests of the farmers in the production and in the disposition of their produce by means of price guarantee, or price maintenance as well as organizing the system and control of production and disposition appropriate to the demand of the market or by other means, and should promote the assembling of farmers in the form of co-operatives or other forms. Section 68. The State should support economic initiative in the private sector. The State should engage in an enterprise in the nature of public utility in such a way as to be beneficial to the people as a whole. An enterprise in the nature of public utility shall be engaged by individuals only if done by virtue of law. The Stete should impose measures to prevent direct or indirect economic monopoly by individuals, which is not created by virtue of law. Section 69. The State should have a demographic policy appropriate for natural resources, economic and social conditions, and technological progress for the purpose of economic and social development and for the security of the State.

13

Section 70. The State should give aids to persons suffering from performing duties for the Nation, or rendering assistance to the official service or performing a moral duty, or from natural calamities.. Section 71. The State should promote and support the State and private social works for the welfare and happiness of the people. Section 72. The State should support the people of working age to obtain suitable employments, ensure the fair protection of labour, and provide for the system of labour relations including the settlement of fair wages. Section 73. The State should promote public health and provide the indigent persons with free medical treatment. The State shall prevent and suppress harmful contagious diseases in the interest of the public without charge.

Chapter VI The National Assembly

Part 1 General Provisions Section 74. The National Assembly consists of the Senate and the House of Representatives. Joint or separate sittings of the National Assembly shall be in accordance with the provision of this Constitution. Section 75. The President of the Senate is President of the National Assembly. The President of the House of Representatives is Vice-President of the National Assembly. The President of the National Assembly has the power and duty to conduct the proceedings of the National Assembly at joint sittings in accordance with the rules of procedure and has other powers and duties as provided in this Constitution. In the case where the President of the National Assembly is absent or is unable to perform his duties, the Vice-President shall act in his place. Section 76. A bill may be enacted as law only by and with the advice and consent of the National Assembly.

14

Section

77.

After a bill has been approved by the

National Assembly, the Prime Minister shall present it to the King for signature and it shall come into force upon its publication in the Government Gazette. Section 78. If the King refuses His assent to a bill and either returns it to the National Assembly or does not return it within ninety days, the National Assembly must re-deliberate such bill. If the National Assembly resolves to reaffirm the bill with the votes of not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of both Houses, the Prime Minister shall present such bill to the King for signature once again. If the King does not sign and return the bill within thirty days, the Prime Minister shall cause the bill to be promulgated as an Act in the Government Gazette as if the King had signed it. Section 79. The President and the Vice-President of the Senate, the President and the Vice-President of the House of Representatives, the Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives, senators and members of the House of Representatives shell receive emoluments and other considerations in accordance with the law. Section 80, No person shall be a senator and member of the House of Representatives simultaneously. Section 81. Senators or members of the House of Representatives of not less than one-tenth of the total number of members of each House have a right to lodge with the President of the House of which they are members a complaint asserting that the membership of any member of the House has terminated under section
87(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9)

or (10) or section 103 (3), (4), (5), (6), (7),

(9) (10) or (11), as the case may be, and the President of the House
with whom the complaint is lodged shall refer it to the Constitutional Tribunal for decision as to whether person has terminated. When the Constitutional Tribunal has made its deoision, the Constitutional Tribunal shall inform the President of the House with whom the complaint is lodged under paragraph one of such decision. the membership of suoh

Section 82. In the case where any senator or member of the House of Representatives doing an act jeopardizing the dignity of membership of the Senate or the House of Representatives, senators or members of the House of Representatives, as the case may be, of not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of each House have the right to lodge with the President of the House of which they are members a complaint in order to have the Senate or the House of Representative decide to terminate the membership of that member. Section 83. The vacation of the office of a senator or a member of the House of Representatives after the day on which his membership terminates or after the decision of the Constitutional Tribunal that the membership of any person terminates does not affect any act done by such person in the capacity of a member including the receipt of emoluments or other considerations by such member before he vacates his office , or the President of the House of which such person is a member has been informed of the decision of the Constitutional Tribunal, as the case may be.

Part 2
The Senate

Section 84. The Senate is composed of members to be appointed by the King from qualified persons- possessing knowledge and experience in various branches of learning or affairs which will be useful to the administration of the State, being of Thai nationality by birth, being not less than thirty-five years of age, and not being a member of any political party. The number of senators shall not exceed three-fourths of the total number of members of the House of Representatives. Section 85. The Membership of the Senate is six years from the date of appointment by the King. As for the initial stage, one-third of the total number of senators shall retire by drawing lots after two years in office. At the end of the period of four years from the date of appointment by the King, one-half of the senators who remain in office after drawing lots at the end of the period of the first two years shall retire by drawing lots. If the number so calculated has any fraction, the fraction shall be disregarded. The termination of membership by drawing lots shall be regarded as retirement at the expiration of term of office.

16

The King shall have the prerogative to re-appoint the persons retiring at the expiration of term of office. Section 86. Section 97 except (1) shall apply mutatis
mutandis to senators.

Paragraph one shall not apply to cases where a senator takes or holds the position of a committee member appointed in the course of the administration of State affairs or State enterprise. Section 87. The membership of a senator terminates upon: (1) the expiration of term of office; (2) death; (3) resignation; (4) loss of Thai nationality; (5) becoming a member of any political party; (6) acting in contravention of the prohibition under section 86; (7) disenfrachisement under section 96 (1), (2) or (3); (8) the Senate passing a resolution terminating the membership in accordance with section 82. In such case, the membership shall be terminated at the date of the resolution; (9) having been absent throughout a session, which is not less than ninety days without the permission of the President of the Senate. (10) being sentenced to imprisonment by a final judgment
except that the sentence is for an offence committed through negligence or for a petty offence

Section 88. If the office of a senator becomes vacant for any reason other than the expiration of his term of office, the King will appoint a person properly qualified under section 84 to fill the vacancy. The senator so appointed may serve only for the remainder of his predecessor's term of office.

Part 3
The House of Representatives

Section 89. The House of Representatives is composed of members to be elect by the people for the number determined on the basis provided in section 90. Section 90. The number of members of the House of Representatives to be elected shall be determined by the number of

17

inhabitants in each Changwat as evidenced in the census announced in the year preceding the year of the election on the basis of the ratio of one member of the House of Representatives to one hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants. A Changwat with the inhabitants less than one hundred and fifty thousand shall elect one member, while a Changwat with the inhabitants exceeding one hundred and fifty thousand shall elect an additional member for every one hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants; any fraction thereof; if amounting to seventy-five thousand or more, shall be counted as one hundred and fifty thousand. For the election of members of the House of Representatives; the area of a Changwat shall be regarded as one constituency, except that Bangkok Metropolis shall be divided into three constituencies and each constituency shall have equal or approximately equal number of members of the House of Representatives; the boundaries of each constituency shall be adjoining and the ratio of the number of inhabitants to the number of members of the House of Representatives to be elected in one constituency must be close to that in another constituency. Section

91. The election of members of the House of

Representatives shall be conducted by group voting in accordance with the lists of the names of the candidates supported by the political parties to stand in the constituencies. The election shall be conducted by direct suffrage and secret ballot. Section

92. A person having the following qualifications

has the right to vote at an election: (1) being of Thai nationality by birth; provided that a Thai national having alien father must also possess qualifications stipulated by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives; (2) being not less than twenty years of age on 1st January of the year of the election; (3) having his name appeared on the house register in the constituency. Section 93. A person under any of the following prohibitions on the date of the election is disenfranchised: (1) being of unsound mind or of mental infirmity; (2) being deaf and dumb and illiterate; (3) being a Buddhist priest, novice, monk or clergy; (4) being detained by a warrant of the Court lawful order;

or by a

18

(5) being in the state of disenfranchisement by a judgment. Section 94. A person having the following qualifications has the right to be a candidate at an election: (1) being of Thai nationality by birth; provided that a Thai national having alien father must also possess the qualifications stipulated by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives; (2) being not less than twenty-five years of age on the date of the election; (3) being a member either of the political party sending members to stand for election under section 95 or of the political party under section 104 paragraph two; (4) having other qualifications, if any, as stipulated by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives. Section 95. In the general election, the political party, the members of which shall have a right to stand as candidates under section 94 (3), must be the party sending members of not less then one-half of the total number of members of the House of Representatives to stand as candidates election. And in each constituency where the said political party sends its members to stand for election, the members shall stand as a group of candidates equal in number to that of the members of the House of Representatives and each political party shall send only one group in each constituency. When any political party has sent the candidates to stand for election, that political party or its candidates cannot withdraw the candidatures. When any political party has sent the candidates in the required number according to paragraph one, and thereafter the number of the candidates of that political party has reduced below the required number for any reason whatever, that political party shall be regarded as having sent the candidates for the required number according to paragraph one. Section 96. A person under any of the following prohibitions shall have no right to be a candidate at an election: (1) being addicted to harmful habit forming drugs; (2) being an undischarged bankrupt; (3) being disfranchised under section 93(1),(2),(3) or (5);

19 (4) having been sentenced by a judgment or ordered by a

lawful order for imprisonment and having been detained by a warrant of the Court or the order; (5) having been discharged for a period of less than five years on the election day after being sentenced or ordered by a judgment or lawful order to imprisonment for a term of two years or over except for an offence committed through negligence; (6) being a government official or local government official holding a permanent position or receiving a salary except a political official; (7) being an official of a State agency or State enterprise. Section 97. A member of the House of Representatives shall not (1) hold any position or have any duty in any government agency or State agency or State enterprise, or a position of member of the local assembly, local administrator or local official, except the position of the Minister or any other political official; (2) receive any concession from the State or a government agency or State agency or State enterprise or become a party to the contract of the nature of economic monopoly with the State or indirectly; (3) receive any special money or benefit from any government agency or State agency or State enterprise apart from what the government agency or State agency or State enterprise gives to other persons in the ordinary course of business. The provision of (2) shall not apply in the case where a member of the House of Representatives received the concession or became a party to the contract before he is elected. The provision of this section shall not apply in the case where a member of the house of Representatives receives Bia Wad, gratuities, pensions, or annuities or any other form of payments of the same nature, and shall not apply in the case where a member of the House of Representatives accepts or holds the position of committee member of the National Assembly or the House of Representatives, or committee member appointed as a qualified person under the provision of law, or committee member appointed in the course of the administration of the State affairs in case he holds e position of political official.

a govern-

ment agency or State agency or State enterprise, whether directly or

20

Section 98. Subject to the provision of this Constitution, the rules and procedure of election shall be in accordance with the law on election of members of the House of Representatives. Section 99. The term of the House of Representatives is four years from the date of the election. Section 100. Upon expiration of the term of the House of Representatives, the King will issue a Royal Decree calling for a general election of members of the House of Representatives in which the election day must be fixed within sixty the date of expiration of the
term of days

from

the House of Representatives

and the election day must be te same all over the Kingdom. Section 101. The King has the prerogative of dissolving the House of Representatives for a new election of members of the House of Representatives. The dissolution of the House of Representatives shall be made in the form of a Royal Decree in which the election day for the general election must be fixed within ninety days and such election day must be the same all over the Kingdom. The dissolution of the House of Representatives may be made only once under the same circumstance. Section 102. The membership of the House of Representatives commences on the election day. Section 103. The membership of the House of Representatives terminates upon: (1) the expiration of the term or dissolution of the House of Representatives; (2) death; (3) resignation; (4) being disqualified under section 94(1), (2) or (4); (5) being under any prohibition provided in section 96(1), 2 ), (3), ( 6 ) or (7); (6) having done an act prohibited by section 97; (7) the resignation from membership of his political party
or

his political party passing a resolution of not less than

three-fourths of the joint meeting of the executive committee of the political party and members of the House of Representatives belonging to that political party terminating his membership of the political party. In such cases, his membership shall be deemed to have terminated from the date of resignation or the resolution of the political party;

21 (8) the House of Representatives passing a resolution terminating the membership. under section 82. In such case-, his membership shall be deemed to have terminated from the date of the resolution of the House of Representatives. (9) the loss of membership of the political party in the case where the political party of which he is a member is dissolved by an order of the Court and he is unable to become a member of another political party within sixty days. from the date on which the Court issues its order. In. such case, his membership shall be deemed to have terminated on the day following the date on which sixty days have elapsed. (10) Representatives; (11) having been imprisoned by a final judgment of imprisonment except for an offence committed through negligence or a petty offence.
Section 104. If the office of member of the-House of Repre-

having been absent throughout a session which is not less

than ninety days without the. permission of the President of the House of

sentatives becomes vacant for any reason other than the expiration. of the term or the dissolution of the House of Representatives, an election of a member of the House of Representatives to fill the vacancy shall be held within ninety days unless the remainder of the term of the House of Representatives is less than One hundred and eighty days. In the election under paragraph one, the. candidate for an election shall be member of the political party having its members being members of the House of Representatives elected at the general election, and section 95 shall apply mutatis mutandis. The replacing member of the House of Representatives may serve only for the remainder of the - term of the House of Representatives. Section 105. After the Council of Ministers has assumed the administration of the State affairs, the King will appoint as Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives a member of the House of Representatives who is leader of the political party having its members of the House of Representatives holding no ministerial position, and having the largest number of members of the House of Representatives among the political parties having their members of the House of Representatives holding no ministerial position, and such number must not be less than one-fifth of the total number of members of the House of Representatives. The President of the House of Representatives shall countersign the Royal Command appointing the Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives.

The Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives Shall vacate office upon being disqualified as referred to in paragraph one, and section 109 shall apply mutatis mutandis, and in such case, the King will appoint new Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives to fill the vacancy.

Part 4 Provisions Applicable to Both Houses Section 106. Senators and members of the House of Representatives are representatives of the Thai people. Section 107. Before taking office, a senator and a member of the House of Representatives must make a solemn declaration

in a sitting of the House of which he is a member in the following
words: "I, (name of the declarer), do solemnly declare that I will perform :Ay duties in accordance with the honest dictates of my conscience for the common interest of the Thai people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect." Section 108. The Senate and the House of Representatives shall each have one President and one or two Vice-Presidents who are appointed by the King from the members of such House in accordance with its resolution. Section 109. The President and the Vice-President of the Senate hold office until the day preceding the date of election of the new President: and Vice-President; which must be held every two years. The President and the Vice-President of the House of Representatives hold office until the expiration of the term or the dissolution of the House. The President and the Vice-President of the Senate and the President and the Vice-President of the House of Representatives vacate office before the expiration of term of office under paragraph one or paragraph two, as the case may be, upon; (1) the lost of membership of the House of which he is a member; (2) resignation from office; (3) holding a position of Minister or of other political official;

(4) being sentenced by a judgment of imprisonment.

23

Section 110. The President of the Senate and the President of the House of Representatives have the power and duty to carry out the business of the Houses in accordance with their rules of procedure. The Vice-President has the power and duty to act on behalf of the President when the President

is

absent or unable to perform his duty.

Section 111. When the President and the Vice-President of the Senate or the President and the Vice-President of the House of Representatives are absent fro m any sitting, the members of each House shall elect one among themselves to preside over .such sitting, Section 112. At a sitting of the Senate or of the House of. Representatives, the presence of not less than one-half of the total number of members of each House. is required

to

constitute a quorum.

Section 113. A resolution on any issue shall be made by a majority of votes unless it is otherwise provided in this Constitution. In casting the vote, each member has one vote. In case of an equality of votes, the presiding member as a casting vote. Section 114. At a sitting of the Senate or of the House of. Representatives or at a joint sitting of the National Assembly, words expressed in giving a statement of fact or opinion or in casting the vote by any member are absolutely privileged. No charge or action manner whatever shall be brought against such member. This privilege also extends to printers and publishers of the minutes of sittings in accordance with the regulations pf the Senate or of the House of Representatives, as the case may bp, and to persons permitted by the presiding member to give a statement of fact at such sittings. Section 115. The National Assembly shall, within thirty days from the date of the election of members of the House of Representatives, be summoned for the first sitting. Each year, there shall be one or two ordinary sessions of the National Assembly as may be determined by the Reuse of Representives. The day on which tLe first sitting referred to in paragraph one is held shall be considered as the first day of the annual

shall

have

an

additional votes

in

any

or

opinion

ordinary

.session, and the first day of the succeeding annual ordinary session . shall be fixed by the House of Representatives.

24 Section 116. An ordinary session of the National Assembly shall last ninety days .but the King may prolong it. An ordinary session may be prorogued before the end of ninety days only with the approval of the National Assembly, Section 117. The King convokes the National Assembly. He opens and prorogues its session. The King may be present to perform the opening ceremony of the first annual ordinary session or may command the Heir to the Throne who is sui tative. • Section 118, When it is necessary for the interests of the State, the King may convoke an extraordinary session of the National Assembly. Section 119. Senators and members of the House of Representatives collectively, or members of the House of Representatives, of not less than one-third of the total number of members of both Houses have the right to present their petition to the King for the issue of a Royal Command convoking an extraordinary session of the' National Assembly. The petition referred to in paragraph one shall be lodged with the President of the National Assembly. The President of the National Assembly shall present the petition to the King and countersign the Royal Command. Section 120. Subject to section 119, the convocation, the prolongation of session and the prorogation of the National Assembly shall be made by a Royal Decree. Section 121.
No

juris or any person to perform the ceremony as His Represen-

senator or member of the House of Represen-

tatives shall, during a session, be arrested or detained or summoned by a warrant for inquiry as an alleged offender in a criminal case unless permission of the House of which he is a member is obtained or he is arrested in flagrante delicto.• In the case where a senator or a member of the House of Representatives has been arrested in flagrante delicto, it shall be forthwith reported to the President of the House of which he is a member and the President of the [louse of which he is a member may order the •release of the person so arrested.

25 Section 122. In the case where a criminal charge is brought against a senator or a member of the House of Representatives, whether the House -is in session or not, the Court shall not try the case during a session unless permission of the House of which he is a member is obtained; provided that the proceedings of the Court shall not hinder such member from attending the sitting of the House. The proceedings of- the Court before the invocation of membership of either House of the accused are valid. Section 123. If a senator or member the House of Represen-

tatives is detained during the inquiry or trial before the beginning of

a. session, where the session begins, the inquiry official or the Court,
as the case may be, must order his release as soon as the House of which he is a member has so requested. The order of release under paragraph one shall be effective as from the date of such order until the last day of the session. Section. 124, Subject to section 161, the Senate shall not hold its sitting during the expiration of the term or the dissolution of the House of Representatives. Section 125. Bills may be introduced only by the Council of Ministers or members of the. House of Representatives, but coney hills may be introduced by members of the House of Representatives-only with the endorsement of the Prime Minister. A member of The House of Representatives may introduce a bill only if the political party of which he is a member has passed a resolution approving the introduction thereof, and the bill is endorsed by not less than twenty members of the House of Representatives who are members of that political party. A money bill means a bill with provision-dealing with one or all of the following matters: (1) repeal, reduction, alteration, modification, imposition, remission, or regulation of taxes or duties; (2) (3) (4) allocation, receipt, custody, or payment of the State raising of loans, or guarantee or redemption of loans; currency. funds or transfer of expenditure estimates of the State;

In case of doubt as to whether a bill is a money bill which requires the endorsement of the Prime Minister, it shall be the power of the President of the House of Representatives to make a decision thereon.

26

Section 126. A bill shall be first submitted to the House of Representatives. Section 127. Subject to section 133, when the House of Representatives has considered a bill submitted under section 126 and resolves to Approve it, the House of Representatives shall submit Ouch bill to the Senate. The Senate must finish the consideration of the bill within sixty days; if it is. a. money bill, the consideration thereof must be finished within thirty days; provided
that the House of Representatives may resolve to extend the period

as a special case. The
reaches the Senate.

said period shall mean the period during

a session and shall be counted as from the day on which such bill The Period referred to in paragraph one shall not include the period during which .the bill is under the consideration of the Constitutional Tribunal under section 130. If the Senate has not finished the consideration of the bill within the period referred to in paragraph one, it shall be deemed that the Senate has approved such bill. In the base where the House of Representatives submits a money bill to the Senate, the President of the House of Representatives shall also advise the Senate that the bill so submitted is

a money bill. The advice of the President of the House of Representatives shall be deemed final. In the case where the President of the House of Representatives does_ net advise the Senate that the bill is a money bill, such_ bill shall not be deemed a money bill. Section 12e., Subject to section 133, after the Senate

has finished the consideration of a bills
(1) if it agrees with the House of Representatives, further proceedings under section 77 shall be taken; (2) if it disagrees with the House of Representatives, such bill shall be withheld and returned to the House of Representatives; (3) if there is an amendment, the amended bill shall be -returned to the House of Representatives; in such case, each House shall appoint its Members or other persons in equal number as may be fixed by the House of Representatives to constitute a joint committee for consideration of the bill; the joint committee shall prepare a report thereon and submit the bill which it has already considered to both Houses; if both Houses approve the bill considered by the joint committee, further proceedings under section 77 shall be taken; if either House disapproves the bill, such bill shall be withheld.

27

The joint committee has the power to demand documents from any person or summon any person to give a statement of fact or opinion in respect of the consideration of the bill and-the privilege provided in section 114 shall also extend to the person performing his duties under this section. At a meeting of the joint committee, the presence of not less than one-half of the total number of its members in required to constitute
a

quorem and the rules of procedure of the

House of Representatives in so far as the committee is concerned shall apply mutatis mutandis. Section 12). A bill withheld under section 128 may be reconsidered by the House of Representatives only after the lapse of one hundred and eighty days from the date the bill is returned to the Rouse of Representatives by the Senate in case of withholding under section 123(2) and from the date either House disapproves the bill in case of withholding under section 128(3). In such eases? if the House of Representatives resolves to-reaffirm the original bill or the bill considered by the joint committee by the votes of more than one-half of the total number of members of the House, such bill shall be deemed to have been approved Assembly and further proceedings under
by

the National

section 77 shall be taken.

If the bill withheld is a money bill, the House of Representatives may forthwith proceed -to reconsider it. In such case, if t h e House of Representatives resolves to reaffirm the .original bill or the bill considered
by

the joint committee by the votes of

more than one-half of the total number of members of the House, such bill shall be deemed to have been approved by the National Assembly' and further ` proceedings under section 77 shall be taken. Section 130. While a bill isbeing withheld under section 123, the Council of Ministers or members of the House of . Representatives may not introduce e bill having the same or similar principle as that of the bill so withheld. in the case where. the Senate . or the 'House of Representatives is of the opinion that the bill so. introduced or referred to for consideration has the same or similar principle as that of the bill being withheld, the President of the Senate or the President of House of Representatives shall refer the said bill to the Constitutional Tribunal decides that it is
a
fpr

decision. if the Constitutional Tribunal

bill having the same or similar principle as

that of the bill so withteld, such bill shall lapse.

28 Section 131. In the case where the term of the House of Representatives expires or the House of Representatives is dissolved, all bills which have riot yet been approved by the National Assembly, those to which the King has refused assent and those which have not been returned by the King within ninety days shall lapse. Section 132. The expenditure estimates of State shall be made in the form of an Act. If the Annual Appropriations Act for the following fiscal year is not enacted in time, the law on annual appropriations for the preceding fiscal year shall apply foi the time -being. Section 133. The House of Representatives must finish the consideration of the annual appropriations bill, the supplementary - appropriations bill and the transfer of appropriations bill within ninety days from the date the bills reach the House of Representatives. louse of Representatives has not finished the If the B consideration of the bill within the period referred to in paragraph one, such bill shall be deemed to have been approved by the House of Representatives and shall be submitted to the Senate. In the consideration of the bill, the Senate must approve

or disapprove it within fifteen days from the date the bill reaches
the Senate. After such period, such bill shall be deemed to have been Approved; in such case and in the case where the Senate approves it, further proceedings under section 77 shall be taken. If the Senate disapproves the bill, section 129 paragraph two shall apply mutatis mutandis. In the consideration of the annual appropriations bill, the supplementary appropriations bill and the transfer of appropriations bill, a member of the House of Representatives shall not submit e motion adding any item or amount to the bill, but may submit a motion reducing or abridging the expenditures which are not expenditures according to any one of the following obligations: (1) (2) (3) money for payment of the principal of a loan; interest on a loan; money payable in accordance with the law.
The payment of State funds shall be made

Section 134.

only when it has been authorized by the law on appropriations, the law on budgetary procedure, the law on transfer of appropriations or the law on treasury balance, except that it may be

29

prepaid in the case of urgent necessity under the rules and procedure provided by the law.- In such case, the expenditure estimates for reimbursement must be set aside in the Transfer of Appropriations Act, the Supplementary Appropriations Act, or the Annual Appropriations Act for the following fiscal year. Section 135. The Senate and the House of Representatives are, by virtue of this Constitution, vested with the power to control the administration of the State affairs. Section 136. At a sitting of the Senate or of the House of Representatives, every member- has the right to interpellate a Minister on any matter within the scope of his authority but the Minister has the right to decline to answer if the Council of Ministers. is of the opinion that the matter should not yet be disclosed on the ground of safety or vital interest of the State. Section 137. Members of the House of Representatives of not less than one-fifth of the -total number of members of the

House of Representatives have the right to submit a motion for a
general debate for the purpose of passing a vote of no-confidence in an individual Minister or in the Council of Ministers.

If the general debate is concluded with a r esolution not
to pass over the agenda of the general debate, the House of Representatives shall pass a vote of confidence or no-confidence. Voting in such case shall not take place on the same day as that of the conclusion of the debate. The vote of no-confidence must be passed by more than one-half' of .the total number of members of the House. In the case where a vote of no-confidence is passed by not more than one-half of the total number of members of the House, the members of the House of Representatives who submit the motion for the general debate shall no longer have the right to submit another motion for the general debate for the purpose of passing a vote of no-confidence in an individual Minister or in the Council of Ministers throughout the session. Section 138. The sittings of the Senate and of the House of Representatives and the joint sittings of the National Assembly are public under the conditions stipulated in the rules of procedure of each House. A sitting in camera shall be held as the request of the Council of Ministers or members of not less than quarter of the total number of members of each House or of both Houses, as the case may be.

30 Section 139. The Senate and the House of Representatives have the power to select and appoint members of 'each House to constitute a standing committee and. have the power to select and appoint members or other persons to constitute an ad hoc committee in order to perform any act, inquire into, or study any matter as may be assigned by the House and report its findings to the House. The said committee may demand documents from any person or summon any person to give a statement of fact or opinion on the act or the matter Under its inquiry or study. The privilege provided in section 114 shall also extend to the persons performing their duties under this section. The number of members of a standing committee to be appointed shall be in proportion to or in close proportion to the number of Members of the House of Representatives of each political party or group of political parties in the House of Representatives. In the absence of the rules of procedure of the House of Representatives under section 142, the President of the House of Representatives shall determine the proportion under paragraph three. Section 140. At a meeting of the committee, the presence of tot less than one-half of the total number of members of the committee is required to constitute a quorum.. Section 141. Subject to section 191, if there is a problem, which requires an interpretation of the Constitution in relation to the power and duty of the National Assembly, it shall be within the power of the National Assembly to cake the interpretation and the interpretation shall he regarded as final. Section 142. The Senate and the House of Representatives have the power to make the rules of procedure governing the selection and performance of duties of the 'Presidents and the Vice-Presidents of the Houses, and members of committees, sittings, introduction and consideration of bills, presentation of motions, consultation, debate, passing of resolution, interpollation, general debate, observation of the rules and order as well as other matters for the execution of this Constitution.

31 Part

5

Joint Sittings of the National Assembly Section 143. The National Assembly shall hold a joint sitting in the following cases: (1) approval of the appointment of the Regent under section 16 and section 17; (2) making of a solemn declaration by the Regent before the National Assembly under section 19; (3) (4) section 21; (5) (6) section 116; (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) opening of the session of the National Assembly interpretation of the Constitution under section 141; announcement of policies under section 151; general debate under section 153; approval of the declaration of war under section 161; approval of a treaty under section 162; appointment of members of the Constitutional Tribunal amendment of the Constitution under section 194. under section 117; reconsideration of a bill under section 78; approval of the prorogation of session under amendment of the Palace Law on Succession, B.E.2467 approval of the Succession to the Throne under under section 20;

under section 184;

Section 144. At a joint sitting of the National Assembly, the rules of procedure of the Senate shall apply mutatis mutandis. Section 145. Subject to section 20, section78,,section 161 paragraph two and section 194, the provisions applicable to both Houses shall apply mutatis mutandis to the joint sitting of the National Assembly; provided that, in so far as the appointment of a committee is concerned, the number of members of committee appointed from the members of each House must be in proportion to or in close proportion to the number of members of each House. Chapter VII The Council of Ministers Section 146. The King appoints the Prime Minister and not more than forty four other Ministers to constitute the Council of Ministers having the duty to carry out the administration of the State affairs.

32 The President of the National Assembly shall countersign the Royal Command appointing the Prime Minister. Section 147. Before taking office, a Minister must make a solemn declaration before the King in the following words: "I, (name of the declarer), do solemnly declare that I will be loyal to the King and will faithfully perform my duties in the interests of.the country and the people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect." Section 148. A Minister shall not be government official holding a permanent position or receiving a salary except political official. Section 149. A Minister shall not hold a position or perform an act, which a member- of the House of Representatives is prohibited to hold or perform under section 97, except the position required to be held by law, and shall neither be a manager, director, adviser, agent, nor employee of any person, partnership, company, or organization, which engages in a business for profit. Section 150. A Minister has the right to attend and give a statement of fact or opinion as a sitting of the House of which he is not a member-, but he has no right to vote. Section 114 governing privileges shall apply mutatis mutandis. Section 151. The Council of Ministers which will assume the administration of the State affairs must state its policy to the National Assembly but no vote of confidence is required. Section 152. In the implementation of the policy on the administration of the State affairs, the Ministers shall be responsible individually to the House of Representatives for the performance of their duties and shall be responsible collectively for the general policy of the Council of Ministers. Section 153. If there is a problem in the administration of the State affairs, on which the Council of Ministers deems it advisable to take opinion of the Senators and the members of the House of Representatives, the Prime Minister may g ive a notice to the President of the National Assembly requesting that a general

33
debate be held as a sitting of the National Assembly. put in the debate. Section 154. Ministers vacate office en masse upon: (1) the passing of a vote of no-confidence by the House of Representatives under section 137; (2) the expiration of the term or the dissolution of the House of Representatives; (3) the resignation of the Council of Ministers; (4) the termination of ministership of the Prime Minister under section 155. The outgoing Council of Ministers shall remain in office and carry on the administration until the newly appointed Council of Ministers takes the offioe. Section 155. The ministership of an individual Minister terminates upon: (1) death; (2) resignation; (3) being disqualified es a candidate as an election of members of the House of Representatives under section 94(1),(2) or (4) in case of 'a Minister not being a member- of the House of Representatives or under section 94(1), (2), (3) or (4) in ease of a Minister being a member- of the House of Representatives, or being under any prohibition provided in section 96(1),(2),(3),(5) or (0); (4) being sentenced by a judgment to imprisonment; (5) the passing of a vote of no-confidence by the House of Representatives under section 137; (6) having done an act prohibited by section 149; (7) a Royal Command issued under section 156. Section 81, section 82 and section 83 shall apply mutatis
mutandis to the termination of the ministership under(2),(3),(4)

In such Case,

no resolution shall be passed by the National Assembly on the issue

or (6). Section 156. The King has the prerogative of relievinga Minister of his office upon the advice of the Prime Minister.

Section 157. In case of an emergency when there is an
urgent necessity to maintain national or public safety or national economic security or to avert public calamity, the King may issue an Emergency Decree which shall have the force as an Act,

34

In the next succeeding sitting of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers shall submit the Emergency Decree 'to the National Assembly for consideration without delay. If the House of Re presentatives disapproves it or approves it but the Senate disapproves it and the House of Representatives reaffirms its approval by the votes of not more than one-half of the total number of its members, the Emergency Decree shall lapse; provided that it shall not affect any act done during the enforcement of such Emergency Decree. If the Senate and the House of Representatives approve the Emergency Decree, or if the Senate disapproves it but the House of Representatives reaffirms its approval by the votes of more than one-half of the total number of its members, such. Emergency Decree shall continue to have the force as en Act. The Prime Minister shall cause the approval or disapproval of the Emergency Decree to be published in the Government Gazette. In case of disapproval, it shall be effective as from the day following the date of its publication in the Government Gazette. The consideration of an Emergency Decree by the Senate and by the House of Representatives in case of reaffirmation of approval of the Emergency Decree must take plaoe on the first opportunity when such Houses hold their sitting. Section 158. If, during a session, it is necessary to have a law on taxes, duties or currency, which, in the interests of the State, requires an urgent and confidential consideration, the King may issue an Emergency Decree which shall have the force as an Act. The .Emergency Decree issued under paragraph one must be submitted to the House of Representatives within three days after the date of its publication in the Government Gazette, and section 157 snail apply mutatis mutandis. Section 159. The King hes the prerogative of issuing a Royal Decree which is not contrary to the law. Section 160. The King has the prerogative of declaring and lifting the martial law in accordance with the conditions and manner under the martial laws. In the case where it is necessary to declare the martial laws in

a

certain locality without dela y , the military autho-

rity may do so under the martial laws.

35
Section 161. The King has the prerogative of declaring war with the approval of the National Assembly. The resolution of approval of the National Assembly must be passed by a majority of votes of not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of both Houses. After the expiration of the term or the dissolution of the House of Representatives, the Senate shall perform the function of the National Assembly in making the approval under paragraph one. Section 162. The King has the prerogative of concluding a peace treaty, armistice and other treaties with other countries or international organizations. A treaty -which provides for a change in the Thai territories or the national territorial sovereignty or requires the enactment of an Act for its implementation must be approved by the National Assembly. Section 163. The King has the prerogative of granting pardon. Section 164. The King has the prerogative of removing titles and recalling decorations; Section 165. The King appoints and removes officials in the military service and in the civil service holding the positions of Under-Secretary of State, Director-General and their equivalent. Section 166. Subject to section 165, the requirement of qualifications, recruitment, appointment, promotion, increase of salaries, punishment and retirement of government officials shall be in accordance with the provision of law. Section 167. A government official holding a permanent position or receiving a salary, except political official, shall not be a political official. Section 168. All laws, Royal Rescripts and Royal Commands relating to the State affairs must be countersigned by a Minister unless otherwise provided in this Constitution.

36

Chapter VIII The Courts Section 169. The trial and adjudication of cases are the power of the Courts, which must proceed in accordance with the law and in the name of the King. Section 170. All Courts may be established only by Acts. Section 171. A new Court for the trial and adjudication of any particular case _or a case of any particular charge in place of' an ordinary. Court existing under the law and having jurisdiction over such case shall not be established, Section 172. A law having an effect of changing or amending the law on organization of courts or law on judicial procedure for the purpose of applying it to a particular case shall not be enacted. Section 173. Judges are independent in the trial and adjudication of cases in accordance with the law. Section 174. Judges shall not be political officials. Section 175. The King appoints and removes judges, before taking office for the first time, a judge is required to make a solemn declaration before the King with the words prescribed by the Judicial Commission under the law on judicial service. Section 176. The appointment and removal from office of a judge of a Court of Justice must be approved by the Judicial Commission under the law on judicial service before they are tendered to the Xing.. The promotion, increase of salaries and punishment of judges of Court of justice must be approved by the Judicial Commissio: under the lag on judicial service.
Section 177, Military Courts have the power to try and

adjudicate cases as provided by the law. The appointment and removal of a military judge . shall be in accordance with the law.

37

Section 178. The appointment and removal of a judge of a Court other than the Court of justice or Military Court as well as the jurisdiction and the procedure of such Court shall be in accordance with the law on the establishment of such Court. Section 179. In the case where there is a dispute on the jurisdiction between the Court of Justice and any other Court or between other Courts, the Constitutional Tribunal shall decide it.

Chapter IX Local Government Section 180. The administration of local government shall, subject to the law, be in accordance with the principle of self-government according to the will of the people in the locality. Section 181. Local government shall consist of a local assembly and a local administrative committee or local administrators. The powers and duties of a local assembly, local administrative committee or local administrator shall be in accordance with the provision of law. .Section 182. Members of a local assembly shall be basically elected. Members shall be appointed only in case of necessity in accordance with the provision of law, and whose number must be less than the number of elected members. The election of members of a local assembly shall be by direct suffrage and secret ballot. A candidate standing for the election of member- of a local assembly must as least possess the qualifications in accordance with section 94 (1) and (2). The rules and procedure of election under this section shall be in accordance with the law on such purpose. Section 183. A local administrative committee or local administrator shall be basically elected. A local administrative committee or local administrators shall be appointed only in case of necessity as provided by the law. The rules and procedure of election under this section shall be in accordance with the law on such purpose.

38

Chapter X The Constitutional Tribunal Section 184. The Constitutional Tribunal is composed of the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Supreme Court, the Director-General of the Public Prosecution Department and four other persons appointed by the National Assembly from qualified persons. The President of the National Assembly shall be President of the Constitutional Tribunal. Section 185. A member- of the Constitutional Tribunal appointed by the National Assembly shall not be a senator, memberof the House of Representatives, member- of a local assembly, local administrator, government official holding a permanent position or receiving a salary, official of e State enterprise, or local government official. Section 186. A member- of the Constitutional Tribunal may receive emoluments and other considerations in accordance with the provision of law. Section 187. At each general election,the National Assembly shall appoint, from qualified persons, new members of the Constitutional Tribunal within the period of thirty days from the opening of the first session of the National Assembly. The period of time referred to in paragraph one means the period during the session. In the appointment of new members of the Constitutional Tribunal under paragraph one, the National Assembly may re-appoint the retiring members. Section 188. A member- of the Constitutional Tribunal vacates office upon: (1) the opening of the first session of the National Assembly after the general election; (2) death; (3) resignation; (4) being a senator, member- of the House of Representatives, member- of a local assembly, local administrator, government official holding a permanent position or receiving a salary, official of a State enterprise, or local government official; (5) being sentenced by a judgment to imprisonment.

39 Section 189. If the office of a member- of the Constitutional Tribunal becomes vacant upon any reason except upon reason referred to in section 188 (1), the National Assembly shall appoint a new member- of the Constitutional Tribunal to fill the vacancy within a period of thirty days. The period of time referred to in paragraph one means the period during the session. Seotion 190. After a bill has been approved by the National Assembly and before the Prime Minister presents it to the King for signature under section 77s (1) if the senators and the members of the House of Representatives or members of each House of not less than one-fifth of the total number of members of both Houses are of the opinion that the provision of the said bill is contrary to or inconsistent with the Constitution, they shall submit their opinion to the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, or the President of the ' House of Representatives, as the case may be, and the President of the House who receives the said opinion shall then refer it to the Constitutional Tribunal for consideration and decision and inform the Prime Minister of it; (2) if the Prime Minister is of the opinion that the provision of the said

hill

is contrary to or inconsistent with

the Constitution, he shall refer such opinion to the Constitutional Tribunal for consideration and decision and then info r m the President of the Senate and the President of the House of Representatives of it. During the consideration of the Constitutional Tribunal, the Prime Minister shall suspend the proceedings in respect of the promulgation of the bill referred to in paragraph one until the Constitutional Tribunal gives a decision thereon. If the Constitutional Tribunal decides that the provision of such bill is contrary to or inconsistent with the Constitution, the Prime Minister shall return the bill to the National Assembly. Section 191. In applying a law to any case, if the Court is of the opinion that the provision of such law comes under section 5 and there has not yet been a decision of the Constitutional Tribunal relating to such provision, the Court shall stay its trial and adjudication of the case and submit its opinion through proper channel to the Constitutional Tribunal for consideration and decision. The decision of the Constitutional Tribunal shall apply to all cases but shall not affect the judgments of the Courts which have been final.

40
Section 192. The decision of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be deemed final and shall be published in the Government Gazette. Section 193. The procedure of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be in accordance with the law.

Chapter XI
Amendment of the Constitution

Section 194. An amendment of the Constitution may be made only under the rules and procedure as follows: (1) a motion for amendment must be proposed either by the Council of Ministers or members of the House of Representatives of not less than one-third of the total number of members Of the House of Representatives; provided that the motion of members of the House of Representatives may be made only in accordance with the resolution of the political party to which they belong; (2) a motion for amendment must be proposed in the form of a draft Constitution Amendment and the National Assembly shall consider it in three readings; (3) the voting in the first reading for acceptance in principle shall be by roll call and the amendment must be approved by the votes of not less than one-half of the total number of members of both Houses; (4) the voting in the second reading for consideration section by section shall be decided by simple majority of votes; (5) as the conclusion of the second reading, there shall be an intervening period of fifteen days after which the National Assembly shall proceed with its third reading; (6) the voting in the third and final reading shall be by roll call and the promulgation of it as the Constitution must be approved by the votes of more than one-half of the total number of members of both Houses; (7) after.the resolution has been passed in accordance with the above rules and procedure, the draft Constituion Amendment shall be presented to the King and section 77 and section 78 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

41 Transitory Provisions Section 195. As from the date of the promulgation of this Constitution until the date of the election of, members of the House of Representatives under section 202, the National Legislative Assembly under the Constitution for the Administration of the Kingdom B.E.2520 shall act as the National Assembly in accordance with this Constitution, but the members of the National Legislative Assembly shall not introduce a bill under section 125 or exercise the right of interpollation under section 136 or submit motion for

a general debate under section 137,

and the provision of section 86 and section 97 shall not apply to the holding of office of the members of the National Legislative Council under this section. Section 196. Section 114, section 121, section 122 and section 123 shall apply mutatis mutandis to members of the National Legislative Council under section 195. Section 197. The Privy Council holding office before the date of the promulgation of this Constitution shall be the Privy Council under this Constitution. Section 198. The Council of Ministers administering the State affairs before the date of the promulgation of this Constitution or the Council of. Ministers, if formed prior to the election of members of the House of Representatives under section 202, shall be the Council of Ministers administering the State affairs under this Constitution, and section 148, section 149 and section 151. shall not apply to the holding of office of the Ministers under this section. After the election of members of the House of Representatives under section 202, the Council of Ministers referred to in paragraph one shall vacate office; provided that it shall remain in office until the new Council of Ministers takes office. Section 167 and section 174 shall not apply to the officials holding the positions of political officials before the date the new Council of Ministers takes office. Section 199. The National Policy Council Acting before the date of the promulgation of this Constitution shall give advice to the Council of Ministers so as to make the administration of State affairs being in accordance with the Directive Principles of State policy and in accordance with the duty under section 200 until the new Council of Ministers takes office.

42
Section 200. Since the date of the promulgation of this Constitution until the new Council of Ministers takes office in the case where the Prime Minister deems it necessary for the prevention, aversion or suppression of an act subverting the security of the Kingdom, the Throne, the national economy or the State affairs or of an act endangering or jeopardizing public order or good morals or of an act destroying the natural resources or detrimental to public health, whether such act has oocurred before or after the date of the promulgation of this Constitution, either within or outside the Kingdom, the Prime Minister shall, with the approval of the Council of Ministers and the National Policy Council, have the power to issue any order, or take any action, and such order or action as well as acts performed in compliance therewith shall be considered lawful according to the laws in force and to this Constitution. Having issued any order or taken any action under paragraph one, the Prime Minister shall inform the National Assembly of it. After the and of the period of time under paragraph one, all orders of the Prime Minister issued under this section which are still in force shall continue to be in force, and the repeal or modification of the said orders shall be made by an Act. Section 201. At the initial stage, the King will appoint senators in accordance with this Constitution on the date of the election of members of the House of Representatives under section 202. Section 202. The election of members of the House of Representatives under the provision of this Constitution shall be carried out within the 2521st year of the Buddhist Era. In the case where it cannot be held within the 2521st year of the Buddhist Era, the period of time for holding the election shall be extended; provided that the extension is not beyond one hundred and twenty days as from the and of the 2521st year of the Buddhist Era. Section 203. At the initial stage when the Constitution has been promulgated, apart from the cases provided in section 143, the following acts shall also be done in the joint sitting of the National Assembly: (1) the consideration of the annual appropriations bill, -tionsbl; (2) the general debate under section 137; the supplementary appropriations bill and the transfer of app ro pria

43 (3)
the consideration of the bill which the Council of

Ministers has notified that it is an important bill relating to the security of the Kingdom, the Throne or the national economy, and the President of the National Assembly has approved the notification;

section

(4) 157 and

the consideration of the Emergency Decree under section 158,

provided that senators shall have the same right as members of the House of Representatives, but they shall not submit or join to submit a

motion for a general debate under section 137, and the phrase "the House
of Representatives or the Senate" as stipulated in section 137 paragraphs two and three, section the National Assembly. Section

133,

section

157

and section

158

shall mean

204.

At the initial stage when the Constitution

has been promulgated: (1) section Section section

94(3),

90 paragraph two, section 91 95 and section 103(7) and (9)

paragraph one, shall not apply

to the election, holding of office and termination of membership of members of the House of Representatives elected under this Constitution. Whether the election of members of the House of .Representatives is to be done by means of combining or dividing the constituencies shall be determined in accordance with the law on election of members of the House of Representatives, and a person qualified to vote shall have the right to vote for a number of candidates equal to the total number of members of the House of Representatives for that constituency. (2) Section

79,

section

105,

and section

139

paragraph three

shall not apply to the appointment, holding of office and the vacation of Leader of the Opposition, and the appointment of the standing committee,

(5)

Section

148,

section

prohibition referred to in section

149 specifically related to the 97(1) and (3) and section 167 shall

not apply to the holding of office of Minister and other political officials.

(4)

Section

125

paragraph two and section

194(1)

specifically

related to the political party shall not apply to the introduction of a bill and the submission of motion to amend the Constitution.

44
(5) The introduction of a bill by members of the House of Representatives shall be done only with the endorsement of the and hoc Committee Considering bills composing of seventeen members, three of whom are appointed by the Council of Ministers, six of whom by the Senate, and eight of whom by the House of Representatives. The privileges provided in section 114 shall also extend to the persons acting under (5). Section 205. At the and of the period of four years from the date of the appointment of senators under section 201, section 203 and section 204 shall be repealed; provided that section 204 office. Section 206. All orders issued by the Prime Minister under section 21 of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand B.E.2519 or under the provision of section 27 of the Constitution for the Administration of the Kingdom B.E.2520, and which are in force on the date of the promulgation of this Constitution, shall continue to be in force, the repeal or modification of the said orders shall be made by an Act.

(3)

shall

continue to be in force until the new Council of Ministers takes

Countersigned by Air Chief Marshal Harin Hongskule President of the National Legislative Assembly

Certified correct translation

(Teksepol Chiemwichitra) Office of the Juridical Council

