CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

TOGO
by MATHEW JODZIEWCZ & SARAH CAMPBELL

Issued July 1980

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1980 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION

Translated by Sarah Y. Campbell and Lorraria Darnell Bateman

T 0 G 0 PREAMBLE CONSTITUTION

1. The material, social and psychological transformations which are shaking the world have twice caused Togo, since her accession to independence, to change her fundamental structures and, again today, cause her to conceive a new way of thinking, working and living. 2. A new style of existence, based on Unity, Peace and National Solidarity, for the purpose of creating new political, economic, and social conditions -- this is the profound aspiration of the Togolese People. 3. The Togolese People, horrified by the policy of hate, division and revenge of the preceding political regimes, is committed to the path of National Unity and harmonious economic development under the exclusive direction of the Assembly of the Togolese People. 4. The Assembly of the Togolese People, the sole party, shall take precedence over all institutions of State. 5. It shall express the aspirations of the workers to Union, Peace and Solidarity. 6. It shall guide the institutions of the Republic and assure respect for the rights and duties of the citizen. 7. It shall adhere to the Charters of the United Nations, the Organization for African Unity, CEDEAO, and the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of December 10, 1948. 8. The Togolese State shall give unreserved support to all policies aimed at reinforcing African unity and safeguarding and consolidating peace in the world. 9. In addition, it shall express a desire to establish ties of friendship and cooperation with all peoples based on principles of equality, reciprocal interests and mutual respect for national sovereignty and territorial integrity. TITLE I
SOVEREIGNTY

and social.

Article 1. Togo is a Republic, indivisible, secular, democratic

1

The national flag shall consist of five horizontal stripes, alternating green and yellow. It shall have a white star on a red background in the upper left corner. The national anthem shall be . . The motto of the Republic shall be "Union, Peace, Solidarity." Its principle shall be: Government of the people, by the people, and for the people. Article 2. Sovereignty shall be vested in the Togolese people, who shall exercise it by their representatives or by referendum. The conditions and means of recourse to referendum shall be defined by law. Article 3. Suffrage may be direct or indirect under conditions provided for by the constitution. It shall always be universal, equal, and secret. All Togolese citizens, of both sexes, having attained their majority and enjoying civil and political rights, shall be electors, under conditions determined by law. TITLE II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE CITIZEN Article 4. All Togolese shall be equal in rights and duties, without distinction as to origin, sex, belief or opinion. Article 5. The right to vote shall be exercised within the framework of the laws which regulate it. Article 6. The Togolese Republic shall assure to each citizen, in accordance with the law, respect for the rights and liberties of the human person, the family, and local organizations; political liberties; philosophic and religious liberties; labor-union liberty; the right to property, individual or collective; and economic and social rights. Article 7. All citizens, according to their abilities, shall contribute to collective responsibilities. Article 8. Defense of the country shall be a sacred duty of all citizens. Article 9. Any acts which may threaten the Republican form of the State or the indivisibility of the national territory shall be a crime of high treason, punished by law.

2

TITLE III THE PARTY AND THE STATE THE ASSEMBLY OF THE TOGOLESE PEOPLE
Article 10. The Togolese institutional system shall be based upon the principle of one party, embodied by the Assembly of the Togolese People. All political activities, including those competing for the expression of suffrage, shall be exercised exclusively within the Assembly of the Togolese People and freely within the framework of the laws and regulations, respecting national sovereignty and democracy.

The organization and work of the Assembly of the Togolese People shall be defined by the internal statutes and regulations of the Movement. The Assembly of the Togolese People shall guide the general policy of the country. Within the framework of the Party, broader affiliated organizations shall be involved in mobilizing the population to carry out the great political, economic, social, and cultural tasks upon which the country's development depends. TITLE IV THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
Article 11. The President of the Republic shall be the Chief of State. He shall embody national unity; he shall assure respect for the Constitution and the continuity of the State. He shall protect National Independence, territorial integrity, and respect for treaties and international agreements.

Candidates for the Presidency of the Republic must be of exclusively Togolese nationality and native-born.
Article 12. The President of the Republic shall be elected for seven years by direct suffrage upon nomination of the Congress of the Assembly of the Togolese People (R.P.T.). He may be reelected.

An organic law shall establish the modalities of the Presidential election.
Article 13. In case of vacancy in the Presidency of the Republic, for whatever reason, the Presidential function shall be exercised temporarily by the Political Bureau of the Assembly of the Togolese People.

The Political Bureau shall convene the Congress of the R.P.T. within forty-five days following the beginning of the vacancy in order to nominate a candidate for the Presidential election, which must take place within the month following the adjournment of the Congress. 3

Article 14. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws voted by the National Assembly. Upon the advice of the Political Bureau of the R.P.T., he may dissolve the National Assembly. A new Assembly must be elected within a period of three months. Article 15. The President of the Republic shall exercise regulatory power by decree in the Council of Ministers in cases provided for by law. The President of the Republic shall accredit Ambassadors and envoys extraordinares of the Republic to foreign powers. Foreign Ambassadors and envoys extraordinaires shall be accredited to him. Article 16. The President of the Republic shall be the Chief of the Army. He shall appoint civil and military state employees. Article 17. The President of the Republic shall appoint Ministers and may dismiss them from their functions. He shall preside in the Council of Ministers. Article 18. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon. Article 19. Whenever the Republic is in danger and the regular operation of institutions is interrupted, the President of the Republic shall take the measures required by circumstances, after consultation with the Political Bureau of the Assembly of the Togolese People. He shall so inform the Nation by a message explaining the measures taken to avoid the danger and to promote the reestablishment of the institutions. TITLE V THE GOVERNMENT Article 20. The President of the Republic shall appoint the Ministers, shall direct the activity of the Government, and shall establish the duties of each of its members. The members of the Government shall be responsible to the President of the Republic, who may terminate their duties. Article 21. The Ministers shall exercise regulatory power by means of orders within the limit of their duties. Article 22. Ministers shall have access to sessions of the National Assembly and its commissions. They shall have the right to speak upon request.

4

TITLE VI THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 23. The National Assembly shall vote the laws and shall supervise the activity of the Government. Article 24. The National Assembly shall consist of Deputies elected for five years by direct suffrage, upon the nomination of the Assembly of the Togolese People. The office of Deputy shall be open to all. An organic law shall establish the number of Deputies, the modalities of their election, the conflicts of interest resulting from their election, and the amount of their remuneration. Article 25. No Deputy may be pursued, prosecuted, arrested, detained, or judged for opinions or votes issued by him in the exercise of his duties. While the Assembly is in session, no Deputy may be prosecuted or arrested in a criminal or minor matter except with the authorization of the Assembly, unless it is a case of flagrante delicto. When the Assembly is not in session, no Deputy may be arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of the Assembly, except in cases of flagrante delicto, official investigation, or final conviction. The detention or prosecution of a Deputy shall be suspended if the Assembly so requests. Article 26. The Deputies' right to vote may not be delegated. Article 27. The National Assembly shall meet in ordinary session the first Tuesday in April and the first Tuesday in October. The length of each session shall not exceed two months. Article 28. The National Assembly may be convened in extraordinary session by decree of the President of the Republic for an established agenda. As soon as this agenda is exhausted, the session shall be closed by decree. Article 29. The President of the Assembly shall be elected for the length of the legislature. His duties shall end if he is censured by two-thirds of the Deputies. An election for a new President shall then be held.

5

Article 30. Meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. Complete minutes of the debates shall be published in the Journal officiel. The National Assembly may meet in secret at the request of its President or of the President of the Republic. TITLE VII RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND THE ASSEMBLY Article 31. Initiative for making laws shall be vested concurrently with the President of the Republic and the Deputies. Article 12. The law shall establish rules concerning the following: - fundamental rights and guaranties concerning the person and the family; - charges imposed on the person and property of citizens for the needs of national defense and economic development; - definition and suppression of crimes and misdemeanors; penal procedure; amnesty; the creation of new jurisdictions; and the regulation of judges; - the basis, amount, and means of collection of taxes; and regulation of the minting of money. The law shall determine the fundamental principles of the following: - the organization of National Defense; - the administration of local organizations, their jurisdiction, and their revenue; - the creation, management, and supervision of public establishments; - the system of property, property rights, and civil and commercial obligations; - labor laws and social security; - regulation of State employees, civil and military. Budgetary laws shall establish the revenue and obligations of the State according to the procedures provided for by law. Article 33. A declaration of war may be authorized by a joint meeting of the National Assembly and the Central Committee of the

6

Assembly of the Togolese People. An organic law shall determine the procedures for application of a state of emergency. Article 34. Matters other than those in the area of law shall have a regulatory character. The Government may declare inadmissible any bill overreaching the jurisdiction established by Article 32. If the Assembly retains on the agenda the bill declared inadmissible, the Government shall call upon the Central Committee of the Assembly of the Togolese People, which shall rule on the admissibility of the bill. Article 35. For a limited period the Government may decree measures which are normally within the area of law. These ordinances shall be formulated in the Council of Ministers and shall be promulgated and executed as laws. Ordinances thus formulated may then be modified only on matters which fall within the legislative domain. Article 36. The Government may withdraw from the agenda any bill or amendment formulated by a Deputy if adoption would entail a reduction in public revenue or the creation or enlargement of a public debt. Article 37. Government bills and private bills shall be submitted to the bureau of the Assembly, which shall send them for examination to specialized commissions whose composition and duties shall be established by the by-laws of the Assembly. Article 38. The Government and the Deputies shall have the right to amend bills. After the opening of debate, the Government may rule out any amendment which has not previously been submitted to the Commission. If the Government so requests, the Assembly shall vote on all or on a part of the bill under discussion, retaining only the amendments accepted by the Government. Article 39. If the Assembly has not voted on a bill within a period of forty days, the Government may execute the provisions of the bill by decree. If the budget for a fiscal year has not been presented in sufficient time to be promulgated before the beginning of that fiscal year, the Government, by ordinance, may authorize taxes and credits as needed for the operation of public services. Article 40. The Assembly's agenda shall include, as a priority and in the order established by the Government, discussion of bills presented by the Government and provisions which it has accepted.

7

One session a week shall be reserved, by priority, for questions from the members of the National Assembly and answers from the Government. The National Assembly may question a member of the Government about his management and shall report to the President of the Republic. TITLE VIII TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS Article 41. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties. He may designate plenipotentiaries empowered to sign them in the name of Togo. Article 42. Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties regarding international organization, those committing the State's funds, those modifying legislative provisions, those regarding the status of persons, those which cede, exchange or add territory -may be ratified only by law. They shall take effect only after having been ratified. Article 43. Treaties or agreements which are properly ratified shall take precedence, as soon as they are published, over laws, with the requirement, for each agreement or treaty, that it be applied by the other party. TITLE IX THE JUDICIARY Article 44. The highest jurisdiction in the State shall be the Supreme Court. It shall consist of a President, Presidents of Chambers, and Councilors. It shall include; the Constitutional Chamber; the Judicial Chamber; the Administrative Chamber; and the Chamber of Audits. An organic law shall determine the organization and operation of the Supreme Court. Article 45. The President of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President of the Republic upon nomination by the Central Committee of the R.P.T. Article 46. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Superior Council of Judges, the organization of which shall be established by an organic law. Article 47. The Statute of Judges, established by law, shall guarantee the independence and protection of judges in the exercise of their functions.

8

It shall specify their duties and their prerogatives. Article 48. The Superior Council of Judges shall act as the judges' disciplinary council. In the absence of the President of the Republic, it shall be presided over by the Minister of Justice. Article 49. The judicial authority, the guardian of liberty, shall assure respect for the fundamental rights of the citizen. No one may be arbitrarily imprisoned. No one may be sentenced without the opportunity to present his defense. No one may be deprived of his liberty and his rights except within the conditions provided for by law. TITLE X

THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE Article 50. A High Court of Justice shall be instituted. Its composition and duties shall be defined by an organic law. Article 51. The High Court of Justice shall hear cases of high treason. TITLE XI REVISION Article 52. This Constitution may be modified on the initiative of the President of the Republic or the National Assembly. Bills for revision must be submitted for the consent of the Central Committee of the Assembly of the Togolese People, which may propose amendments. Bills for revision shall be adopted if they receive a two-thirds vote of the Deputies and the agreement of the Central Committee of the Assembly of the Togolese People. If a government or member's bill does not receive a majority vote of members of the Assembly, it shall become final only after approval by referendum. Article 53. The Republican form of Government shall not be subject to revision. No procedure of revision may be begun or pursued if territorial integrity is threatened.

9

