Title: Date Adopted: Date Promulgated: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

Constitution of the Fourth Republic of Togo, 14 October 1992 09/27/1992 10/14/1992 Togo Philadelphia Constitution Foundation, reproduced with permission Unofficial Marcia W. Coward

CONSTITUTION OF THE FOURTH REPUBLIC OF TOGO Table of Contents Title I-The State and Sovereignty Title II-Rights, Liberties, and Duties of Citizens Title III-Legislative Power Title IV-Executive Power Title V-The Relationship Between the Government and the National Assembly Title VI-The Constitutional Court Title VII-The Court of Auditing Title VIII-Judicial Power Title IX-The High Authority of Audio-Visual Affairs and Communications Title X-The Economic and Social Council Title XI-Treaties and International Agreements Title XII-Territorial Units and Traditional Engineering Districts Title XIII-On Revising the Constitution Title XIV-Special Provisions Title XV-Transitional Provisions

Title XVI-Concluding Provisions

CONSTITUTION OF THE FOURTH REPUBLIC OF TOGO Adopted by the Referendum of 27 September 1992 and Promulgated 14 October 1992 PREAMBLE We, the Togolese people, putting ourselves under the protection of God, and: — aware that since its accession to an international sovereignty on April 27, 1960, our country has known a troubled political evolution, marked especially by the founding of a monolithic, totalitarian regime that ultimately led to a meeting of the leading forces in a National Sovereign Conference from July 8 to August 28, 1991, — aware of the solidarity that binds us to the international community and to the African peoples in particular, — pledged to build a State of Law in which the fundamental human rights, public freedoms and the dignity of the human being must be guaranteed and protected; and — convinced that we shall not be able to build such a State except on political pluralism, principles of democracy and of the protection of human rights as defined by the Charter of the United Nations of 1945, the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of 1948 and international pacts of 1966, and the African Charter of the Rights of Man and of People adopted by the Organization of African Unity in 1981, * proclaim solemnly our firm aspiration to combat any political regime founded on arbitrary rule, dictatorship or injustice, * affirm our determination to cooperate in peace, friendship and solidarity with all peoples of the world who are inspired by democratic ideals, based on principles of equality and of mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty, * become resolutely engaged in defending the cause of African unity and in working toward realization of sub-regional and regional integration,

* solemnly approve and adopt this Constitution as Fundamental Law of the State, of which this Preamble shall be an integral part. TITLE I THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY Article 1 The Togolese Republic shall be a state based on law, secular, democratic and social. The Republic shall be one and indivisible. Article 2 The Togolese Republic shall assure equality before the law for all citizens without distinction as to origin, race, sex, social status, or religion. The Republic shall respect all political and philosophic opinions as well as all religious beliefs. The Togolese Republic shall be based on the principle of government of the people, by the people and for the people. Its motto shall be: Work—Liberty—Country Article 3 The national emblem shall be a flag consisting of five horizontal stripes, alternating green and yellow. This flag shall bear a white star on a red background in the upper left corner. The national holiday of the Togolese Republic shall be April 27 of each year. The seal of State shall consist of a round metal plaque in bas relief, 50 millimeters in diameter, to be used as a mark of the State on all legal instruments. The seal shall carry, on the obverse, the arms of the Republic, and, as an inscription, “In the name of the Togolese People,” and, as exergue, “Togolese Republic.” The armory of the Togolese Republic shall be as follows: — An oval silver shield shall have the national emblem framed by two flags back-to-back with the Republic’s motto on a streamer; in its heart shall be the initials of the Togolese Republic on a gold ground: and at its points, two roaring lions back-to-back. The two young lions shall represent the courage of the Togolese people. They hold bows and arrows, traditional methods of combat, to demonstrate that the true liberty of the Togolese people is in their own hands and that their power resides, above all, in

traditional things. The standing lions, back-to-back, express the vigilance of the Togolese people in guarding their independence from dawn to dusk. The national hymn shall be “Terre de nos aieux” (“Land of our Ancestors”). The official language of the Togolese Republic shall be French. Article 4 Sovereignty shall belong to the people, exercised by their representatives and by referendum. Sovereignty shall not be exercised by any single group of people, body of the State, or individual. The initiative of referendum shall belong jointly to the people and to the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall have the power to exercise this right only in matters of civil liberty. Conditions regarding the exercise of the right of sovereignty by the people shall be established by organic law. Article 5 Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret. Under conditions specified by law, voters shall comprise all Togolese nationals of both sexes who are eighteen (18) years of age and who are entitled to enjoy full civil and political rights. Article 6 Political parties and alliances of political parties shall contribute to the formation and expression of the political will of the people. Political parties and alliances of political parties may be freely created and may conduct activities within the framework of laws and regulations. Article 7 Political parties and alliances of political parties shall be required to respect the Constitution. None shall have the power to identify themselves with any region, ethnic group, or religion. Article 8

Political parties and alliances of political parties shall have the duty to contribute to the political and civic education of the citizenry, to the strengthening of democracy, and to the development of national unity. Article 9 Methods by which political parties are created and function shall be determined by law. TITLE II RIGHTS, LIBERTIES, AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS Sub-Title 1 Rights and Freedoms Article 10 Each human being shall be intrinsically considered to have certain unalienable and imprescriptible (indefeasible) rights. The safeguarding of these rights shall be the ultimate goal of the entire human community. The State shall be required to respect, to guarantee and to protect these rights. All people of sound mind shall be entitled to enjoy the rights guaranteed by this Constitution inasmuch as they are compatible with their natures. Article 11 Every human being shall enjoy equal dignity and equal rights. Both sexes shall be considered equal before the law. No person shall be protected or prejudiced against because of family, ethnic or regional origin, economic or social status, or political, religious, philosophic or other convictions. Article 12 Each human being shall have the right to develop toward his physical, intellectual, moral and cultural potential. Article 13 The State shall be required to guarantee the physical and mental integrity, life and safety of each person living on any national territory. No one shall be deprived arbitrarily of life or liberty. Article 14

The exercise of rights and freedoms guaranteed by this Constitution shall be subjugated to nothing other than those restrictions expressly established by law as necessary to protect the national security, public order, public health, ethical climate or fundamental rights and liberties of others. Article 15 No person shall be arbitrarily detained or confined. Anyone who shall be detained without legal basis or confined beyond a delay of surveillance shall have the right to seek judicial intervention by the authority designated by law for that end, either at his own request or at the request of interested parties. The appropriate judicial authority shall immediately render an opinion regarding the legality and/or regularity of the confinement. Article 16 Every person who is imprisoned or confined shall nonetheless be treated in a manner that preserves his dignity and physical and mental well-being, and which shall help with his readmittance to society. No person shall have the right to prevent an imprisoned or confined person from medical examination by the physician of his choice. Each prisoner shall have the right for assistance by counsel at the preliminary inquiry. Article 17 Every person who is detained shall have the right to be informed immediately of the charges against him. Article 18 Every accused or imprisoned person shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty, following a process that promises all guarantees necessary for his defense. The power of judiciary authorities, who shall be considered guardians of individual freedom, shall assure respect for this principle, according to conditions determined by law. Article 19 Every person shall have the right, in all affairs, to have his cause heard and decided equitably by an independent and impartial jurisdiction within a reasonable time.

No one shall be found guilty for deeds which were not considered infractions at the time they were committed. Beyond situations encompassed in the law, no person shall be harassed or prosecuted for deeds objected to by others. Damages resulting from an error of justice or from irregular functioning in the administration of justice shall receive an indemnity from the state, according to law. Article 20 No person shall be subjected to military or police action except as allowable by law. Article 21 Each human being shall be considered sacred and inviolable. No person shall be subjected to torture or any form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. No person shall be able to avoid punishment incurred by way of these violations by invoking the order of a superior or a public authority. Each individual and each agent of the State guilty of such acts, whether upon his own initiative or under orders, shall be punished according to the law. Each individual and each agent of the State shall be absolved from the duty to obey orders that constitute a grave and manifest attack against respect for human rights and public liberties. Article 22 Every Togolese citizen shall have the right to move freely and to settle on national territory according to his choice, within conditions defined by law or local custom. No Togolese citizen shall be deprived the right of entering and leaving Togo. All foreigners who have legally gained access to Togolese territory and who abide by laws in force at the time shall have freedom of movement, freedom to choose a place of residence and the right to leave Togo freely. Article 23 No foreigner shall be expelled or extradited from Togolese territory except as a result of a decision conforming to law. He shall have the right to defend himself before a qualified judicial authority.

Article 24 No Togolese citizen shall be able to be extradited from national territory. Article 25 Every person shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion, worship, opinion and expression. These rights and liberties shall be exercised with respect to the liberties of others and to the maintenance of public order and standards established by laws and regulations. The organization and practice of religious beliefs shall be freely exercised in accordance with the law. The same shall apply to philosophic beliefs. Freedom of worship and of the expression of one’s beliefs shall be exercised in a manner respecting the secular nature of the State. One shall have the right to create organizations around religious views and to conduct organizational activities within the framework of the law. Article 26 Freedom of the press shall be recognized and guaranteed by the State and protected by law. Every person shall have the freedom to express and to disseminate his opinions and information by spoken, written and other means, within limits defined by law. It shall not be possible to submit the press to preliminary authority, to bail, to censure or to other impediments. Only a judicial decision can prevent the circulation of a publication. Article 27 The right of own property shall be guaranteed by law. This right may be abridged only because of a legally expressed public need and after just and immediate indemnity. No one shall be deprived of his property except through the decision by a judicial authority. Article 28 One’s home is inviolable. The home shall not be the object of a search or police visit except under conditions specified by law.

Each citizen shall have the right to respect for his privacy, honor, dignity and reputation. Article 29 The State shall guarantee secrecy of correspondence and telecommunications. Each citizen shall have the right to secrecy of his correspondence, communications and telecommunications. Article 30 In accordance with provisions specified by law, the State shall recognize and guarantee freedom of association, assembly and peaceful demonstration conducted without instruments of violence. The State shall recognize private, religious, and secular education. Article 31 The State shall have the obligation to assure protection of marriage and the family. Parents shall have the duty to train and to educate their children. The State shall support them in this task. Infants shall have the same family and social protection, whether born in our out of wedlock. Article 32 Children born of either a Togolese mother or father shall be granted Togolese nationality. Other means of attaining citizenship shall be regulated by law. Article 33 The State shall take all appropriate measures to protect the handicapped and the aged from social injustice. Article 34 The State shall recognize and shall work to promote the citizen’s right to health. Article 35 The State shall recognize the right of all children to education and shall create conditions favorable to this end.

Education is mandatory for children of both sexes until the age of 15 years. The State shall act progressively to assure that public education be free of charge. Article 36 The State shall protect minors against all forms of exploitation and manipulation. Article 37 The State shall recognize each citizen’s right to work and shall strive to create conditions promoting the enjoyment of this right. The State shall assure to each citizen equal right to employment and shall guarantee to each worker a just and equitable remuneration. No one shall be discriminated against in the work place because of his sex, origin, beliefs or opinions. Article 38 The right of citizens and territorial communities to equitable redistribution of national wealth by the State shall be recognized. Article 39 The right of workers to strike shall be recognized. This right shall be exercised within the framework of regulatory laws. Workers shall have the right to create labor unions and to join the unions of their choice. Every worker shall have the right to defend his rights and interests, whether individually, collectively, or through union action, according to conditions specified by law. Article 40 The State shall have the duty to safeguard and to promote the Nation’s cultural inheritance. Article 41 Every person shall have the right to a clean environment. The State shall oversee the protection of the environment. Sub-Title II Duties

Article 42 Each citizen shall have the sacred duty to respect the Constitution as well as the laws and regulations of the Republic. Article 43 It shall be the sacred duty of each citizen to defend his country and its territorial integrity. Article 44 Each citizen shall have the duty to participate in national service, under conditions specified by law. Article 45 Each citizen shall have the duty to combat any person or group of people who try to change by force the democratic order established by this Constitution. Article 46 Public property shall be inviolable. Every person and every public servant shall be obliged to respect public property scrupulously and to protect it. Any act of sabotage, vandalism, embezzlement of public funds, corruption, and squandering of public wealth shall be punishable by law. Article 47 Each citizen shall have the duty to contribute to public expenses according to provisions established by law. Article 48 Each citizen shall have the duty to take care that there is respect for the rights and freedoms of those around him and that the public order is safeguarded. Each citizen shall work to promote tolerance and mutual exchange in their relationships with others. Each citizen shall be assist in preserving the social order, peace, and national cohesion. Any action or other manifestation of racist, regionalist, or xenophobic prejudice shall be punishable by law.

Article 49 Under the authority of the Government, the mission of military and police forces shall be to protect the free exercise of rights and liberties and to guarantee of the safety of citizens and their property. Article 50 Rights and duties enunciated in the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man and in international instruments relating to human rights are ratified by Togo shall become an integral part of this Constitution. TITLE III LEGISLATIVE POWER Article 51 Legislative power, delegated by the people, shall be exercised by a single body, the National Assembly. Members of the National Assembly shall carry the title of “Deputy.” Article 52 Deputies shall be elected for a five-year term through direct and secret universal suffrage. They shall be eligible for reelection. Each Deputy shall represent the entire Nation. Any peremptory mandate shall be void. Elections shall take place within thirty (30) days before expiration of the Deputies’ term of office. The National Assembly shall meet without need of sanction the second Tuesday following official announcement of the results. Any member of the Armed Forces or of Public Security Forces who wishes to be a candidate for Deputy shall resign from the Armed Forces or Public Security. In this case, the interested party shall be able to lay claim to benefits rightfully acquired from his duties, according to statutes of his arm of government. The number of Deputies, their payment, conditions of eligibility, regulation of incompatibility, and conditions to be followed in case of vacant seats shall be established by an organic law. The body of law regarding former Deputies shall be established by an organic law. Article 53 The Deputies of the National Assembly shall enjoy parliamentary immunity.

No Deputy shall be prosecuted, searched, detained, confined or passed judgment upon because of his opinions or voting record in the exercise of his duties, even after he has completed his term of office. Except in the case of a flagrant offense, Deputies shall not be able to be detained or prosecuted for crimes and other misdemeanors except when their parliamentary immunity is lifted by the National Assembly. Any proceedings relating to a flagrant offense which are brought against a Deputy shall be reported immediately to the Office of the National Assembly. When the National Assembly is not in session, no Deputy shall be able to be detained without authorization from the Assembly’s Office. Any confinement or prosecution of a Deputy shall be suspended at the request of the National Assembly. Article 54 The National Assembly shall be led by a President, who shall be assisted by an administrative department. They shall be elected for the term of the legislature under conditions established through the Assembly’s Rules of Procedure. The President of the Assembly shall be removed from office if he is censured by a twothirds vote of all Deputies composing the National Assembly. In case the office of the President of the National Assembly is vacated due to death, abdication or other reason, the Assembly shall elect a new President within two weeks of the vacancy, if the Assembly is in session. If the National Assembly is not in session, it shall convene for this purpose without need of sanction under conditions specified by its Rules of Procedure. Replacement of other members of the administrative department shall be provided for in conformance with provisions in the National Assembly’s Rules of Procedure. Regulations concerning former Presidents of the National Assembly, especially pertaining to their compensation and safety, shall be established by an organic law. Article 55 The National Assembly shall meet without need of sanction in two regular sessions per year. The first session shall open the first Tuesday in April. The second session shall open the first Tuesday in October.

Each session shall last three months. Special session of the National Assembly may be convened by its President under a fixed agenda, at the request of the President of the Republic or of an absolute majority of the Deputies. This session shall conclude when the agenda has been exhausted. Article 56 The Deputies’ right to vote is personal. The Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly may authorize delegating a Deputy’s vote under special circumstances. In this case, the designee can vote on behalf of the Deputy for no more than one term. Article 57 The National Assembly shall function according to Rules of Procedure adopted in conformance to the Constitution. TITLE IV EXECUTIVE POWER Sub-Title I The President of the Republic Article 58 The President of the Republic shall be Chief of State. He shall be the guarantor of independence, national unity, and territorial integrity, in keeping with the Constitution and treaties and international agreements. Article 59 The President of the Republic shall be elected by direct universal suffrage for a term of five years, renewable one time only. In no case may he serve more than two terms. Article 60 The President of the Republic shall be elected by absolute majority of ballots voted. If this majority has not been obtained in the first round of voting, a second round of voting be held in two weeks. The two candidates who have received the largest number of votes during the first round shall be eligible to run for election in the second round. In the case of the withdrawal or death of either candidate in the period between the two rounds of voting, those candidates who received the next largest number of votes may present themselves for election, in the order of votes won.

The candidate who receives the largest number of votes in the second round of voting shall be declared winner. Article 61 Polls shall be open upon convocation of the electoral body by a decree from the Council of Ministers at least sixty (60) days and no more than seventy-five (75) days before the term of the current President expires. Article 62 A person shall be ineligible to be candidate for the office of President of the Republic if: — he is not Togolese by birth. — he has not reached the age of 45 years when he announces his candidacy. — he is not qualified to enjoy full civil and political rights. — he is not considered to be in a general state of physical and mental well-being according to sworn testimony of three physicians appointed by the Constitutional Court. Article 63 The office of President of the Republic shall be considered incompatible with exercising of any parliamentary office, any professional representative duties of a national character, private or public employment (both civil and military, and all professional activity. The President of the Republic shall take office within two weeks following announcement of the results of the Presidential election. Article 64 Before taking office, the President of the Republic shall deliver the following before the Constitutional Court, which shall be convened as a solemn audience at the National Assembly, in the presence of Deputies in special session: “Before God and the Togolese people, sole holders of popular sovereignty, I, , elected President of the Republic according to the laws of the Republic, solemnly swear: — to respect and to defend the Constitution which the Togolese People have freely given themselves; — to fulfill loyally the high office that the Nation has conferred on me;

— to be guided by the general interest and by respect for human rights, to consecrate all my strength to the promotion of development, the common good, peace and national unity; — to preserve the Nation’s territorial integrity; and — to conduct myself in all things as a faithful and loyal servant of the People.” Article 65 In the case of vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic by death, abdication or other final obstruction, the duties of the President shall be temporarily exercised by the President of the National Assembly. Vacancy of the Presidency shall be declared by the Constitutional Court after it is so apprised by the Government. The Government shall convene the electorate within sixty (60) days following the beginning of the vacancy in order to elect a new President of the Republic for a period of five years. Article 66 The President of the Republic shall have the authority to appoint the Prime Minister from the parliamentary majority. He shall also have the authority to remove him from office upon being apprised by the Prime Minister of the resignation of the Government. Upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, the President of the Republic shall have authority to appoint other members of the Government and to remove them from office. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers. Article 67 The President of the Republic shall promulgate laws within two weeks after a law passed conclusively by the National Assembly is presented to the Government. During this period of time, the President of the Republic shall have the power to request a new deliberation of the law or of any of its articles. This request must be moved. A second deliberation cannot be refused. If a law shall not be promulgated within the required time period, the law shall automatically go into effect upon declaration by the Constitutional Court. Article 68

After consultation with the Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Republic shall have the authority to dissolve the National Assembly. This dissolution cannot take place during the first year of the legislature’s term. A new Assembly must be elected within sixty (60) days following the dissolution of the preceding Assembly. The National Assembly shall convene without need of sanction the second Tuesday following its election. If its meeting date should fall outside the time frame established for regular sessions, a two-week session shall convene without need of sanction. This session cannot be followed by a new dissolution in the year following the election(s). Article 69 The President of the Republic shall sign ordinances and decrees that are deliberated in the Cabinet. Article 70 After deliberation of the Cabinet, the President of the Republic shall appoint the Grand Chancellor of the Order of Mono, Ambassadors and Special Envoys, Prefects, Commanding Officers of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, and Directors of central Departments. Upon decree by the Cabinet, the President of the Republic shall name both university presidents elected by the electoral colleges of these universities and professors listed in aptitude rolls recognized by university counselors and general department heads. Those other employees who may be appointed by the President of the Republic, and conditions under which the President’s power of nomination can be delegated by him for exercise in his name, shall be established under an organic law. Article 71 The President of the Republic shall have the authority to accredit Ambassadors and Special Envoys to foreign powers. He also shall accredit his own Ambassadors and Special Envoys. Article 72 The President of the Republic shall be Chief of the Armed Forces. He shall preside over the Councils of Defense. He shall declare war upon authorization of the National Assembly. He shall decree general mobilization after consultation with the Prime Minister.

Article 73 The President of the Republic shall have the authority of pardon upon the advise of the Superior Council of the Magistrature. Article 74 The President of the Republic shall have the power to address the Nation. He shall present an annual State of the Union address to the Nation at the National Assembly. Article 75 Regulations covering former Presidents of the Republic, especially concerning their compensation and safety, shall be established by an organic law. Sub-Title II The Government Article 76 The Government shall be comprised of the Prime Minister, Ministers, and, such being the case, Ministers of State, delegated Ministers, and Secretaries of State. The duties of all members of the Government shall be considered incompatible with any other parliamentary office, all duties regarding professional representation of a national character, all private and public office, whether civil or military, and all other professional activity. Regulations regarding former members of the Government, especially those concerning their compensation and safety, shall be established by an organic law. Article 77 The Government shall determine and conduct National policy. It shall direct the civil and military administration. To this effect, the Government shall have at its command the administration, Armed Forces and Security Forces. The Government shall be responsible to the National Assembly. Article 78 The Prime Minister shall be the head of the Government. He shall direct the Government’s actions and coordinate the duties of other members of the Government. He shall preside over committees for defense. He shall represent the President of the Republic as needed in presiding over the Councils, as indicated in Articles 66 and 72 of

this Constitution. He shall also act as provisional Chief of State in case of the latter’s obstruction, illness or absence from national territory. Before taking office, the Prime Minister shall present his Government’s plan of action to the National Assembly. A vote of confidence in the Government shall be by an absolute majority of the membership of the National Assembly. Article 79 The Prime Minister shall assure that the laws are executed properly. Except for the provisions of Article 70, the Prime Minister shall appoint civil and military employees. The Prime Minister shall have authority to delegate certain of his powers to the Ministers. Article 80 Acts of the President of the Republic, other than those specified in Articles 4, 66, 73, 98, 100, 104, and 139 of this Constitution, shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister, or, such being the case, by the Ministers charged with their execution. TITLE V THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 81 The National Assembly shall hold legislative power. The National Assembly alone shall pass laws and control actions of the government. Article 82 The National Assembly shall control its own agenda. It shall inform the Government of this agenda. The introduction of a bill or a declaration of general policy to the agenda of the National Assembly, in order of priority, shall not require sanction if the Government requests it. Article 83 Initiative for laws shall belong jointly to the Deputies of the National Assembly and to the Government. Regulations concerning the following shall be established by law:

— citizenship, civic rights and the exercise of public freedoms; — the system for establishing holidays, partial workdays and pay days; — constraints necessitated by National Defense; — the nationality, status and capacity of individuals, matrimony, inheritance and gifts; — procedures according to which customs shall be authenticated and harmonized with the fundamental principles of the Constitution; — the definition of crimes and misdemeanors as well as applicable punishment, penal procedure, and amnesty; — the organization of judicial and administrative tribunals and procedures to be followed before these jurisdictions, as well as regulations concerning magistrates, ministerial officers and other judicial aides; — the establishment of jurisdictions concerning financial affairs for constitutional and administrative authorities; — the tax base, tax rates and methods of collecting taxes of all kinds; — the system for issuing money; — the electoral system for the National Assembly and local Assemblies; — remuneration for political offices; — the nationalism of business enterprises and transfers of business property from the public to the private sector; — the creation of categories of public establishments; — sanitation and statistics concerning the population; — state of siege and state of emergency; — protection and promotion of the environment and conservation of natural resources; — the creation, expansion and reclassification of national parks, animal reserves and classified forests; — preparation, execution and application of plans and national programs for development;

— protection of freedom of the press and of access to information; — regulations regarding the minority; — the general organization of the Administration; — the general body of law concerning public office; — the organization of the National Defense; — the conferring of various titles of distinction; — education and scientific research; — the integration of national cultural values; — the regulation of property, property rights and civil and commercial obligations; — the right to work, to organize labor unions and to create social institutions; — regulation of penitentiaries; — regulation of insurance and banking industries; — the economic regime; — the organization of the production of goods and services; — regulation of transportation and communications; — the free administration of territorial communities and of their jurisdictions and of their resources; The provisions of this Article shall be completed and specified by an organic law. Article 85 Matters other than those which come under the domain of law shall be of a regulatory character. Article 86 In order to execute its programs, the Government shall have authority to request from the National Assembly authorization to put into effect by ordinance, for a limited time, measures that would otherwise be considered in the domain of the law.

These ordinances shall be passed by the Council of Ministers upon the advice of the Constitutional Court. They shall be in force from the time of their publication, but shall become void if the bill for ratification has not been presented to the National Assembly before the date established by the enabling act. At the expiration of the time period defined in the enabling act, these ordinances shall not be able to be modified except by a law concerning those of their provisions that relate to the legislative domain. Article 87 Motions and bills shall be presented to the Office of the National Assembly, which shall then submit them for examination by specialized committees whose composition and whose prerogatives shall be established by the National Assembly’s Rules of Procedure. Article 88 The Government shall be notified of motions for laws at least eight (8) days before their deliberation and vote. Article 89 Draft bills shall be deliberated by the Council of Ministers. Article 90 Both Deputies and the Government shall have the right of amendment. Motions and amendments formulated by the Deputies shall not be acceptable if their adoption shall have, as a consequence, the diminution of public assets or the creation or increase of public expense, unless such motions or amendments are balanced by compensatory proposals. Article 91 The National Assembly shall pass finance bills under conditions specified by an organic law. Provisions of a bill shall go into effect by ordinance if the Assembly has not passed them within forty-five (45) days following their presentation and if the fiscal year is going to expire. In this case, the Government shall convene a special session of the National Assembly in order to request ratification. If the finance bill shall not be presented in time to be passed and promulgated before the beginning of the National Assembly’s term of office, and if the budget has not been passed by the end of the special session, the Prime Minister may request authorization

from the Assembly to adopt a preliminary budget matching one-twelfth of the budget of the preceding year, as an emergency measure. Article 92 Motions and organic bills shall be submitted to the National Assembly for deliberation and passage two weeks after their presentation. Organic laws can only be promulgated after they have been declared constitutional by the Constitutional Court. Article 93 Declaration of war shall be authorized by the National Assembly. Article 94 Like a state of emergency, a state of siege shall go into effect by a decree made by the President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers. The National Assembly shall meet immediately, without need of sanction, if it is not already in session. A state of siege or state of emergency can be prolonged beyond two weeks only if it is so authorized by the National Assembly. The National Assembly cannot be dissolved during a state or siege or a state of emergency. Conditions under which a state of siege or state of emergency shall go into effect shall be specified by an organic law. Article 95 Sessions of the National Assembly shall be public. A complete record of its debates shall be published in the Official Journal. The National Assembly shall be able to sit in closed session at the request of the Prime Minister or of one-fifth of its members. Article 96 Members of the Government shall have access to the National Assembly and to its committees.

Members of the Government shall be able to be heard by these entities at the request of members of the Government. Members of the Government may be questioned by the National Assembly and may be required to answer written or oral questions posed to them. Article 97 After deliberation of the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister shall have the authority to request a hearing for the Government’s program or for a statement of general policy. This shall be put to a vote after being debated. The Government cannot be denied a vote of confidence if it is passed by an absolute majority of the total membership of the National Assembly. If such confidence shall be refused, the Prime Minister must submit the resignation of the Government to the President of the Republic. Article 98 The National Assembly can also show lack of confidence in the Government by passing a motion to censure. In order to be admitted, such a motion must be signed by at least one-third of the total membership of the National Assembly and shall indicate the name of the eventual successor to the Prime Minister. Such a vote can only be called after a period of five days following presentation of the motion. The Government can then be censured only by passage of the motion to censure by an absolute majority of the total membership of the National Assembly. If the motion for censure is adopted, the Prime Minister shall submit his Government’s resignation. The President of the Republic shall appoint the newly-designated Prime Minister. If the motion for censure is rejected, its signers shall not be able to re-submit the motion throughout the course of that session. TITLE VI THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT Article 99 The Constitutional Court shall be the highest jurisdiction of the State regarding constitutional matters. The Constitutional Court shall judge the constitutionality of laws

and shall guarantee fundamental human rights and civil liberties. It is the regulatory organ for functioning of institutions and the activities of public authorities. Article 100 The Constitutional Court shall be composed of seven (7) members, of which two (2) shall be elected by the National Assembly upon the proposal of the President of the Assembly, one (1) member appointed by the President of the Republic, one (1) member appointed by the Prime Minister, one (1) magistrate elected by his peers, one (1) lawyer elected by his peers, and one (1) teacher in the Faculty of Law elected by his peers, for a nonrenewable term of seven years. During the first term, two members of the Court shall be elected by the National Assembly for a period of three (3) years and one member shall be appointed by the President of the Republic for a period of three (3) years. Only high-ranking jurists, teachers and legal practitioners with at least fifteen (15) years experience shall be eligible for election or appointment to the Constitutional Court, according to the provisions of an organic law. Article 101 The President of the Constitutional Court shall be elected by his peers for a renewable term of three (3) years. Article 102 Throughout their term, members of the Constitutional Court shall not be able to be prosecuted or detained except upon authorization of the Constitutional Court and then only in the case of a flagrant offense. In that case, the President of the Constitutional Court must be informed immediately, within forty-eight (48) hours. Article 103 The office of membership on the Constitutional Court shall be considered incompatible with other Government office, with exercising any elected office, with public employment (either civil or military), and with any professional activity, just as is the case of any other national office. The organization and functioning of the Constitutional Court, procedures to be followed before it, particularly periods of time for seisin, as well as judicial immunity and disciplinary codes relating to the Court’s members, shall be established by an organic law. Article 104

The Constitutional Court shall be the jurisdiction charged with making sure there is respect for provisions of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court shall determine the constitutionality of laws. Before their promulgation, law can be deferred for the Court’s review by the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly, or a vote of one-fifth of the members of the National Assembly. To the same end, it shall be necessary to submit, before their promulgation, all organic laws and, before their application, all Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly, of the High Authority of Audio-Visual Affairs and Communications, and of the Economic and Social Council to the Constitutional Court. Throughout the course of a judicial hearing, any person of sound mind and body shall in limina litis, be able to raise the question of a law’s constitutionality before any court or tribunal. In that case, the jurisdiction shall suspend making laws and shall call upon the Constitutional Court for its opinion. The Constitutional Court must rule on the law’s constitutionality within a month, or, in an emergency, within a week. Any text declared unconstitutional cannot be promulgated. If it has already gone into effect, it shall be withdrawn through a written judicial order. Article 105 The Constitutional Court shall give its opinion on laws passed by virtue of Articles 69 and 86 of this Constitution. Article 106 Decisions of the Constitutional Court shall not be susceptible to any other authority. These decisions shall apply to all public bodies and to all civil, military and juridical authorities. TITLE VII THE COURT OF AUDITING Article 107 The Court of Audits shall judge the statements of public accountants. The Court of Audits shall verify audits and the conduct of public establishments and public enterprises.

It shall assist Parliament and the Government in checking that fiscal laws are properly executed. It shall prepare any study regarding financial operations and public book-keeping that is requested by the Government or by the National Assembly. The Court of Audits shall make an annual report to the Government and to the National Assembly regarding areas in which infractions are committed and in regard to responsibilities within its province. Article 108 The Court of Audits shall be composed of: — the Chief Justice — chamber presidents — counselor-governors — referendary counselors — auditors Public administration of the Court of Audits shall be under the direction of the Attorney General and of State attorneys. The number of employees at various levels shall be fixed by law. The Chief Justice, the Attorney General, State attorneys, chamber presidents and counselor governors shall be named by a decree of the President of the Republic passed in the Council of Ministers. Referendary counselors and auditors shall be appointed by the President of the Republic at the motion of the Prime Minister, upon the advice of the Finance Minister and approval of the National Assembly. Only high-ranking jurists, inspectors of the departments of Finance, Treasury, and Taxes, economic advisors and auditing experts with at least fifteen (15) years experience shall be eligible for appointment to the Court of Audits. Article 109 The President of the Court of Audits shall be elected by his peers for a renewable term of three years.

Article 110 Members of the Court of Audits shall have the rank of magistrate. They cannot be removed for the duration of their term in office. Article 111 The duties of members of the Court of Audits shall be considered incompatible with those of the rank of member of the Government, with the exercising of any elected office, with any public, civil or military employment, and any professional activity, just as is the case with all other offices with national representation. The organization and functioning of the Court of Audits shall be established by an organic law. TITLE VIII JUDICIAL POWER Sub-Title I General Provisions Article 112 Justice shall be rendered throughout the territory of the Republic in the name of the Togolese People. Article 113 Judicial authority shall be independent from Legislative or Executive authority. Judges shall only be permitted to exercise their duties through the authority of the law. Judicial Power shall be the guarantor of individual liberties and the fundamental rights of citizens. Article 114 Magistrates of the bench shall be permanent. Article 115 The President of the Republic shall be guarantor of the independence of the judiciary. He shall be assisted by the Superior Council of the Magistracy. Article 116

The Superior Council of the Magistracy shall be composed of nine (9) members: — Three judges from the Supreme Court; — Four judges from Appellate Courts and from Tribunals; — One Deputy elected by the National Assembly by ballot; and — One person who belongs neither to the National Assembly, nor to the Government, nor to the Magistracy, and who shall be selected by the President of the Republic on the basis of his competency. The President of the Supreme Court shall preside over the Superior Council of the Magistracy. Judges who are members of said Council, with the exception of the President of the Supreme Court, and members of the law, shall be elected by their peers in secret ballot. Members of the Superior Council of the Magistracy shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years, renewable once. Article 117 The Superior Council of the Magistracy shall rule on discipline of judges. Applicable sanctions, as well as procedures, shall be established through an organic law carrying the statute regarding the Magistracy. The organization and functioning of the Superior Council of the Magistracy shall be fixed by an organic law. Article 118 The recruitment of all judges shall be at the recommendation of the Minister of Justice, upon the advice of the Superior Council of the Magistracy. Nomination of magistrates of the bench shall be made by decree of the Council of Ministers upon the proposal of the Superior Council of the Magistracy. The nomination of magistrates of prosecuting courts shall be upon decree of the Council of Ministers, at the motion of the Minister of Justice, upon advice of the Superior Council of the Magistracy. While on the bench, magistrates shall not be able to fill any other public office or to take part in any money-making activity other than those allowable by law, or to indulge in any public political activity.

The body of laws applying to judges and their remuneration shall be established by an organic law, in conformance with requirements of independence and efficiency. Article 119 The principles of jurisdictional unity and separation of matters in litigation shall be the basis of the organization and functioning of administrative and judicial administrative units. Military jurisdictions shall be organized by law, according to the principles of the Constitution. Other jurisdictions shall be prohibited. Sub-Title II The Supreme Court Article 120 The Supreme Court shall be the highest jurisdiction of the State in judicial and administrative matters. Article 121 The President of the Supreme Court must be a professional judge. He shall be named by decree by the President of the Republic, in the Council of Ministers, upon the motion of the Superior Council of the Magistracy. Before taking office, he shall address the Office of the National Assembly as follows: “I swear that I will fulfill my duties, faithfully and well, by exercising total impartiality and respect for the Constitution, by guarding the secrecy of deliberations and voting, to take no public position and to provide no private opinion regarding questions about the Court’s jurisdiction, and to conduct myself in all ways as a dignified and loyal magistrate.” Article 122 Judges of the Supreme Court can be prosecuted for crimes and misdemeanors committed in the exercise of their duties, if the occasion presents itself, or outside the scope of their duties, only before the High Court of Justice. Except in the case of a flagrant offense, no Supreme Court Judge can be prosecuted or passed judgement on without previous authorization by the Supreme Council of the Magistracy.

Provisions for the organization and functioning of the Supreme Court shall be established by an organic law. Article 123 The Supreme Court shall be composed of two chambers: — the Judicial Chamber and — the Administrative Chamber. Each of these chambers shall constitute an autonomous chamber within the Supreme Court. Each shall consist of a Chamber President and counselors. The President of the Supreme Court shall preside over the combined chambers. The public minister of each of these chambers shall be assured by the office of the public prosecutor of the Supreme Court, which shall be composed of the Attorney General and assisting attorneys. Article 124 The Judicial Chamber of the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction over: — appeals as a last resort against decisions of civil, commercial, social and penal jurisdictions; — disputes against magistrates of the Appellate Court regarding provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure; — penal proceedings against Appellate Court Judges, according to conditions established by the Code of Penal Procedure; and — requests for review and judicial regulations. Article 125 The Administrative Chamber of the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction over: — appeals against decisions rendered in matters of administrative disputes; — appeals for excessive power taken against administrative acts; — disputes over local elections;

— appeals against decisions of organs of state which pass laws regarding disciplinary matters. Sub-Title II The High Court of Justice Article 126 The High Court of Justice shall be composed of the President and of the Presidents of the chambers of the Supreme Court and of four Deputies elected by the National Assembly. The High Court of Justice shall elect its President from its ranks. Rules of functioning as well as procedures to be followed before the High Court of Justice shall be fixed by an organic law. Article 127 The High Court of Justice shall be the only jurisdiction qualified to judge infractions committed by the President of the Republic, as well as crimes of high treason. The High Court of Justice shall be qualified to judge members of the Government and their accomplices in the event of a conspiracy against the State. Article 128 The High Court of Justice shall deal with crimes and misdemeanors committed by members of the Supreme Court. Article 129 The High Court of Justice shall be, by definition, involved in crimes and misdemeanors as well as by the determination of penalties resulting from penal laws in effect when the deeds were committed. The decision to prosecute as well as to arraign the President of the Republic and members of the Government shall be passed by the majority of two-thirds of the Deputy membership of the National Assembly, according to procedures established by organic law. In case of arraignment, the President of the Republic and members of the Government shall be suspended from office. If they are found guilty, they shall be discharged from office.

TITLE IX THE HIGH AUTHORITY OF AUDIO-VISUAL AFFAIRS AND COMMUNICATIONS Article 130 The mission of the High Authority of Audio-Visual Affairs and Communications shall be to guarantee and to assure freedom of and protection of the press and other means of mass communications. The High Authority shall watch over ethics in respect to matters of information, communications and equitable access by political parties and other organizations to official means of information and communication. The High Authority of Audio-Visual Affairs and Communications shall be qualified to authorize new private television and radio networks. Article 131 The High Authority of Audio-Visual Affairs and Communications shall elect its President and officers from among its ranks. Composition, organization and functioning of the High Authority of Audio-Visual Affairs and Communications shall be fixed by an organic law. TITLE X THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL Article 132 The Economic and Social Council shall give its advice on all issues presented for its examination by the President of the Republic, the Government, the National Assembly, and other public institutions. The advice of the Economic and Social Council shall be sought on all economic and social bills and plans as well as on all bills containing clauses of a fiscal, economic or social nature. The Council shall also analyze all problems regarding economic and social development. It shall present its conclusions to the President of the Republic, the government and the National Assembly. It shall follow the execution of decisions of the government relative to economic and social organization. Article 133

At the request of the President of the Republic, the government or the National Assembly, the Economic and Social Council shall designate one of its members to report to various bodies on the Council’s opinion regarding bills or motions submitted to it. Article 134 The Economic and Social Council shall elect its president and officers from among its ranks. Article 135 The Economic and Social Council shall maintain a division in each economic region of the country. Article 136 The composition, organization and functioning of the Economic and Social Council as well as its divisions shall be determined by an organic law. TITLE XI TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS Article 137 The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements. Article 138 Peace treaties, commercial treaties, and treaties relative to international organizations, as well as those involving the State’s finances, those which modify legislative provisions, those which relate to the status of individuals and human rights, and those which involve the suspension, exchange or adjunction of territory cannot be ratified except by a law. Such treaties shall not take effect until they have been ratified and published. No suspension, exchange or adjunction of territory shall be valid without the consent of interested peoples. Article 139 When, at the instigation of the President of the Republic, by the Prime Minister or by the President of the National Assembly, the Constitutional Court declares that an international agreement contains a clause contrary to the Constitution, said agreement cannot be ratified or approved until after there has been a revision of the Constitution.

Article 140 Upon their publication, treaties or agreements which are ratified through regular procedures or approved shall have authority superior to those laws subject to them, as long as they have been applied by the other party also. TITLE XII TERRITORIAL UNITS AND TRADITIONAL ENGINEERING DISTRICTS Article 141 The Togolese Republic shall be organized into territorial units on the basis of the principle of decentralization in respect to national unity. These territorial units shall be: townships, prefectures and regions. Any other territorial unit must be created by law. Territorial units shall be freely self-administered by councils elected by universal suffrage, according to conditions specified by law. Article 142 The State shall keep vigil over the harmonious development of all territorial units on the basis of national solidarity, regional potentialities, and inter-regional equilibrium. Article 143 The Togolese State shall recognize traditional districts as guardians of customs and ways. The designation and installation of the leaders of traditional districts shall be in accordance with the customs and ways of the locality. TITLE XIII ON REVISING THE CONSTITUTION Article 144 Initiative of revising the Constitution shall belong jointly to the President of the Republic, upon a motion of the Prime Minister, and of a minimum of one-fifth of the Deputy membership of the National Assembly. Bills or motions to revise the Constitution shall be considered adopted when passed by a majority of four-fifths of the Deputies composing the National Assembly.

If this majority is not attained, a bill or motion for revision that has attained at least a two-thirds vote of the Deputies composing the National Assembly shall be submitted to referendum. No proceedings for revision can be undertaken or followed during an interim period, during a parliamentary recess or until it has been brought to the attention of the entire territory. Neither the republican form of government nor the undenominational nature of the State can be subject to Constitutional revision. TITLE XIV SPECIAL PROVISIONS Article 145 The President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, members of the government, the president and officers of the National Assembly, and directors of central administrative offices and public enterprises shall provide to the Supreme Court a declaration of their wealth at the beginning and conclusion of their termS of office. ConDitions for putting this provision into effect shall be determined by law. Article 146 The source of all legitimate power springs from this Constitution. Article 147 The Togolese Armed Forces shall be a national, republican and apolitical army. They shall be submitted totally to constitutional political authority that is established through regular means. Article 148 Any effort on the part of personnel of the Armed Forces, the Public Security Force, or any individual or group of individuals to reverse the constitutional regime shall be considered an indefeasible crime against the nation and penalized according to the laws of the Republic. Article 149 Except for matters involving territorial defense or public works, the Armed Forces shall engage in no measure other than those expressly authorized by this Constitution.

In case of an armed conflict with another nation, the Armed Forces shall be qualified to protect civil objectives and to assure the success of missions of the police, as long as those measures are designed to defend territorial integrity. In this case, Armed Forces shall cooperate with police authorities. In the case of an armed rebellion, and if police and security forces cannot maintain public order by themselves, the government shall be authorized to engage the Armed Forces in protecting civil objectives and in fighting rebels so as to disperse the menace to the Republic. In any case, the government must disengage the Armed Forces if so required by the National Assembly. Article 150 In case of a coup d’etat or other forcible coup, all members of the government and of the National Assembly shall have the right and the duty to take any and all means to reestablish constitutional legitimacy. As a recourse, they may call upon any existing agreements of military or defense cooperation. Under these circumstances, the duty of all Togolese to disobey and to organize themselves to check any illegitimate power shall be their most sacred right and their most imperative duty. Any overturning of the constitutional regime shall be considered an indefeasible crime against the nation, to be penalized according to laws of the Republic. TITLE XV TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS Article 151 This Constitution must be promulgated within eight (8) hours of its adoption by referendum. Article 152 Transitional organs of government shall continue to exercise their prerogatives within the respective jurisdictions described in Act 7, as modified, until new institutions established in this Constitution have been put in place. These transitional organs shall continue to exercise their prerogatives with all corresponding guarantees and immunities. Article 153

The putting into place of new institutions shall proceed according to the following provisions: 1) The National Assembly shall be installed by the President of the High Council of the Republic, in the presence of members of said Council, and, in any case, prior to the swearing-in of the newly-elected President of the Republic. 2) The President of the Republic shall remain in office until the swearing-in of the newlyelected President. 3) The Transition Government shall remain in office until the new Government is formed. Article 154 Jurisdictions vested by this Constitution in the Constitutional Court shall be exercised by the Supreme Court until the Constitutional Court has been put in place. Article 155 Legislation in force in Togo prior to the putting in place of new institutions shall remain applicable, unless there are new texts in their place, and only if such existing legislation contains nothing contrary to this Constitution. The provisions of Article 62 of this Constitution shall be applicable immediately upon their promulgation. However, after having conducted the State’s policy, members of the Transition Government shall not be eligible to be candidates for in the next presidential election, according to this Constitution. SPECIAL TITLE THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Article 156 A National Commission on Human Rights shall be created. This commission shall be independent and shall not be subjugated to any other authority than the Constitution and the law. Article 157 No member of the Government or of Parliament, or any other person shall interfere with the exercise of its duties and all other organs of the State shall accordingly provide any assistance needed by the Commission to preserve its independence, dignity and efficiency. Article 158

The composition, organization and functioning of the National Commission on Human Rights shall be established by an organic law. TITLE XVI CONCLUDING PROVISIONS Article 159 This Constitution shall be executed as the FUNDAMENTAL LAW of the Togolese Republic.

