Title:

Date Adopted: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

Constitution of Turkmenistan, Together with the Law of Turkmenistan on the Entry into Legal Force of the Constitution of Turkmenistan, 18 May 1992 05/18/1992 Turkmenistan The Philadelphia Constitution Foundation, reproduced with permission Proprietary Vladimir I. Lafitsky

CONSTITUTION OF TURKMENISTAN Table of Contents Section I-Fundamentals of the Constitutional Structure Section II-Fundamental Rights, Freedoms and Obligations of the Individual and Citizen Section III-System of State Organs Section IV-Local Self-Government Section V-The Election System and Referendum Section VI-Judicial Power Section VII-Procurator’s Office Section VIII-Concluding Provisions

We, the people of Turkmenistan, based upon our inherent right of self-determination; being responsible for the present and future of our fatherland; expressing fidelity to the behest of our ancestors to live in integrity, peace and consent; protecting national values [valuables] and interests; strengthening the sovereignty of the Turkmenian people; guaranteeing rights and freedoms to every citizen and seeking to secure civil peace and national unity and to lay down fundamentals of government for the people and State based on the rule of law;

hereby adopt this Constitution as the Fundamental Law of Turkmenistan. Section I FUNDAMENTALS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE Article 1 Turkmenistan is a democratic, law-governed, secular state, where the State government is implemented as a presidential republic. Turkmenistan shall have supreme power over its territory. It shall implement its own domestic and foreign policy independently. The State sovereignty and the territory of Turkmenistan shall be united and indivisible. The State shall protect the independence and territorial integrity of Turkmenistan and its constitutional structure and provide a lawful system of legal order. Article 2 The people shall be the repository of sovereignty and the sole source of State power in Turkmenistan. The people of Turkmenistan shall exercise their power directly and through representative organs. Neither a section of the people, nor an association, nor any individual may assume State power for itself. Article 3 In Turkmenistan, the individual shall be considered the supreme value of the society and of the State. The State shall be responsible to its citizens and provide conditions for the free development of their personality. The State shall protect the life, honor and dignity, personal inviolability and security, and the inherent and inalienable rights of each citizen. Each citizen shall be responsible to the State for fulfilling duties given him by the Constitution and law. Article 4 The system of State power shall be based on the principle of separation of powers— legislative, executive, and judicial, which shall act independently, checking and counterbalancing each other. Article 5

The State and all its organs and officials shall be bound by law and the constitutional structure. The Constitution of Turkmenistan shall be the supreme Law of the State; its rules and provisions shall be applied directly. Laws and other legal acts which contradict the Constitution shall have no legal force. Legal acts of State organs shall be published for general information or promulgated in any way, except for acts containing State or other secrets protected by law. Legal acts which affect the rights and freedoms of citizens may not be applied if they have not been published for general information. Article 6 Turkmenistan shall acknowledge the priority of generally recognized norms of international law. Turkmenistan shall be an authorized member of the world community, observing in its foreign policy the principles of peaceful co-existence, non-use of force, and non-interference in the internal affairs of other states. Article 7 Turkmenistan shall provide for its own citizenship. Citizenship shall be acquired, maintained, and/or terminated in accordance with law. No person may be stripped of his citizenship or of the right to change his citizenship. No citizen of Turkmenistan may be extradited to another state, exiled beyond the borders of Turkmenistan, or restricted in his right to return to his motherland. Turkmenistan shall guarantee the defense of and protection of its citizens both within its territory and beyond its borders. Article 8 Foreign citizens and persons without citizenship shall enjoy the rights and freedoms of citizens of Turkmenistan, with exceptions defined by law. Turkmenistan shall grant the right of asylum to foreign citizens persecuted in their countries for political, national, or religious convictions or faiths. Article 9 Property shall be considered inviolable. Turkmenistan shall confirm the right of private property regarding means of production, land, and other material and intellectual values [valuables]. [Such properties] may also belong to associations of citizens and the State. Objects to be considered exceptional State property shall be determined by law. The State

shall guarantee equal protection and equal conditions for the development of all forms and kinds of property. The confiscation of property shall not be permitted, except for property obtained illegally. Eminent domain shall be permitted only in cases specified by law. Article 10 The State shall be responsible for preserving the national, historical, and cultural heritage and the environment, for securing equality between social and national entities, for encouraging scientific and cultural works and the dissemination of their results, and for promoting international links in the fields of science, culture, education, sports, and tourism. Article 11 The State shall guarantee freedom of conscience and the equality of all religions and denominations before the law. Religious associations shall be separate from the State and may not execute State functions. The State’s educational system shall be separate from religious associations; it shall have a secular character. Every person shall have the right to select his religious affiliation freely and to profess with other persons any religion or no religion at all, to express and disseminate religious views, and to participate in a religious organization and/or religious worship or ceremony. Article 12 Turkmenistan shall maintain its own military forces in order to protect the State’s sovereignty. Article 13 The Turkmenian language shall be the official State language of Turkmenistan. Article 14 The State flag, emblem, and anthem shall be the symbols of Turkmenistan as a sovereign state. Article 15 Shaher Ashgabat shall be the capital of Turkmenistan.

Section II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS, FREEDOMS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE INDIVIDUAL AND CITIZEN Article 16 Human rights shall be inviolable and inalienable. No one may deprive an individual of his rights and freedoms or limit his rights by any means other than those provided by the Constitution and laws. An enumeration of certain human rights and freedoms may not be constructed as a rejection or reduction of any other rights and freedoms. Article 17 Turkmenistan shall guarantee the equality of rights and freedoms of all citizens and the equality of all citizens before the law, regardless of nationality, origin, property or employment status, place of residence, language, attitude toward religion, political conviction, or political affiliation. Article 18 Men and women shall have equal civil rights. Any violation of equality on grounds of sex shall be prosecuted by law. Article 19 The exercise of rights and freedoms must not violate the rights and freedoms of other persons, moral rules, or the social order, or harm the national security. Article 20 Every person shall have the right to life. No one may be deprived of life. Capital punishment may be applied only by court sentence as an exceptional means of punishment for serious crimes. Article 21 No citizen may be limited in or deprived of his rights or convicted or punished except in strict accordance with the law and upon a court decision. No person may be subjected to torture, inhumane or denigrating treatment, nor may any person be subjected to medical or other experiments without his voluntary consent. A citizen may be arrested only in cases described by law, upon a court decision or with a

sanction of a prosecutor. A citizen may be temporarily detained by authorized organs in urgent circumstances established by law. Article 22 Every citizen shall have the right to receive State assistance in order to obtain a well-built residence and to construct individual housing. Every residence shall be considered inviolable. No one shall be able to enter a home without the consent of its residents or without legal grounds. Every citizen shall have the right to have his place of residence protected from illegal violations. No person may be deprived of his place of residence except on grounds established by law. Article 23 Every citizen shall have the right to be protected from arbitrary interference into his private life, correspondence, and telephone and other communications, and from encroachments on his honor and good name. Article 24 Every person shall have the right to freedom of movement and to choosing a place of stay in the territory of Turkmenistan. Restrictions on movement in certain territories or for certain persons may only be imposed on the basis of law. Article 25 A man and woman of marital age may be married upon their mutual consent; they may create a family. Spouses shall have equal rights in marital relations. Parents or guardians shall have the right to and shall be obliged to bring up their children; to take care of their health, development, and education; to prepare them for work; and to help them enjoy their culture and to respect the law and historic and national traditions. Adult children shall be obligated to care for their parents and provide assistance to them. Article 26 The citizens of Turkmenistan shall have the right to freedom of conviction and to freedom of expression. They may obtain information that is not related to State, official or commercial secrets. Article 27

Freedom of assembly, meeting, and demonstrating in accordance with the law shall be guaranteed. Article 28 Citizens may create political parties and other public associations in accordance with the Constitution and laws. The creation and any activities of any political parties or other public associations aimed at violent alteration of the constitutional structure, which permit violence in their activities, which act against the constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens, which propagate war, racial, national, social, and/or religious enmity, or which encroach on the health and/or morals of the people, as well as militarized associations and political parties based on nationality or religion shall be prohibited. Article 29 Every citizen shall have the right to participate in the management of State affairs both directly and through freely elected representatives. Article 30 Citizens shall have the right to vote and to be elected to State organs. Only citizens of Turkmenistan shall have the right to equal access to State service according to their abilities and professional training. Article 31 Each citizen shall have the right to work and to choose his profession, type, and place of work freely and to enjoy healthy, safe labor conditions. Compulsory work shall be prohibited except in cases established by law. Persons working under labor agreements shall have the right to remuneration for their work according to the quantity and quality of said work. Such remuneration may not be less than the official subsistence established by the State. Article 32 Workers shall have the right to periods of rest. For persons working under labor agreements, this right shall mean a limited work week, annual paid vacation, and weekly rest days. The State shall create conditions favorable to getting rest in one’s home and to enjoying the rational use of one’s free time.

Article 33 Citizens shall have the right to health protection, including free medical assistance in State health care institutions. Paid medical assistance may be provided in cases defined by law. Article 34 Citizens shall have the right to social security in their old age and in the event of illness, disability, loss of the household provider, and unemployment. Large families, children without parents, war veterans, and other persons who have been injured while protecting State and public interests shall have the right to receive additional assistance and benefits from public funds. The means and conditions of realizing this right shall be defined by law. Article 35 Every citizen shall have the right to education. Basic secondary education shall be compulsory; every person shall be entitled to receive it free of charge in State educational institutions. The State shall assure access to professional, secondary special, and higher education to all persons, according to their abilities. Associations and private citizens may create private educational institutions on the basis of and in the manner defined by law. Article 36 Citizens of Turkmenistan shall have the right to freedom of artistic, scientific and technical creativity. Copyrights and lawful interests of the citizens in the fields of scientific and technical creativity and artistic, literary, and cultural activity shall be protected by law. The State shall encourage the development of science, culture, arts, indigenous art, sports, and tourism. Article 37 The implementation of rights and freedoms shall be inseparable from the execution by the individual and citizen of his duties before the State and before society. Every person residing in or staying in the territory of Turkmenistan must observe its Constitution and laws and respect its national traditions.

Article 38 The defense of Turkmenistan shall be a sacred duty of each person. Male citizens of Turkmenistan shall be subjected to universal army service. Article 39 Citizens of Turkmenistan shall pay State taxes and other duties in the manner and in the amounts specified by law. Article 40 Citizens shall be guaranteed the right to the judicial protection of their honor, dignity, and personal and political rights and freedoms defined by the Constitution and by law. Any acts of State organs and public associations and officials which infringe upon the law, exceed their authority, or violate the rights and freedom of citizens may be appealed to a court. Article 41 Citizens shall have the right to compensation in a court for material and moral damage illegally done by State organs or other organizations or by their officials, or by private persons. Article 42 No person shall be obligated to testify against himself or his close relatives. Evidence obtained under psychological or physical pressure or by any other illegal means shall have no legal force. Article 43 No law which reinforces legal responsibility shall be retroactive. No person shall be held responsible for actions which were not considered violations of the law at the time they were committed. Article 44 Implementation of the rights and freedoms of citizens as defined by the Constitution may be suspended only under a state of emergency or state of war in accordance with the Constitution and law. Section III SYSTEM OF STATE ORGANS

Chapter 1 General Provisions Article 45 The Hulk Maslahaty (People’s Council) shall be the ultimate representative organ of popular government in Turkmenistan. Article 46 The supreme State power of Turkmenistan shall reside in the President, the Mejlis, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic Court, and the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan. Article 47 Turkmenistan shall be composed of administrative territorial units—velayets, atraps, and shahers equated with atraps and have State government; and of shahers, villages and obas, which shall have local organs of self-government. Chapter 2 The Hulk Maslahaty Article 48 The Hulk Maslahaty shall consist of: — the President; — members of the Mejlis; — hulk vekileries, popularly elected according to one person from each atrap; — the Chairman of the Supreme Court, the Chairman of the Supreme Economic Court, the Attorney General, members of the Council of Ministers, the heads of administrations of velayets, and the archines (mayors of municipal councils) of shahers and villages which have the status of administrative centers of atraps. Article 49 The Hulk vekileries shall be elected for five years and shall serve without pay. Article 50 The Hulk Maslahaty shall consider and render decisions regarding:

1) expediting the amendment of or modification of the Constitution and the adoption of a new Constitution; 2) declaring a national referendum; 3) recommending fundamental guidelines concerning the country’s economic, social and political development; 4) changing State borders and modifying administrative territorial divisions; 5) ratifying and/or rejecting treaties calling for participation in inter-State unions and other international associations; 6) war and peace; and 7) other questions defined by the Constitution and laws. Article 51 Decisions of the Hulk Maslahaty shall be executed by the President, the Mejlis, and other State organs in accordance with their powers as stipulated by the Constitution and laws. Article 52 The Hulk Maslahaty shall be convened from time to time, at least once a year, at the initiative of the President, the Mejlis or one-fourth of the total number of the members of the Hulk Maslahaty. Article 53 The work of the Hulk Maslahaty shall be directed by the President or any of its members who are so elected by the Hulk Maslahaty. Methods for convening and conducting the proceedings of the Hulk Maslahaty shall be described by its standing rules. Chapter 3 The President of Turkmenistan Article 54 The President of Turkmenistan shall be the head of State, the head of its executive power, and the supreme official of Turkmenistan; he shall guarantee national independence, territorial integrity, and observance of the Constitution and international treaties. Article 55

Only a citizen of Turkmenistan who is a Turkman of at least forty years of age and who lives in Turkmenistan may become President. No person may be elected to the post of President more than twice in succession. Article 56 The President shall be elected by the people of Turkmenistan for a term of five years; he shall assume office immediately upon taking his oath at the session of the Hulk Maslahaty. Procedures for electing and inaugurating the President shall be determined by law. Article 57 The President of Turkmenistan shall: 1) implement the Constitution and laws and provide for their strict observance; 2) direct the implementation of foreign policy, represent Turkmenistan in foreign relations, nominate and relieve diplomatic representatives to foreign states or attached to inter-State or international organizations, and accept the credentials and letters of recall of accredited representatives of foreign states; 3) be Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, proclaim general or partial mobilization, determine the use of the Armed Forces with consecutive approval by the Hulk Maslahaty, and appoint the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces; 4) present an annual message on the state of the nation to the Hulk Maslahaty and inform that body on salient issues of internal and foreign policy; 5) present the State’s budget and report on its implementation to the Mejlis; 6) sign laws, or, within two weeks, use the right to return legislation to the Mejlis for reconsideration. If a returned law should be adopted again by a vote of two-thirds of the Mejlis, the President shall sign the law. The President shall not veto laws on amendments and modifications of the Constitution. 7) declare a referendum upon such decision by the Hulk Maslahaty and convene a session of the Mejlis in a emergency; 8) determine matters regarding citizenship of Turkmenistan and the granting of asylum; 9) present State orders and awards and grant honorary, military and other special State titles;

10) with the previous consent of the Mejlis, appoint and relieve the Chairman of the Supreme Court, the Chairman of the Supreme Economic Court, and the Attorney General; 11) grant the right of pardon and amnesty; and 12) exercise other powers vested in him by the Constitution and laws. Article 58 The President shall issue decrees, directives, and orders which shall be obligatory throughout the territory of Turkmenistan. Article 59 The President may not be a member of the Mejlis; he shall not have any other regular pay or compensation except for royalties for scientific, literary, or artistic works. Article 60 The President shall enjoy the right of immunity. The President may be removed if he is unable to exercise his powers because of his state of health. The Hulk Maslahaty may remove the President upon the recommendation of an independent medical commission established by it, by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the Hulk Maslahaty. The Hulk Maslahaty may decide to call for a vote of confidence regarding the President in any case in which he violates the Constitution or laws and introduce the issue of his removal to popular vote. The issue of confidence may be considered upon the request of one-third of the members of the Hulk Maslahaty. Any decision on this issue must be enacted by at least two-thirds of the members of the Hulk Maslahaty. Article 61 The President shall not delegate his powers to other organs or officials, with the exception of powers stipulated by items 2, 9, and 11 of Article 57 of the Constitution, which may be delegated to the Chairman of the Mejlis. In the event the President is unable to exercise his powers on any grounds, the temporary execution of said powers shall devolve to the Chairman of the Mejlis until the election of a new President. In this case, the election of the President shall be held within two months after devolvement of presidential powers to the Chairman of the Mejlis. The person who acts as President shall not participate as a candidate in the ensuing presidential elections.

Chapter 4 The Mejlis of Turkmenistan Article 62 The Mejlis (Parliament) shall be a legislative organ of Turkmenistan. Article 63 The Mejlis shall consist of 50 deputies elected by territorial districts, which shall contain a roughly equal number of electors, for a term of five years. Article 64 The Mejlis may be dissolved: — by passage of a referendum calling for such; — upon such a resolution of the Mejlis, passed by two-thirds of its members (selfdissolution); — by the President, if the Mejlis is unable to form the governing organs of the Mejlis or if the Mejlis votes twice within eighteen months for the removal of the Cabinet of Ministers. Article 65 The Mejlis shall independently judge any ineligibility of elections and/or powers of its members, elect the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman from among the membership of the Mejlis, and create the Mejlis’ committees and commissions. Article 66 The Mejlis may delegate the power to enact laws on appropriate issues to the President; such laws shall require the approval of the Mejlis. The Mejlis may not delegate legislative powers on the following issues: 1) adoption of and amendments to the Constitution; 2) criminal and administrative legislation; and 3) the judiciary. Article 67

The Mejlis shall have power: 1) to adopt and to amend the Constitution and laws and to give their interpretation; 2) to declare the elections of the President, the Mejlis, and the hulk vekileries; 3) to form the Central Election and Referendum Commission; 4) to approve the political program of the Cabinet of Ministers and to vote for its removal; 5) to consent to or to reject the appointment of and/or the relieving of the Chairman of the Supreme Court, the Chairman of the Supreme Economic Court, and the Procurator; 6) to approve Turkmenistan’s budget and to report on its implementation; 7) to institute State awards and to present the President with State awards and to grant him honorary and military titles; 8) to determine whether acts of the State organs are consistent with the Constitution and other laws; 9) to decide other issues vested in the Mejlis by the Constitution and laws. Article 68 The right of legislative initiative in the Mejlis shall be held by the President, members of the Mejlis, and the Cabinet of Ministers. Article 69 Deputies of the Mejlis may come before the Cabinet of Ministers, the ministers, and the heads of other State organs to question them and provide written questions. Article 70 A deputy may only be expelled by the Mejlis. Any decision on that issue shall require the vote of two-thirds of the deputies of the Mejlis. No deputy may be subjected to criminal persecution, arrested, or deprived of any other type of freedom without the consent of the Mejlis, or without the consent of the Presidium of the Mejlis when the Mejlis is not in session. Article 71

The Mejlis shall be a permanently functioning organ. Its deputies may not be members of the Cabinet of Ministers or heads of administrations of velayets, shahers, or atraps; hold positions of the archines; or be judges or prosecutors. Article 72 The Chairman of the Mejlis shall be elected by secret ballot. He shall be responsible to the Mejlis and may be removed by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the Mejlis. The Deputy Chairman of the Mejlis shall be elected by ordinary vote. Upon delegation by the Chairman, he shall exercise certain powers of the Chairman and shall act as Chairman if the Chairman is absent or unable to execute his powers. Article 73 The Presidium of the Mejlis shall organize the work of the Mejlis and execute powers vested in it by the Constitution and laws. The Presidium shall consist of the Chairman of the Mejlis, the Deputy Chairman, and chairmen of the committees and commissions of the Mejlis. Article 74 The manner in which the Mejlis and its organs and deputies operate, their functions, and any powers not prescribed in the Constitution shall be defined by law. Chapter 5 The Cabinet of Ministers Article 75 The Cabinet of Ministers shall be an executive organ. The Cabinet of Ministers shall be headed by the President. Article 76 The Cabinet of Ministers shall consist of the Vice-Chairmen and ministers. The Cabinet of Ministers shall be formed by the President within one month after his inauguration; it shall transfer its powers to the newly-elected President. Article 77

Meetings of the Cabinet of Ministers shall be presided over by the President or, upon being so delegated by the President, by one of the vice-chairmen of the Cabinet of Ministers. Within its powers, the Cabinet of Ministers shall adopt decisions, directives, and orders which have obligatory legal force. Article 78 The Cabinet of Ministers shall: 1) organize the execution of laws, Presidential acts, and decisions of the Hulk Maslahaty; 2) implement measures providing for and protecting the rights and freedoms of citizens, defending property, and maintaining public order and national security; 3) elaborate and introduce to the Hulk Maslahaty proposals regarding major guidelines over the internal and foreign policy of the State and State programs of economic and social development; 4) implement State management of economic and social development and secure rational exploitation and preservation of natural resources; 5) take measures to strengthen the monetary and credit system; 6) establish, if necessary, committees, departments, and other agencies under the Cabinet of Ministers; 7) implement foreign economic policy and provide for the development of cultural links with foreign countries; 8) direct the activity of governmental organs, enterprises, and institutions and have the authority to revoke acts of ministers and agencies; 9) exercise other duties prescribed by laws and other legal acts. Article 79 The powers of the Cabinet of Ministers, rules regarding its work, and its relations with other State organs shall be determined by law. Chapter 6 Local Executive Power Article 80

Local executive power shall be carried out by: the velayet hakimies—in velayets, the shaher hakimies—in shahers, and the hakimi archines—in atraps. Article 81 The hakimies shall be representatives of the head of the State in their territorial units. They shall be appointed and relieved of their posts by the President, to whom they are responsible. Article 82 The hakimies shall direct the activities of local administrative organs and assure observance of the Constitution and laws and acts of the President and the Cabinet of Ministers. Within their powers, the hakimies shall adopt directives which shall be obligatory within their territorial units. Article 83 The archines shall assure observance of decisions of the Gengeshi and of acts of State organs. They shall direct the management of objects of municipal property, execute the local budget, and render decisions on other local questions. Article 84 The scope of the functions and powers of hakimies and archines, the manner in which they operate, and their relationships with other State organs shall be determined by law. Section IV LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT Article 85 The system of local self-government shall comprise the Gengeshies and organs of public territorial self-government. The Gengeshies shall be the representative organs of the people’s power within the territories of shahers, villages and obaes. They shall be elected directly by the citizens for a term of five years and shall not be administratively subordinated. Article 86 The Gengeshies shall have power: 1) to determine major guidelines regarding the economic, social, and cultural development of their territories;

2) to approve the local budget and report on its implementation; 3) to establish local taxes and fees and to make rules regarding the manner in which they must be levied. 4) to determine measures to enable natural resources to be used rationally and to protect the environment; 5) to exercise other powers prescribed by laws. Within their powers, the Gengeshies shall render decisions that are mandatory throughout their territories. Article 87 The Gengeshies shall elect the archines from among their members; the archines shall direct the work of the Gengeshies and be responsible to them. Article 88 The elected members of the Gengeshies shall carry out their duties without pay. The operation of the Gengeshies and of other organs of public self-government shall be described by law. Section V THE ELECTION SYSTEM AND REFERENDUM Article 89 The elections of the President, the deputies of the Mejlis, the hulk vekileries, and other elected officials shall be held on the basis of universal and equal suffrage. Citizens of Turkmenistan who have reached the age of eighteen shall have the right to vote, with each elector having one vote. Mentally disabled persons who are declared incompetent by the courts and persons imprisoned on judicial sentences may not take part in elections. Persons detained through criminal procedures may not take part in the elections, but may be elected. Any other direct or implied restriction of the right to vote and/or to be elected shall be inadmissible and punishable by law. Article 90 Any Turkmenistan citizen who will be twenty-five years of age by the date of elections may be elected member of the Mejlis or hulk vekileri.

Age qualifications for members of the Gengeshies, archines, and other elected officials shall be determined by law. Article 91 Elections shall be direct, with deputies and other elected officials elected directly. Article 92 Elections shall be by secret ballot; supervision of elections shall be admissible. Article 93 The candidates may be nominated by political parties, public associations, or corresponding groups of voters, as provided by election laws. Article 94 National and local referendums may be held in order to determine major issues regarding State and public life. A referendum decision may only be revoked by referendum. Article 95 A national referendum may be declared by the Hulk Maslahaty upon the proposal of at least one-fourth of its members or upon the initiative of at least 250,000 citizens of Turkmenistan who are qualified to vote. Article 96 A local referendum may be called by the Gengeshi upon its own initiative or upon the initiative of at least one-fourth of the voters residing in the corresponding territory. Article 97 A referendum shall be held on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage; it shall be by secret ballot. Citizens of Turkmenistan who are qualified to vote shall have the right to take part in referenda. Article 98 The organization of elections and of national and local referendums shall be determined by law. During a state of emergency, no elections or referendums shall be held.

Section VI JUDICIAL POWER Article 99 Judicial power in Turkmenistan shall reside only in the courts. Judicial power shall have as its intent to defend the rights and freedoms of citizens and of the State and of public interests protected by law. Article 100 Judicial power shall be exercised by the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic Court, military courts, and other courts provided by law; such power shall functioning through civil, arbitrational, administrative and criminal legal proceedings. The creation of special courts or of other institutions with judicial powers shall not be permitted. Article 101 Judges shall be independent and be subordinate only to the law and to their own convictions. Any interference in the activities of the courts shall be inadmissible and punishable under law. The immunity of judges shall be assured by law. Article 102 Judges of all courts shall be appointed by the President for a term of five years. The manner in which judges are appointed and relieved shall be determined by law. Before his term expires, a judge may only be relieved of his position without his consent upon a corresponding decision of a court, on grounds prescribed by law. Article 103 No judge may hold any other position, except for scholarly and educational work. During their incumbency, judges shall not be members of political parties or public associations which pursue political goals. Article 104 Court cases shall be tried by a panel, and, in cases established by law, by one judge. Article 105

Courtroom examination in all cases shall be open. The hearing of a case in closed session shall be allowed only in instances stipulated by law and in accordance with all rules of proceedings. Article 106 Judicial proceedings shall be carried out in the official State language. Persons involved in the proceedings who do not know the official State language shall be entitled to study the materials of the case and to take part in the proceedings through an interpreter, using their native language. Article 107 Legal proceedings shall be carried out on the adversarial principle with equality of all sides in a judicial case. All sides in a judicial case shall have the right to appeal the decisions, sentences, and other judicial acts in any court in Turkmenistan. Article 108 The right to professional legal assistance shall be acknowledged at any stage in any judicial proceeding. Legal assistance to citizens and organizations may be provided by lawyers and other persons and institutions. Article 109 The powers, their manner of organization, and all activities of the courts shall be determined by law. Section VII PROCURATOR’S OFFICE Article 110 Supervision over strict and uniform observance of laws, acts of the President, State organs, Armed Forces, and local self-government in the territory of Turkmenistan by participants of industrial and commercial activities, organizations and institutions, and public associations, and officials and citizens shall reside in the Procurator and prosecutors subordinate to him. The prosecutor shall take part in judicial proceedings according to methods established by law. Article 111

The prosecutor’s office shall supervise the legality of preliminary investigations of crimes and of materials pertaining to them. Article 112 The united and centralized system of the Procurator’s office shall be headed by the Procurator, who shall be appointed by the President for a term of five years. The Deputy Attorney General and prosecutors of velayets shall be appointed by the President. The prosecutors of shahers and atraps shall be appointed by the Procurator. Article 113 The Procurator and prosecutors subordinate to him shall execute their powers only as guided by law. In all his activities the Procurator shall be responsible to the President. While in office, prosecutors may not be members of political parties or any other public associations pursuing political goals. Section VIII CONCLUDING PROVISIONS Article 114 Laws and other acts of State organs of Turkmenistan shall be adopted on the basis of and pursuant to the Constitution. If a law contradicts the Constitution, the Constitution shall supersede it. Article 115 Provisions of the Constitution establishing the republican form of the government shall not be repealed or changed. Article 116 Adoption of a law regarding an amendment to the Constitution shall require a vote of two-thirds of the Mejlis. Adopted by the Supreme Soviet and promulgated by the President on May, 18, 1992 in Ashgabat. The President of Turkmenistan C.NIYASOV Ashgabat

May, 18, 1992 N 691 - XII THE LAW OF TURKMENISTAN ON THE ENTRY INTO LEGAL FORCE OF THE CONSTITUTION OF TURKMENISTAN 1. The Constitution of Turkmenistan shall go into force on the day of its publication. From that day, the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Turkmenian Soviet Socialist Republic of April, 13, 1978, as well as its subsequent amendments and supplements, shall lose its force as law. 2. Laws and other acts of state organs shall apply insofar as they do not contradict the Constitution. Legislation regulating the activities of organs of local self-government shall retain its legal force regarding existing organs until the elections of new organs of selfgovernment; the powers of these organs shall be determined by the Constitution. 3. The present elected President shall retain his post and shall be vested with all the powers and functions established by the Constitution from the day it goes into force. The first election of the President shall be held in accordance with the Constitution on June, 21, 1992. For the first election, candidates for the post of President shall be proposed by the Supreme Soviet. The election of the President shall be held by the Central Election and Referendum Commission and shall be based on the Constitution and the Law on Elections of representatives of the people; said election shall be adapted to conditions stipulated by present law. The limitation on the election of a President of no more than two consecutive terms as specified in Article 55 of the Constitution shall apply to persons elected after the Constitution goes into force. 4. The Supreme Soviet shall be called “the Mejlis” and resume its functions and powers. The People’s Deputies of Turkmenistan shall become the “Deputies of the Mejlis” and shall retain all powers defined by legislation at the moment of their election, until January, 1, 1995. Vacancies in the Mejlis shall not be filled during this period. 5. Pending the elections of members of the Hulk Maslahaty, its functions and powers shall be exercised jointly by the Mejlis and the Cabinet of Ministers, under the direction of the President.

6. The Government (Council of Ministers) shall take the name and powers of the “Cabinet of Ministers”; the Deputy Chairman at the head of the Government and the chairmen of State committees shall respectively become the Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers and Ministers. The Committee of State Control is hereby abolished. It is recommended that before January 1, 1993, the President reorganize state committees into ministries, put in order the structure and composition of the Cabinet of Ministers, and establish a special supervisory organ which shall be directly subordinate to the President. 7. The Soviets of People’s Deputies in oblasts, rayons, and cities shall cease operating from the moment the Constitution goes into force. Executive organs and officials elected or appointed by the above-mentioned Soviets and other local state organs shall continue to exercise their powers until the appointment or election of their successors in accordance with the Constitution. The Soviets of People’s Deputies of cities, villages, and settlements shall continue to exercise their duties and shall take on the powers of “the Gengeshies”; the chairmen of the Soviets shall assume their powers as “archines,” in accordance with the provisions of Article 2 of the present law. 8. Judges and procurators shall keep their authority and shall exercise their functions according to law. The judicial acts and decisions of procurators, criminal investigators, and other officials pertaining to criminal and administrative cases which were not executed by the date the Constitution goes into force shall be null if they contradict provisions or rules of the Constitution. 9. The following velayets shall be formed in the territory of Turkmenistan: Velayet Ahal, embracing the former Ashgabat oblast; Velayet Balkan, embracing the former Balkan oblast; Velayet Dashhovuse, embracing the former Dashhovuse oblast; Velayet Mariy, embracing the former Mariy oblast; Velayet Leban, embracing the former Chardji oblast. The Cabinet of Ministers shall draft proposals on the legal status of atraps, shahers equivalent to atraps, and other territorial units, territories, and settlements and present them to the Hulk Maslahaty no later than January, 1, 1993.

10. This Law shall go into force the moment it is signed. President of Turkmenistan S.NIYASOV Ashgabat May, 18, 1992. N 692 - XII.

