
CONSTITUTION of the United States of Venezuela.- Caracas,
 March 28, 1864.

 THE Constituent Assembly, invoking the Supreme Author and
 Legislator of the Universe, and by authority of the people of Venezuela, decrees :
 TITLE 1.-THE NATION.
 SECTION 1.-Of the Territory.
 ART. 1.-The provinces of Apure, Aragua, Barcelona, Barinas,
 Barquisimeto, Carabobo, CarAcas, Cojedas, Coro, CumnanA, Guirico,
 
 Guayana, Maracaibo, Maturin, Merida, Margarita, Portuguesa,
 TAchira, Trujillo, and Yaracuy, declare themselves independent
 States, and unite to form a free and sovereign nation, with the
 name of United States of Venezuela.
 II. The limits of each State shall be those assigned to the provinces by the Law of 28 April, 1856, which fixed the final territorial
 division.
 III. The limits of The United States which constitute the Venezuelan Confederation are the same as those which in the year 1810,
 belonged to the ancient Captain-Generalship of Venezuela.
 IV. The political entities expressed in Article I reserve to themselves the power of uniting two or more of themselves to form one
 single State; but always retaining the liberty of recovering their
 character of a State. In either case notice shall be given to the
 National Executive, to the Congress, and to the other States of the
 Union.
 V. The States which may have exercised the power of the pre-
 ceding Article shall retain their votes for the Presidency of The
 United States, the appointment of Senators, and the presentation
 of members for the High Federal Court.
 SECTIO   II .-Of the Venezuelans.
 VI. The Venezuelans are:
 1. All those persons who have been or may be born in the territory of Venezuela, whatever may be the nationality of their
 parents.
 2. The children of a Venezuelan mother or father who may have
 been born in another territory, if they should come to domicile
 themselves in the country and express a wish to be Venezuelans.
 3. Foreigners who have obtained letters of nationality.
 4. Those born or to be born in any of the Spanish American
 Republics or in the Spanish Antillas, provided they have fixed their
 residence in the territory of the Union and desire to become Venezuelans.
 VII. Those who fix their domicile and acquire nationality in a
 foreign country do not lose the character of Venezuelans.
 VIII. Male Venezuelans 21 years of age are eligible, with the
 exceptions contained in this Constitution.
 IX. It is the duty of all Venezuelans to serve the nation as the
 laws direct, to sacrifice their property and their life, if necessary, to
 defend it.
 X. Venezuelans in the territory of any State shall have the
 same duties and rights as those who are domiciled there.
 XI. The law will determine the rights which belong to the condition of foreigner.
 
 VENEZUELA.                         473
 TITLE II.-BASES OF THE UNION.
 XII. The States which form the Venezuelan Union reciprocally
 recognize their autonomy, they declare themselves equal in political
 entity, and retain in all its plenitude the sovereignty not expressly
 delegated in this Constitution.
 XIII. The said States undertake to defend themselves against
 all violence that may injure their independence or the integrity of
 the Union, and they undertake to establish the fundamental rules
 of their regime and internal Government, and are therefore bound:
 1. To organize themselves in conformity with the principles of
 popular, elective, federal, representative, alternative, and responsible
 Government.
 2. Not to alienate any part of their territory to, nor to ask the
 protection of a foreign Power.
 3. To grant to the nation such ground as may be necessary for
 the federal district.
 4. Not to restrict by taxes or in any other way the navigation of
 the rivers and other navigable waters that have not required artificial
 canalization.
 5. Not to subject produce which has been charged with national
 imposts to contributions before it has been offered for consumption.
 6. Not to impose contributions on goods and merchandize in
 transit for another State.
 7. Not to impose duties on persons in the national service, unless
 in their character of members of the State, and in so far as such
 duties are not incompatible with the national public service.
 8. To defer and submit themselves to the decision of the Congress, the National Executive, or the High Federal Court, in all
 controversies which may arise between two or more States if they
 cannot be settled peaceably; in no case can one State declare or
 make war against another State. If for any case they should not
 name the umpire to whose authority they will submit, they submit,
 in fact, to that of the Congress.
 9. To preserve strict neutrality in the contentions which may
 arise in other States.
 10. Not to associate or ally themselves with another nation, nor
 to separate themselves to the detriment of the nationality of Venezuela and its territory.
 11. To fulfil and to cause to be fulfilled and executed the Constitution and the laws of the Union, and the decrees and orders
 which the National Executive, the Tribunals and Courts of Justice
 of the Union may issue in the exercise of their attributions.
 12. To insert the extradition of criminals as a political principle
 in their respective Constitutions.
 
 13. To keep persons who take refuge in 4 State for political
 reasons, at a distance from the frontier, provided that the interested
 State requests it.
 14. Not to establish Custom-Houses for the collection of dues,
 as there are to be none but the national ones.
 15. Not to allow in the States of the Union recruitments or
 levies which are or might he intended to attack the liberty and
 independence, or to disturb the public order of other States or of
 another nation.
 16. To leave to each State the free administration of its natural
 productions.   Consequently, those which have salt works will
 administer them quite independently of the general Government.
 17. To reserve from the national revenues for the benefit of those
 States which have no mines in working, the sum of 20,000 dollars,
 which is to be set down in the annual estimates of public expenses,
 and to be given to those States every 3 months in advance.
 18. To furnish their proper contingent to make up the national
 public forces in time of peace or of war.
 19. Not to prohibit the consumption of the produce of other
 States, nor to burthen them with differential impositions.
 20. To leave to the Government of the Union the free administration of the Amazon territory and that of La Goagira, until they
 may choose to come into the category of States.
 21. To respect the town properties, magazines, an4 castles be-
 longing to the nation.
 22. To have for them all substantially the same civil and criminal
 legislation..
 23. To establish direct and secret voting in the popular elections.
 TITLE III.-Guarantees of the Venezuelano.
 XIV. The nation guarantees to the Venezuelans:
 1. The inviolability of life, capital punishment being abolished,
 by whatever law established.
 2. Property with all its rights: it is only subject to the contributions decreed by the legislative authority, to judicial decision,
 and to be taken for public works on previous indemnification and
 contested trial.
 3. The inviolability and secrecy of correspondence and other
 papers.
 4. The domestic hearth, which cannot be invaded except in
 accordance with the law, to prevent the commission of a crime.
 5. Personal liberty, and therefore: 1, compulsory recruitment for
 military service is abolished; 2, slavery is proscribed for ever;, ,
 slaves who set foot in the territory of Venezuela are free; and 4,
 all have the right to do or effect what is not prejudicial to another.
 
  474 
 
 474
 
 VENEZUELA.
 
 
 6. Freedom of thought, expressed in words or by means of the
 press; and that without any restriction.
 7. Freedom of travelling without passport, of changing domicile,
 on observing the formalities established in the States, and of leaving
 and returning to the Republic, taking and bringing back their
 property.
 8. Freedom of industry, and consequently property in dipco-
 veries or productions. The laws will appoint a temporary privilege
 for the owners, or the mode of indemnification in case the producer
 agree to their publication.
 9. The liberty of assembling and associating in public or private,
 without arms; the authorities cannot have any right of inspection.
 10. The liberty of petitioning, and the right of obtaining a
 decision. This may be to any functionary, authority, or corporation.
 If the petition be from various persons, the first 5 shall be answer-
 able for the signatures, and the whole for the truth of the facts.
 11. Freedom of suffrage for the popular elections, with no other
 restriction than that of being under 18 years of age.
 12. Freedom of instruction, which shall be protected to its full
 extent. The Executive Power is bound to establish primary edu-
 cation and instruction in arts and trades gratuitously.
 13. Religious freedom; but only those belonging to the Roman
 Catholic Apostolic religion can perform public worship out of the
 churches.
 14. Personal security, and therefore: 1, No Venezuelan can be
 imprisoned or put under constraint unless for fraudulent debts or
 crime; 2, nor be obliged to receive soldiers into his house for
 lodging or quarters; 3, nor be tried by special tribunals or com-
 missions, but only by his natural judges and in virtue of laws passed
 before the commission of the act or crime which is to be tried; 4,
 nor be imprisoned or arrested without previous examination as to
 the commission of a crime deserving corporal punishment, and the
 written order of the functionary who directs the apprehension,
 stating the reason for it, unless the delinquent be taken in the
 act; 5, nor be deprived of communication for any cause or
 pretext; 6, nor be obliged to take oath nor undergo examinAtion
 in criminal cases, against himself or his relations within the fourth
 degree of consanguinity, second of affinity, or married partner; 7,
 nor continue in confinement if the reasons for it are done away with;
 8, nor be condemned to suffer any punishment in a criminal case
 without having been legally heard; 9, nor be condemned to corporal
 punishment for more than 10 years; 10, nor continue to be de-
 prived of his liberty for political reasons when order is restored.
 15. Equality, in virtue whereof: 1, all must be tried by the
 same laws, and subject to the same duties, services, and contri-
 
 HemOnline -- 57 British & Foreign State Papers 475 
 
 475
 
 VENEZUELA.
 
 
 butions; 2, no titles of nobility, no hereditary honours or dis-
 tinctions shall be conferred, nor any employments or offices of which
 the pay or emoluments last longer than the service; 3, no other
 official address shall be used to functionaries and corporations than
 that of " citizen " and " you " [usted].
 XV. The present enumeration does not restrain the right of the
 States to grant other safeguards to their inhabitants.
 XVI. The laws of the States shall assign punishments for the
 infraction of these guarantees, at d establish the procedure to make
 them effectual.
 XVII. Those who issue, sign, or execute, or direct the execution
 of decrees, orders, or resolutions which violate or infringe any of
 the guarantees granted to the Venezuelans, are guilty, and must be
 punished as the law directs. Every citizen is competent to accuse
 them.
 TITLE IV.-OF THE NATIONAL LEGISLATURE.
 SEcTION I.
 XVIII. The National Legislature shall be composed of two
 Chambers, one of Senators, and the other of Deputies.
 XIX. The States will determine the manner of appointing the
 Senators and Deputies.
 SECTION II.-Of the Chamber of Deputies.
 XX. To form the Chamber of Deputies each State shall elect
 one for every 25,000 inhabitants, and another for an excess beyond
 12,000. They shall also elect an equal number of substitutes.
 XXI. The Deputies shall continue in their functions for two
 years, and shall be renewed altogether.
 XXII. The attributions of the Chamber of Deputies are:
 1. To examine the annual account which is to be presented by
 the President of the United States of Venezuela.
 2. To pass votes of censure on the Ministers of State, and by
 that fact their posts become vacant.
 3. To hear the accusations against the person charged with the
 National Executive for treason against the country or for ordinary
 offences; and those against the Ministers and other national func-
 tionaries for infraction of the laws, and for improper discharge of
 their duties, in accordance with Art. LXXXII of this Constitution.
 This faculty is preparatory, and does not diminish those which other
 authorities possess for trial and punishment.
 XXIII. When an accusation is proposed by a Deputy, or by any
 corporation or individual, the following rules shall be observed:
 1. A Committee of 3 Deputies shall be appointed by secret
 voting.
 
  476 
 
 4-76
 
 VENEZUELA.
 
 
 4-7
 
 VENEZUELA.
 
 2. The Committee shall declare its opinion within the third day,
 declaring whether there is or is not cause for taking proceedings.
 3. The Chamber shall consider the report, and shall decide by
 vote of the absolute majority of the members present; the Deputy
 who brings the accusation must abstain from voting.
 XXIV. The declaration of cause for proceedings at once
 suspends the accused, and incapacitates him from discharging any
 public office during the trial.
 AECTIox 3.-Of the Chamber of the Senate.
 XXV. To form this Chamber each State will elect two principal
 Senators, and two substitutes to fill vacancies.
 XXVI. To be a Senator it is requisite to be a Venezuelan by
 birth, and to be 30 years of age.
 XXVII. The Senators shall hold their offices for 4 years, and
 shall be renewed by moiety. When for any reason they are ap-
 pointed altogether, one shall be elected for two years.
 XXVIII. It is an attribution of the Senate to proceed with and
 decide the trials commenced in the Chamber of Deputies.
 XXIX. If the trial should not b e concluded during the sessions,
 the Senate shall continue assembled for that purpose alone, until the
 case is finished. When that happens, the Senators shall receive
 no pay.
 SECTION IV.-Provisions common to the two Chambers.
 XXX. The Legislature shall assemble every year in the capital
 of The United States on the 20th day of February, or the nearest
 to it possible, without waiting for convocation, and the sessions
 shall last for 70 days, which may be prolonged to 90.
 XXXI. The Chambers shall open their sessions with two-thirds
 of their members at least, and in default of that number the mem-
 bers present shall assemble in preparatory Committee, and take
 measures for the attendance of the absentees.
 XXXII. When the sessions have been opened, they may con-
 tinue with two-thirds of those who have commenced them, provided
 they do not fall below the moiety of the whole of the members
 appointed.
 XXXIII. Although the Chambers are to carry on their pro.
 ceedings separately, they will unite in Congress when the coasti-
 tution and the law so determine, or when one of them deems it
 necessary. If the Chamber invited agrees, it will fix the day and
 the hour of the meeting.
 XXXIV. The sessions shall be public; but secret when the
 Chamber so decides.
 XXXV. The Chambers have the right:
 
  477 
 
 
 478
 
 VENEZUELA.
 
 1. To make their own regulations, which are to be observed in
 their sessions and debates.
 2. To settle upon the correction of those who infringe them.
 3. To establish the police of their sessions-house.
 4. To chastise or correct those spectators who neglect the
 established orders.
 5. To remove any obstacles in the way of the free exercise of
 their functions.
 6. To order the execution of their privative resolutions.
 7. To qualify their members and to attend to their resignations.
 XXXVI. One of the Chambers cannot suspend its sessions,
 nor change its place of meeting, without the consent of the other;
 in case of disagreement they shall unite, and what the majority
 decides shall be done.
 XXXVII. The exercise of any public function is incompatible
 with that of a Senator or Deputy during the sessions; the law will
 appoint the indemnifications which they are to receive for their
 services, and they cannot be augmented in the constitutional period
 wherein they are fixed.
 XXXVIII. The Senators and Deputies shall enjoy immunity
 from the 20th of January every year until 30 days after the conclusion of the sessions; and this consists in the suspension of every
 proceeding, whatever may be its origin or nature.    If any one
 commits an act which deserves corporal punishment, the investigation shall continue until the termination of the preliminary examination and shall remain in that state during the immunity.
 XXXIX. The Congress shall be presided over by the President
 of the Senate, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall
 be the Vice-President.
 XL. The members of the Chambers are not responsible for the
 opinions or speeches which they utter therein.
 XLI. The Senators and Deputies cannot accept offices or commissions from the National Executive, until a year after the termination of the period for which they were appointed. The appointments of Ministers of State,and those to diplomatic posts and military
 commands in time of war are excepted ; but the acceptance of
 those appointments vacates their seat in the Chamber.
 XLII. Neither can the Senators or Deputies make contracts
 with the General Government, nor negotiate the claims of others
 with it.
 SECTION V.-Attributions of the Legislature.
 XLIII. The National Legislature has the following attributions:
 1. To adjust the controversies that may arise between the States.
 2. To establish and organize the Federal district on unpeopled

 land, not exceeding 10 square miles in extent, whereon the capital
 city of the Union is to be built. This district shall be neutral, and
 shall not make any other elections than those which the law deter-
 mines for its locality.  The district shall be provisionally that
 appointed by the Constituent Assembly or that which the National
 Legislature may appoint.
 3. To organize everything relating to the Custom-Houses, the
 revenues of which are to constitute the treasure of the Union, until
 substituted by others.
 4. To decide upon everything relating to the qualification and
 security of the ports and maritime coasts.
 5. To institute and organize the national Post Offices, and to
 establish dues on the postage of correspondence.
 6. To form the national codes in accordance with section 2  of
 Article XIII.
 7. To fix the value, pattern, alloy, weight, and coining of the
 national money, and to decide upon the admission and circulation of
 foreign money.
 S. To settle the national coat of arms and the flag, which shall
 be the same for all the States.
 9. To create, suppress, and endow the national functionaries.
 10. To decide upon everything relative to the national debt.
 11. To contract loans on the credit of the nation.
 12. To pass the requisite measures for taking the census of the
 population, and the national statistics.
 13. To fix annually the armed force for sea and land, and to issue
 the ordinances for the army.
 14. To settle the rules for the formation and replacement of the
 forces mentioned in the previous number.
 15. To decree war, and to call upon the National Executive to
 negotiate peace.
 16. To approve or reject the diplomatic Treaties or Conventions.
 Without this requisite they cannot be ratified or exchanged.
 17. To approve or reject the contracts made by the President of
 the Union for national public works, without which requisite they
 cannot be executed.
 18. To arrange the estimates of the public expenditure
 annually.
 19. To promote what may be conducive to the prosperity of the
 country, and to its progress in the general knowledge of the sciences
 and arts.
 20. To fix and regulate the national weights and measures
 uniformly.
 21. To grant amnesties.
 22. To establish, with the denomination of territories, the special
 regulations for the temporary management of unpeopled regions or
 those inhabited by uncivilized natives: such territories are to be
 immediately dependent on the Executive of the Union.
 23. To establish the procedure, and to appoint the punishments
 which the Senate should impose in trials initiated in the Chamber
 of Deputies.
 24. To augment the basis of population for the appointment of
 the Deputies.
 25. To allow or refuse the admission of foreigners into the public
 service.
 26. To issue the law of elections for President of the Union.
 27. To pass laws upon military retirement and superannuation.
 28. To pass the law for the responsibility of all the national
 functionaries.
 29. To determine the manner of granting military rank or
 promotion.
 XLIV. Besides the foregoing enumeration, the national Legislature can pass such laws of a general character as may be necessary.
 SECTION 4.-Of the formation of the Laws.
 XLV. The laws and decrees of the national legislature may be
 initiated by the members of either Chamber, and in the manner
 directed by their regulations.
 XLVI. On the presentation of a project, it shall be taken into
 consideration for admission; if it be admitted it shall be discussed
 3 times, with at least a day's interval between them, and in accordance with the rules established for the debates.
 XLVII. The projects approved in the Chamber where they were
 initiated shall be passed on to the other for the purposes of the preceding Article, and, if they should not be rejected, they shall be
 returned to the Chamber of their origin with the alterations which
 they may have undergone.
 XLVIII. If the Chamber of their origin should not accept the
 alterations, it may insist upon rejecting them and send its reasons
 in writing to the other. The two Chambers may also unite in Congress, and resolve themselves into a General Committee to seek the
 means of coming to an agreement, but if that cannot be arrived at,
 the project will remain without effect directly the Chamber of its
 origin decides separately.
 XLIX. On passing the projects from one Chamber to the other,
 the days upon which they have been discussed shall be stated.
 L. A law which reforms another shall be drawn up complete,
 and the former law shall be abrogated entirely.
 LI. This formula,-" The Congress of the United States of
 Venezuela decrees," shall be used in the laws.

 
 VENEZUELA.
 LII. The projects rejected in one Legislature cannot be, presented again, except in another.
 LIII. The projects pending in one of the Chambers at the close
 of the sessions, must likewise undergo 3 discussions in the following
 Legislatures.
 LIV. The laws are abrogated with the same formalities as they
 are enacted.
 LV. When the Ministers of State have maintained the unconstitutionality of a project in the Chamber, and it has, notwithstanding, been sanctioned as a law, the Executive of the Union,,may
 submit it to the nation, as represented in the Legislatures of the
 States.
 LVI. In the case of the preceding Article, each State will
 represent one vote, expressed by the majority of the members
 meeting in the Legislature, and the result will be sent to the High
 Federal Court, in this form: "I confirm," or "I object."
 LVII. If the majority of the States be of the same opinion as
 the Executive, the Court will order the suspension of the law, and
 will report to the Congress with an account of all that has taken
 place.
 LVIII. The laws will not be in force until after they have been
 published with the established formalities.
 LIX. The faculty granted for sanctioning the law cannot be
 delegated.
 LX. No legislative measure shall have a retroactive effect, except
 in matters of judicial procedure, and such as impose a lesser
 punishment.
 TiTLE V.-O THE NATIoNAL EXecUTIve.
 SECTION I.-Of the Chief of the General Adminsistration.
 LXI. Everything relating to the general administration of the
 nation, which is not assigned to another authority by this Constitution, shall be in the charge of a magistrate who shall be called the
 President of the United States of Venezuela.
 LXII. To be President it is required to be a Venezuelan by
 birth and to be 30 years of age.
 LXIII. The President will be elected by the citizens of all the
 States, by direct and secret votes, so that each State will give one
 vote, which will be that of the relative majority of its electors.
 LXIV. On the eighth day of the sittings of Congress the
 Chambers shall assemble to perform the scrutiny. If all the registers
 shall not then have been received, the proper measures shall be
 taken to obtain them, and the proceeding must be deferred for as
 long as 40 days if necessary. At the expiration of that term, it
 [1866-67- L7r.]            2 I
 
  481 
 
 
 may take place with the registers which have been received, provided
 that they do hot form less than two-third parts.
 LXV. When the election has been made in accordance with the
 preceding Article, he shall be declared to be elected as President
 who has received the absolute majority of votes; if no one has
 received it, the Congress shall choose between the two who have
 obtained the highest number. In this case the votes shall be taken
 by States, each State having one vote, and without the concurrence of
 two-thirds of the States no election shall take place. The vote of each
 State is constituted by the absolute majority of its Representatives
 and Senators, and in case of equality it is to be decided by lot.
 LXVI. None of the members present can leave the sitting
 during the scrutiny, without the consent of the Congress.
 LXVII. To provide for the temporary or absolute inability of
 the President, two Designates shall be annually elected by the United
 Chambers.
 LXVIII. The President shall remain in office for 4 years,
 reckoned from the 20th of February, on which day he shall give it
 up and call upon the person who is to succeed him, although he may
 not have served for the whole period.
 LXIX. In case of the absolute inability of the President
 occurring in the first two years of a period, the Congress shall order
 new elections for the appointment of another, who shall serve. for
 the time for which the President has failed.
 LXX. The President, or whoever replaces him in the case of the
 preceding Article, cannot be re-elected for the period next to that
 which is at an end.
 LXXI. The law will appoint the pay which the President and
 those who replace him in his office are to receive; and it can neither
 be increased nor diminished during the period in which the law is
 passed.
 SECTION 11.-Of the attributions of the President of the United
 States of  Venezuela.
 LXXII. The President of the Union has the following attributions :
 1. To preserve the nation from all external attacks.
 2. To order and to attend to the execution of the laws and
 decrees of the National Legislature.
 3. To attend to and watch over the collection of the national
 revenues.
 4. To administer the State lands according to law.
 5. To convoke the National Legislature for its periodical meetings; and also for extraordinary meetings when any serious events
 require them.

 
 
 6. To appoint to diplomatic posts, Consulates-General and Consulates; the first and second must be filled by Venezuelans by birth.
 7. To conduct the negotiations and to conclude all kinds of
 Treaties with other nations, and to submit them to the National
 Legislature.
 8. To enter into contracts for the national interest according to
 law, and to submit them to the Legislature.
 9. To appoint and remove the Ministers of State.
 10. To appoint the persons employed in the Treasury, whose
 appointment does not belong to other functionaries; the persons
 employed there must be Venezuelans by birth.
 11. To remove and suspend the persons whom he freely appoints,
 and to order their prosecution if there be reason for it.
 12. To grant letters of nationality according to law.
 13. To issue commissions of navigation to the national vessels.
 14. To declare war in the name of the Republic, when Congress
 has decreed it. '
 15. In cases of foreign war, he may :-1. Require of the States
 the necessary aids for the national defence; 2. Collect the taxes in
 advance, or negotiate loans that have been decreed, if the ordinary
 revenue is not sufficient; 3. Arrest or expel persons belonging to
 the nation with which the Republic is at war, and who interfere
 with the defence of the country; 4. Suspend the guarantees which
 are incompatible with the defence of the independence of the country, except that of life; 5. Appoint the place to which the National Executive is to be temporarily transferred, when there are serious
 reasons for it; 6. Bring to trial for treason against their country
 such Venezuelans as are in any way hostile to the national defence.
 7. Issue letters of marque and reprisal, and lay down the rules to
 be observed in cases of capture.
 16. To employ the public force and the powers contained in
 Nos. 1, 2, and 5, of the preceding attribution, for the purpose of
 re-establishing constitutional order, in case of armed insurrection
 against the political institutions established by the nation.
 17. To dispose of the public force to put an end to an armed
 collision between two or more States; to require them to lay down
 their arms and submit their disputes to the decision of the national
 authorities, according to section 8, of Article XIII.
 18. To conduct the war or command the army in person in the
 cases anticipated in this Article. He may also leave the capital
 when matters of public interest require it.
 19. To grant general or special pardons.
 20. To defend the territory appointed for the federal district, if
 there be well-founded apprehension of its being invaded by hostile
 forces.
 212

 
 21. To discharge the other functions which the national laws
 assign to him.
 LXXIII. When the national Executive may have exercised all
 or any of the faculties granted to him by the preceding article, he
 must give an account to Congress within the first 8 days of its next
 meeting.
 SETION III.-Of the Ministers of State.
 LXXIV. The President of the United States of Venezuela will
 have for the transaction of his business such Ministers as the law
 shall decide; their functions and duties and the organization of
 their offices will also be determined by law.
 LXX V. A Minister of State must be 25 years of age, a Venezuelan by birth, or naturalized for 5 years.
 LXXVI. The Ministers are the natural and necessary organs of
 the President of the Union; all his acts must be signed by them,
 and without their signature they cannot be fulfilled or executed by
 the authorities, functionaries, or private persons.
 LXXVII. All the Acts of the Ministers must be in accordance
 with this Constitution and the laws; they are not relieved of their
 responsibility by the order of the President, although they receive
 it in writing.
 LXXVIII. The decision of all matters not relating to the
 management of the offices is to take place in the Council of
 Ministers, and the responsibility is collective.
 LXXIX. The Ministers shall give an account to the Chambers
 within the first 5 sittings of each year, of what they have done or
 intend to do in their respective departments. They shall also give
 such written or verbal reports as may be required of them, reserving
 only the information which it may not be expedient to publish in
 regard to diplomatic negotiations and war.
 LXXX. They shall present to the National Legislature within
 the same term the estimate of public expenses and the general
 account of the preceding year.
 LXXXI. The Ministers have the right of speaking in the Chambers, and they must appear when they are called upon for information.
 LXXXII. The Ministers are responsible:
 1. For treason against the country.
 2. For infringement of this Constitution or of the laws.
 3. For malversation of the public funds.
 4. For expenditure beyond the estimates.
 5. For subornation or bribery in the business of their office, or
 in appointments of public functionaries.

 SECtIoN IV.
 LXXXIII. The National Executive is exercised by the President of the Union or his substitute, in connection with the Ministers of State, who are his organs,
 LXXXIV. The functions of the National Executive cannot be
 exercised beyond the Federal district, unless in the case anticipated
 in No. 5, attribution 15 of Article LXXII. Whenever the President shall take the command of the army, or absent himself from
 the Federal district, in virtue of the faculty 18. of the said Article
 LXXII, he shall be replaced as provided in Articles LXVII and
 CII of this Constitution.
 TITLE VI.-OF THE HIGH FEDERAL COURT.
 SEcTIoN I.-The Formation of the Court.
 LXXXV. The High Federal Court shall be composed of 5 members, with the qualifications to be expressed:
 1. To a Venezuelan by birth, or to have been naturalized for
 10 years.
 2. To be full 30 years of age.
 LXXXVI. For the appointment of the members the Legislalature of each State shall present to Congress a list equal in number
 to the places to be filled, and the Congress shall declare the person
 elected who gets most votes in the united presentations of each of
 the following sections:
 1. Of Cumang, Margarita, Maturin, and Barcelona.
 2. Of Guayana, Apure, Barinas, and Portuguesa.
 3. Qf Caracas, Aragua, Guirico, and Carabobo.
 4. Of Cojedes, Yaracuy, Barquisimeto, and Coro; and
 5. Of Maracaibo, Trujillo, Merida, and Tichira.
 Equal numbers to be decided by Congress.
 LXXX VII. The law will determine the various functions of
 the members and of the other persons employed in the High
 Federal Court.
 LXXXVIII. The members and their respective substitutes who
 will be appointed in the same manner as the principals, shall remain
 in their offices for 4 years. Neither the principals, nor their substitutes on duty, can accept during that period any employment in
 the appointment of the Executive, even if they relinquish their
 office.
 SECTION II.-Attributions of the High Federal Court.
 LXXXIX. The following are matters within the competency of
 the High Federal Court:
 1. To take cognizance of civil or criminal actions brought against
 diplomatic functionaries in the cases allowed by international
 public law.
 2. To take cognizance of the actions which the President orders
 to be brought against his Ministers, to whom account is to be given
 in case suspension is decreed.
 3. To take cognizance of actions of responsibility against the
 Ministers of State, when they are accused in accordance with the
 provisions in this Constitution. In case suspension from office
 should be necessary, it is to be requested of the President of the
 Union, who will grant it,
 4. To take cognizance of the actions of responsibility brought
 for improper discharge of their functions, against the Diplomatic
 Agents accredited to another nation
 5. To take cognizance of criminal actions or actions of responsibility brought against the high functionaries of the different
 States, provided it is so determined by the laws of those States.
 6. To take cognizance of civil trials when the nation is defendant, and the law so determines.
 7. To settle the disputes which arise between the functionaries
 of different States in matters of jurisdiction and competency.
 S. To take cognizance of all matters which the States wish to
 submit to its consideration.
 9. To declare which is the prevailing law, when the national
 laws are opposed to each other, or to those of the States, or those of
 the States to each other.
 10. To take cognizance of controversies resulting from contracts
 concluded, or negotiations carried on by the President of the
 Union.
 11. To take cognizance of prize cases.
 12. To exercise all other attributions determined by law.
 TITLE VII.—Complemental Provisions.
 XC. Everything that is not expressly assigned to the general
 administration of the nation in this Constitution, is within the
 competency of the States.
 XCI. The courts of justice in the States are independent, the
 cases commenced therein in conformity with their special procedure,
 and in matters of their exclusive competency, will terminate in the
 same States without subjection to the examination of any external
 authority.
 XCII. Every act of the Congress, or the National Executive,
 which violates the rights guaranteed to the States in this Constitution, or which attacks their independence, must be declared null by
 the High Court, whenever the majority of the Legislatures
 demands it.
 XCIII. The national public forces are divided into naval and
  military, and will be composed of the citizen soldiery organized by
 the States according to their laws.
 XCIV. The force at the charge of the Union will be formed of
 volunteers, with a proportionate contingent to be given. by each
 State, which will call into service the citizens who are bound to
 render it according to its laws.
 XCV. In case of war the contingent may be augmented by the
 corps of the citizen soldiery up to the number of men necessary to
 meet the demand of the national Government.
 XCVI. The national Government may change the commanders
 of the public force furnished by the States, in the cases and with
 the formalities determined by the national military laws, and then
 other appointments are to be required of the States.
 XCVII. The military and civil authority shall never be exercised
 by one and the same person, or corporation.
 XCVIII. The nation being in possession of the right of ecclesiastical patronage, will exercise it as determined by law.
 XCIX. The Government of the Union will have no resident functionaries with jurisdiction or authority in the States, other than the
 functionaries of the- States themselves. The functionaries of the
 Treasury are excepted, those of the forces which garrison national
 fortresses, magazines established by law, stations, and legal ports,
 who shall only have jurisdiction in what relates to their respective
 offices, and within the precincts of the fortresses and quarters which
 they command; but shall nevertheless be subject to the general
 laws of the State in which they reside. All materials of war at
 present existing belong to the National Government.
 C. The National Government cannot station a force in a State,
 nor military officers with a command, although they be of the same
 State, or of another, without the leave of the Government of the
 State in which the force is to be stationed.
 CI. Neither the National Executive, nor those of the States can
 exercise armed intervention in the domestic quarrels of a State;
 they are only allowed to offer their good offices to give them a
 peaceable solution.'
 CII. When the vacant place, or the absence of the President
 cannot be supplied by the Designates, one of the Ministers of
 State, elected at a public sitting of the whole of them, shall perform
 the duties. In this case the respective Designate shall be called
 upon, and information shall be given to the States.
 CIII. The National Congress cannot increase the duties imposed
 on exportation, nor constitute further charges thereon; and when
 once the present charges have been satisfied by payment, compensation, or substitution, the exportation of national productions shall be
 free for ever.
 
 CIV. All usurped authority is ineffective, and its acts are null.
 Every decision given on the requisition, direct or indirect,. of an
 armed force, or of a popular meeting in a subversive attitude, is null
 in law and void of effect.
 CV. Every corporation or authority is forbidden to exercise any
 function that is not conferred upon, it by the Constitution or the
 laws.
 CVI. Any citizen may accuse the national functionaries before
 the Chamber of Deputies, before their respective superiors, or before
 the authorities appointed by law.,
 CVIL The functionaries freely appointed by the President of
 the Union relinquish office with him in each constitutional period,
 but not until they have been replaced.
 CVIII. No expenditure shall be made from the national treasury,
 for which a sum has not been expressly appropriated by Congress in
 the annual estimates; and those who infringe4his provision shall be
 civilly responsible to the national treasury for the amounts which
 they have paid. In all issues from the public treasure, the ordinary
 expenditure shall take precedence of extraordinary.
 CIX. The offices for the collection of the national taxes shall
 always be kept separate from those for payment, and the former
 shall have no power to make any other payments than those of the
 salaries of their respective functionaries.
 CX. If the estimates for a fixed period should for any reason
 fail to be voted, those of the period next preceding shall remain in
 force.
 CXI. At the periods of the national elections and those of the
 States, the public forces shall be disarmed, and the respective laws
 shall determine the manner of doing it.
 CXII. In international Treaties of Commerce and Friendship a
 clause shall be inserted, that "all differences between the Contracting Parties must be decided without appeal to war, by the arbitration of one or more friendly Powers."
 CXIII. No person can fill more than one office in the appointment of the Congress or the National Executive. The acceptance
 of a second is equivalent to the renunciation of the first. Functionaries who are removable vacate their places on accepting the
 office of Senator or Deputy, if they arc dependent on the National
 Executive.
 CXIV. The law will create and appoint such other national
 tribunals as may be necessary.
 CXV. The national functionaries cannot accept gifts, charges,
 honours, or rewards, from foreign nations, without the permission of
 the National Legislature.
 CXVI. The armed force cannot deliberate: it is passive and
 obedient. No armed body can make requisitions, nor require aids
 
 of any kind, except of the civil authorities, and in the manner and
 form determined by law..
 CXVII. The nation and the States will promote the immigration
 and colonization of foreigners, in accordance with their respective laws.
 CXVIII. A law will regulate the manner in which the national
 functionaries shall take oath or make affirmation when, entering
 upon their offices, for the proper discharge.of their duties..  -
 CXIX. The national Executive will treat with the Governments
 of America upon compacts of alliance or confederation.
 CXX. The law of nations forms part of the national legislation;
 its provisions shall have force especially in cases of civil war, which
 may therefore be put an end to by means of treaties between the
 belligerents, who are bound to respect the philanthropic practices of
 Christian and civilized nations.
 CXXI. The laws and regulations of the State Governments
 shall remain in force until the new Legislatures which are to be
 appointed shall bring them into harmony with the precepts of the
 present Constitution, which must be done in the period of 4 months.
 CXXIL. This Constitution may be reformed wholly or partially
 by the National Legislature, if required by the majority of the State
 Legislatures; but no reform shall ever be made except on the points
 to which the requisitions of the States refer.
 CXXIII. The present Constitution shall come into force from
 the day of its official publication in each State; and from that day
 all public acts and official documents shall bear the date of the
 Federation, reckoning from the 20th of February, 1859, and that of
 the present Law.
 Given and signed in the Sessions Hall of the Constituent
 Assembly at CarAcas, on the 28th of March, 1864, the 1st year of
 the Law, and the 8th of the Federation.
 