CONSTITUTION OF VENEZUELA
July 5, 1947 1 PRELIMINARY DECLARATION
The Venezuelan Nation is the association of all Venezuelans in a political organization compact having the name of the United States of Venezuela. It shall be forever irrevocably free and independent of all domination by or protection of foreign powers. The Venezuelan Nation proclaims as the basic reason for its existence the spiritual, political, and economic liberty of man, based on human dignity, social justice, and the fair participation of all the people in the enjoyment of the national wealth. From that fundamental reason the Nation derives its functions of defense, of law, and of culture, for the achievement of its essential aims consisting chiefly in the harmony, welfare, and social and individual security of Venezuelans and of those who live together in its territory and subject to its law; the affirmation of its own nationality, in sustained harmony with fraternal co-operation in the concert of nations for purposes of peace and progress and with a mutual respect of sovereignty; the support of democracy, as the sole and irrenounceable system for governing its internal relations, and the peaceful collaboration for the purpose of promoting that same system in the government and relations of all the peoples of the earth. The Venezuelan Nation repudiates war, conquest, and the abuse of economic power as instruments of international politics; it reaffirms its desire to resolve all its conflicts and controversies with other states by the peaceful means established in the pacts and treaties to which it is a party; it endorses the principle of self-determination of peoples, and it recognizes international law as adequate to guarantee the rights of men and of nations in the terms and for the purposes of the present declaration. The Venezuelan Nation bases the fulfillment of its destiny and the realization of its goals upon the integrity of its territory, its economic potential, its respect for liberty, the consecration of work as the supreme virtue and as the supreme foundation of human betterment, and the patrimony of the moral and historic authority which Venezuelans have earned, led by Simon Bolivar, in the undertaking of freeing the American Continent.

TITLE I TERRITORIAL AND POLITICAL DIVISION Art. 1. The territory of the United States of Venezuela is that which before the political transformation of 1810 corresponded to the Captainship General of Venezuela, with the modifications resulting from treaties celebrated by the Republic. This territory cannot, in whole or in part, ever be ceded, transferred, leased, or alienated in any manner to foreign powers, even for a limited period of time. Foreign nations may only acquire, in conformity with the law, the realty necessary for the seat of their diplomatic representation in the capital of the Republic, on a basis of reciprocity, it being understood that the national sovereignty over the land shall always remain. Art. 2. The national territory shall be divided, for the purposes of the political organization of the Republic, into states, the federal district, the federal territories, and the federal dependencies. The territory of the states shall be divided into municipal districts, and the territory of the latter, in turn, into municipalities. Art. 3. The states are as follows: Anzoftegui, Apure, Aragua, Barinas, Bolivar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Falc6n, Guirico, Lara, MWrida, Miranda, Monagas, Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, T6chira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, and Zulia. Art. 4. The states shall retain the boundaries which they now have. A special law shall set forth the said boundaries, abiding by the division established by the Law of April 28, 1856, and its modifications in effect as of the date of this Constitution. States having a common boundary may merge by means of agreements approved by their respective legislative assemblies; however, they shall always conserve the right to reacquire their autonomy. They may also, by means of the same formalities, modify their common boundary, granting to each other such compensations or territorial concessions as may be appropriate. Art. 5. The federal district shall be organized by means of a special law, in which the autonomy of the municipal power shall be retained in those matters respecting its economic and administrative management, in the terms consecrated by this Constitution. Art. 6. The City of Caracas is the capital of the Republic and the seat of the national government, subject to the provisions of clause (b), section 18 of Article 198 of this Constitution and section 31 of the same Article. Art. 7. The federal territories are the Amazonas and the Delta Amacuro, and they shall be governed by special laws. The boundaries of the said territories and of the federal district with their neighboring states may be modified by means of agreements which the national executive may celebrate with the governments of the said states, with the approval of the National Congress and the legislative assemblies of the contracting states. Art. 8. The federal territories may choose the category of states when they shall have a minimum of fifty thousand inhabitants. In such event, the National Congress shall elevate to the category of state all or a part of the territory requesting the same, in accordance with the law. Art. 9. The federal dependencies are the maritime islands of Venezuela, excepting the islands of Margarita, Coche, and Cubagua, which constitute
the state of Nueva Esparta. The government and administration of the said dependencies belong to the national executive, in accordance with the law. The law shall prescribe, further, the conditions by means of which federal dependencies may choose the category of territories. Art. 10. All presently existing controversies involving boundaries, as well as those which may in the future arise for the same cause, between the states, or between them and the federal district or the federal territories, shall be decided by the Supreme Court of Justice, through the procedure prescribed by law. TITLE II OF NATIONALITY Art. 11. The following are Venezuelans by birth: (1) Those born in Venezuela, except the children of foreigners not domiciled or residing in the Republic or who may be in the country in the official service of another state; (2) Those born on Venezuelan ships or planes, outside the territorial dominion of another state, with the exceptions set forth in the preceding section; (3) Those born abroad, of a Venezuelan father or mother who is abroad in the official service of Venezuela; (4) Those born abroad, of Venezuelan father and mother, when in accordance with the laws of the country where they are born they do not acquire the nationality of that country. First Paragraph: There shall also be considered as Venezuelans by birth those excepted in sections 1 and 2 of this Article if, having attained their majority, they establish their domicile in Venezuela or manifest their desire to embrace Venezuelan nationality. Second Paragraph: Those born abroad, of a Venezuelan father or mother, not included in sections 3 and 4 of this Article, shall, likewise, be Venezuelans by birth if they are domiciled in this country upon attaining their majority, or if, having attained their majority, they manifest their desire to embrace Venezuelan nationality or establish their domicile in the country. Third Paragraph: There shall also be considered as Venezuelans by birth, those born abroad, of a Venezuelan father or mother, when their birth has been inscribed before the respective Venezuelan diplomatic or consular authority. Art. 12. The following are Venezuelans by naturalization: (1) The foreign-born woman who marries a Venezuelan, if in accordance with her national law she loses her previous nationality as the result of her marriage; (2) The children of age who are born abroad of a naturalized Venezuelan if they become domiciled in this country and manifest their desire to be Venezuelans(3) IRatives of Spain or of any of the Latin-American countries who are domiciled in the country and manifest their desire to be Venezuelans. On the basis of effective international reciprocity, established by means of treaties, persons of Spanish and Latin-American-Republican origin may obtain Venezuelan nationality without losing or modifying their original nationality; (4) Foreigners who have obtained or may obtain naturalization papers in accordance with the law.

 471 1950


472

Constitutions of Nation

Art. 13. The dissolution of marriage shall not affect the nationality which the spouses and children may have. Art. 14. Any Venezuelan woman who marries a foreigner shall conserve her Venezuelan nationality, unless she manifests a contrary desire, and provided that such manifestation is sufficient for her to acquire the nationality of her husband in accordance with the national law of his country. Art. 15. The manifestations of desire to which the previous articles refer and the acquisition of naturalization papers shall be regulated by the law. Art. 16. By means of public treaties, there may be adopted rules for determining the nationality of persons to whom the application of the laws of different countries might attribute multiple nationality. There are excepted the provisions of the second paragraph of section 3 of Article 12 of this Constitution. Art. 17. Venezuelan nationality may be lost: (1) Through the full and voluntary acquisition of another nationality, except in the cases set forth in the second paragraph of Section 3 of Article 12; (2) Through the revocation of naturalization in cases fixed by law. Art. 18. The recovery of nationality shall be regulated by law. Art. 19. The nullity of naturalizations as a result of defects which might affect them shall be regulated by the law.

TITLE MI
OF INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES
CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 20. All Venezuelans have the duty to defend their country, to fulfill and obey the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, as well as the decrees, orders, and resolutions which, in accordance with their powers, the public authorities may dictate. They shall not serve against Venezuela in any event, or against her allies in case of armed international conflict, and, should they do so, they shall be considered as traitors to the Nation. All foreigners are obliged to obey the laws in the same manner required of Venezuelans while they reside in the territory of the Republic. Art. 21. Without prejudice to the provisions of international agreements, all foreigners in Venezuela shall have the duties and the rights which this Constitution and the laws grant them; however, neither their rights nor their duties can be greater than those of Venezuelans. The laws can establish restrictions regarding the exercise of the rights corresponding to all foreigners, or to a determinate class of them, when this is required as the result of grave motives of internal or external security or for reasons of public health. Confiscation can be imposed only upon foreigners, and only in the event of conflict with their country. Art. 22. All naturalized Venezuelans shall enjoy the same political rights as Venezuelans by birth, except for such restrictions as may be fixed by law.

Art. 23. All persons shall have the right to do that which does not prejudice others, and no one shall be obliged to do that which the law does not require, nor shall anyone be prevented from carrying out what the law does not prohibit. Art. 24. In no case may nationals or foreigners claim that the Nation, the states, or the municipalities should compensate them for direct or indirect damages or expropriations which have not been executed by proper authorities acting in their public capacity. I Art. 25. The enunciation of the rights and duties made in this Title shall not be understood to be a denial of any other rights and duties which belong to the inhabitants of the Republic and which do not appear expressly in this Title. Art. 26. No law, decree, ordinance, resolution, or regulation can diminish the rights granted by this Constitution to Venezuelans and to foreigners. All dispositions contrary to this principle shall be null, and the Supreme Court of Justice shall so declare them. Art. 27. Whoever shall issue, sign, execute, or order the execution of decrees, resolutions, or ordinances which violate any of the rights guaranteed by this Constitution shall be culpable and shall be punished in accordance with the law, except in the cases of measures directed to the defense of the Republic or to the conservation or re-establishment of peace, dictated by competent public officials in their official capacity, in the cases foreseen by Articles 76 and 77 of this Constitution. Art. 28. The period for the prescription of criminal actions corresponding to the crimes of violation of any of the individual guarantees shall be six years, and this period shall not begin to run, with respect to public officials, until the day following the date on which the person to whom the criminal act is attributed has ceased to exercise his public functions.
CHAPTER II
INDIVIDUAL GUARANTEES

Art. 29. The Nation guarantees to all its inhabitants the inviolability of life. No law shall establish the death penalty, nor shall any authority apply the said penalty. Art. 30. The Nation guarantees personal liberty and security to all its inhabitants and, as a consequence: (1) No one shall be subjected to forcible recruitment. Military service is compulsory and shall be rendered in conformity with the law. (2) No one shall be arrested or detained, unless he has been caught in the act, without there first being issued a summary information setting forth the commission of a punishable offense calling for corporal punishment and the written order of the official authorized by the law to decree said detention it being necessary always to set forth in the said order the reason therefor. The summary proceedings shall not in any case be prolonged for more than thirty days after judicial detention. In the crimes of injury, defamation, disrespect, or offense against persons or judicial, political, or administrative bodies invested with public authority, the accused shall be granted a trial, and he shall not be permitted to leave the place of the proceedings until the matter has been decided. Detention shall only follow by virtue of a final sentence. (3) No one shall continue under detention if, by means of final judicial sentence, there shall have been destroyed the basis for such detention, nor shall anyone continue under detention after he has been granted freedom

under bond in those cases when the law permits this benefit. The granting and the forwarding of the bond shall not occasion any payment. (4) No one shall be held incomunicado, or be obliged to take an oath, or be submitted to questioning in criminal cases against himself, or against his relatives within the fourth grade of consanguinity and the second grade of affinity, or against his spouse, or the person with whom he is living in marital status. (5) No one shall be judged by specially created tribunals or commissions, except by his regular judges and by virtue of pre-existing law. (6) No one shall be condemned in a criminal case without first having been personally notified of the charges and heard in the form provided by law. (7) No one shall be deprived of his liberty for failure to perform civil obligations not defined as crimes by the law. (8) No one shall be condemned to corporal punishment for more than twenty years. (9) No one shall be condemned to opprobrious or perpetual punishment, nor shall anyone be submitted to tortures or other measures which cause physical suffering. (10) No one shall continue to be deprived of his liberty after he has fulfilled the penalty imposed upon him. (11) No one shall be tried for the same offense which was the basis of a previous trial. Art. 31. The detentions which administrative authorities may make in conformity with the law shall not be subject to the provisions of section 2 of the preceding Article; however, the arrests which the said authorities may make shall not exceed a period of fifteen days and shall be granted pursuant to written resolution setting forth the reason therefor whenever such arrests are to exceed a forty-eight hour period. The law shall determine the procedures to which repeated offenders shall be submitted. Art. 32. All persons detained or taken in violation of the guarantees established in this Constitution regarding individual liberty may have recourse to habeas corpus. This recourse may be exercised by the person himself, or by any other person in his name, and it shall be admissible when the law does not provide for any ordinary judicial recourse against the order, act, or procedure which motivates it. The law shall specify the tribunals which shall have jurisdiction and which shall decide in short and summary form the charges involved, as well as all the other conditions necessary for the exercise of this remedy. Art. 33. The Nation recognizes asylum for political motives, subject only to the limitations established by the laws, the principles of international law, and public treaties. Art. 34. All persons may travel freely throughout the national territory, change their domicile, absent themselves from the Republic and return thereto, bring their property into the country or remove it therefrom, without any limitations other than those established by the laws. In no case may the entrance of nationals into the country be impeded arbitrarily. Art. 35. The Nation guarantees the inviolability of the home, which cannot be entered by force except in order to prevent the commission of a crime or in order to execute the decisions which the tribunals of justice may dictate pursuant to law. The home shall be subject, in accordance with the law, to the visits of health and fiscal authorities, due notice hay-

 474 1950


Venesuela

475

ing first been given by the authorities or functionaries which order or make the inspection. Art. 36. Oral, written, or any other form of correspondence shall be inviolable. No letters, telegrams, private papers, or any other means of correspondence shall be seized except upon fulfillment of the legal formalities by the judicial authority and preserving always all secrets relative to domestic and private life which have no bearing on the proceedings at issue. All books, vouchers, and accounting documents shall be subject to inspection or check by the competent authorities, in conformity with the laws. Art. 37. The Nation guarantees the liberty of thought, manifested by word, by writing, by means of print, by radio, or other systems of publicity, as to which previous censorship cannot be established; however, there shall remain subject to punishment, in accordance with legal prescriptions, all expressions which constitute offenses against the public morals, contumely, defamation, disrespect, and instigation to transgress the law. There shall be forbidden anonymous articles and war propaganda or propaganda which has as its object the provocation of disobedience to the laws, but this prohibition shall not limit the analysis or criticism of legal precepts. Art. 38. The Nation guarantees the liberty of conscience and of worship, the latter liberty, however, being subjected to the supreme inspection of the national executive in accordance with the law. Art. 39. No one shall be required to declare his religious belief or his political ideology, except when the law so requires it. Art. 40. No one shall invoke religious beliefs or disciplines in order to avoid obedience to the laws of the Republic or to impede others in the exercise of their rights. Art. 41. There is guaranteed the right to public or private assembly, for legal purposes and without weapons. The law shall regulate the right of public assembly and the right of manifestation. Art. 42. There are guaranteed the rights of association and of syndicalization for lawful purposes; these rights shall be exercised in accordance with the laws. Art. 43. There is guaranteed the freedom of petition before any public functionary or official entity, with the right to obtain an opportune reply. Art. 44. The Nation guarantees the right of both active and passive suffrage in the terms set forth in this Constitution. Art. 45. There is guaranteed to every citizen the right to accuse before the competent tribunals those officials who may be liable to punishment for the violation of their duties. Art. 46. The Nation guarantees equality to all its inhabitants, by virtue of which: (a) All persons shall be judged by the same laws and shall enjoy equally their protection. (b) No titles of hereditary nobility or distinction shall be granted, nor shall racial discrimination be permitted. (c) The identification of a person in documents relating to his civil status shall not contain any mention of the nature of his filiation, establish any difference in births, or indicate the civil status of his parents. (d) No other official style of address shall be given except that of "Citizen" and "You," except for diplomatic protocol.
CHAPTER III
OF THE FAMILY

Art. 47. The State shall protect the family no matter what its origin, as well as motherhood, regardless of the civil status of the mother, who shall, further, be assisted in case of abandonment. Art. 48. The law shall determine all matters relative to the organization of the family patrimony which shall not be subject to attachment. Art. 49. The State guarantees the full protection of the child from its conception until its full growth, in order that such growth might be realized in an environment of material and moral security. As a consequence, there shall be established, among others, the conditions necessary: (a) In order that the children might enjoy the right to know their parents; (b) In order that the parents might fulfill their duty to aid, educate, and feed their children, regardless of what the filiation of the same might be; (c) In order that minors might be protected and judged by special laws; (d) In order to prevent the exploitation of minors in work. The State shall share with the parents, in a subsidiary manner and within the economic possibilities of the parents, the responsibility incumbent on them for the rearing of their children. A special code shall govern this protection and shall establish an organization charged with the administration of the same. Art. 50. The State shall adopt measures for the elimination of the social causes of prostitution and shall watch over the recovery of those affected by it.
CHAPTER IV
OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY

Art. 51. The State shall watch over the maintenance of the public health. All inhabitants of the Republic have the right to the protection of their health. The State shall establish the services necessary for the prevention and treatment of sicknesses. Art. 52. The inhabitants of the Republic have the right to live protected against the risks of a social nature which might affect them and against the want which results from them. The State shall establish, in progressive form, an ample and efficient system of social security and shall stimulate the construction of low-cost housing destined for the economically needy class.
CHAPTER V OF EDUCATION

Art. 53. There is guaranteed to all the inhabitants of the Republic the right to an education. Education is an essential function of the State, which shall have the obligation to create and maintain institutions and services sufficient to attend to the educational needs of the country and to furnish to the Venezuelan people the indispensable means for improving their cultural level.

Art. 54. National education shall be organized as an integral process, correlated in its various terms, and it shall be aimed to achieve the harmonious development of the human personality, in order to create citizens fit for life and for the exercise of democracy, to stimulate the culture of the Nation and to develop the spirit of human solidarity. Art. 55. There is guaranteed the liberty of instruction. All natural or juridical persons may dedicate themselves freely to the sciences and arts, and found chairs and establishments for the teaching of the same, under the supreme inspection and vigilance of the State, with the limitations and within the conditions of orientation and organization which the law may fix. The State may establish, as its exclusive function, all matters relating to national professorships and teaching. Art. 56. Private initiative in educational matters shall deserve the encouragement of the State, provided that it is in accordance with the principles contained in this Constitution and in the laws. Art. 57. Education must be in charge of persons qualified to teach, verified in accordance with the law. The State guarantees to professional teachers working conditions and a level of life consonant with their high mission. Art. 58. Primary education is obligatory. Education granted in official establishments is free for all. In accordance with the law, the State shall grant to those individuals who lack the resources the means necessary to permit them to complete their educational obligation and to pursue their studies without any limitations other than those derived from their vocation and their aptitude. Art. 59. The artistic and historic wealth of the country shall be under the control and protection of the State, in accordance with the law. Art. 60. The professions which require a diploma cannot be exercised without first possessing the same and without first fulfilling the formalities required by law. The law shall determine those professions which must be exercised by means of the granting of a diploma by the State. Special Paragraph: The State reserves the right to require that professional men lend their services to the Nation and in conformity with the provisions of law.
CHAPTER VI
OF WORK

Art. 61. Work is a duty and a right. Every individual must contribute to the progress of society by means of work. The State shall see to it that every competent person can obtain the means of subsistence through work and because of this it shall prevent the establishment of any conditions which in any form might diminish the dignity or the liberty of persons. Art. 62. The law shall provide for all that which may be necessary for the greater efficiency, responsibility, and encouragement of work, adequately regulating and establishing the protection which must be granted to workers in order to guarantee their stability in their work and the betterment of their material, moral, and intellectual conditions. The Nation shall encourage the technical instruction of workers. Art. 63. Labor legislation shall consecrate the following rights and precepts, applicable to manual labor as well as intellectual or technical

labor, in addition to other rights which may contribute to the betterment of the conditions of the workers: (1) Maximum normal work day of eight hours for day work and seven hours for night work, except for specified work, with weekly remunerated rest day, with the law. The law may establish a progressively smaller in accordance maximum work day, in general, or for determinate industries in particular; (2) Equal salary for equal work, without distinction for sex, nationality, or race; (3) Minimum subsistence salary, sufficient to satisfy the needs of the worker; (4) Annual paid vacations, without distinction between laborers and employees; (5) Liability for occupational risks; (6) Prior notice payment and indemnity in case of termination or rupture of the work contract, length of service payment and pension after a fixed period of service, subject to such conditions as the law may fix; syndicates, except in cases of withdrawals that are fully justified; (8) Collective labor contract, in which a closed shop clause can be included; (9) Conciliation in order to settle the conflicts between employers and workers; (10) The right to strike, except in the public services that may be fixed by law; (11) Special protection in the work of minors and women with the right, in the case of minors, to apprenticeship and the setting of a minimum age for admission into the various types of work, and, in the case of women, remunerated rest both before and after childbirth; (12) A system of participation in the profits of companies in favor of employees and laborers, and the encouragement of savings among the same; (13) The responsibility for complying with social laws, on the part of the natural or juridical person for whose benefit the work is being done, even when the labor contract shall be entered into by an intermediary or contractor, without affecting the responsibility of the latter; (14) Non-attachability of salary to the extent and in those cases fixed by law; (15) Immunity of the money of workers, when such money comes from benefits or rights granted by the law; (16) Non-renounceability of the provisions of law which favor the workers. Art. 64. The State shall see to the establishment of the salary for workers with families through adequate institutions in conformity with the law.
CHAPTER VII
OF THE NATIONAL ECONOMY

(7) Stability of work for the members of the board of directors of workers'

Art. 65. The Nation guarantees the right of property. By virtue of its social function, property shall be subjected to the contributions, restrictions, and obligations established by law for purposes of public utility or of the general welfare. Every author or inventor has an exclusive property right in his work or invention, and he who invents a trade mark has the right to exploit it; all of this to be in conformity with the provisions established by the laws and by treaties. The law may establish special prohibitions covering the acquisition, transfer, use, and enjoyment of specified classes of property, be it because

of the nature of said property, its quality, or its location in the national territory. Art. 66. The State shall look to the defense and conservation of the natural resources of the Venezuelan territory and shall regulate the use, enjoyment, and exploitation of the same, in accordance with the objects previously cited. Art. 67. In conformity with the law, the expropriation of any type of property shall be declared only for reasons of public utility or social welfare, by means of final sentence and upon payment of the price of the same. In those cases where there is involved the expropriation of lands destined for the realization of the agricultural reform and of the expropriation of real property for the purposes of extension and improvement of population centers, the payment for the same may be deferred for a determinate period of time, a sufficient guarantee first having been given, in conformity with the provisions of law. No confiscation of property of any kind shall be decreed or carried out, except as provided in the third paragraph of Article 21 of this Constitution. Art. 68. The right of private territorial property shall be conditioned on the preceding provisions and on the obligation to keep the lands and woods which are its object in production that is socially useful. The law shall determine the operation of this provision and the conditions for its application. Art. 69. The State shall carry out a planned and systematic action aimed to transform the national agrarian structure, to rationalize agricultural and cattle raising exploitation, to organize and distribute credit, to better living conditions of rural areas, and to promote the progressive economic and social emancipation of the rural population. A special law shall determine the technical conditions and other conditions consonant with the national welfare by means of which it shall make effective and workable the exercise of the right which the Nation recognizes in farm associations and in individuals, qualified for farm or cattleraising work but who lack tillable lands or who do not possess the same in sufficient quantity, to be granted the said lands and the means necessary to make them produce. Art. 70. All the lands acquired by nationals or foreigners in the Venezuelan territory and destined for the exploitation of mineral concessions, including petroleum and other combustible minerals, shall pass in full title to the patrimony of the Nation, without any compensation, upon the extinguishment for any reason of the respective concession. Art. 71. The State shall support and encourage the organization of all types of co-operatives and institutions designed for the betterment of the economy of the people. The law shall assure the timely supplying of the necessary technical, administrative, and economic means. Art. 72. It is the duty of the State to obtain the incorporation of the Indians into the national life. A special legislation shall resolve all matters related to this subject, having due regard for the cultural characteristics and the economic conditions of the Indian population. Art. 73. All persons may dedicate themselves freely to commerce, industry, or the exercise of any other lucrative activity, without any

 479 1950


480

Constituions of Nations

limitations other than those established by this Constitution and the laws for reasons of health or public safety. The State shall protect private initiative; however, it can reserve for itself the exercise of determinate industries, exploitations, or services of public welfare in order to assure their normal functioning or the defense or the credit of the Nation, and the State shall also reserve the right to dictate measures of an economic nature in order to plan, rationalize, and stimulate production, and to regulate the distribution and the consumption of wealth for the purpose of achieving the development of the national economy. No monopolies shall be granted; nevertheless, concessions may be granted, of an exclusive nature and for a limited period of time, in order to stimulate the establishment and the development of works or services involving public welfare, provided that there shall not be involved, directly or indirectly, the obligation to guarantee income or profits to invested capital. Art. 74. Exportation cannot be prohibited or limited except when the general welfare of the Nation requires the same. Art. 75. The Republic shall have a council of national economy composed of representatives of capital, labor, the liberal professions, and the State, in the form and with the attributes determined by law.
CHAPTER VIII
OF THE SUSPENSION AND RESTRICTION OF GUARANTEES

Art. 76. In cases of civil or international war, or when there is an imminent danger that one or the other might occur, or in cases of grave circumstances which affect the economic or social life of the Nation, the President of the Republic, in session with the council of ministers, may restrict or suspend in all or in part of the national territory the exercise of constitutional guarantees, except for those consecrated in Article 29 and in section 9 of Article 30 of this Constitution. The decree of restriction or suspension of guarantees shall set forth the following:: (1) The motives which justify it; (2) The specification of the guarantees which are to be restricted or suspended; (3) The territory to be affected by the restriction or suspension. Guarantees shall be restricted or suspended only to the extent required for the security of the country and the restoration of normality, and the decree which orders the restriction or suspension shall be submitted to the National Congress, or to the permanent commission of the same, within ten days following its promulgation, and it shall be annulled upon termination of the causes which motivated it. Art. 77. If the circumstances do not require the restriction or suspension of guarantees, but there are well-founded indications of the existence of plans or activities which have as their object the destruction of constituted powers, by means of a coup d'6tat or other violent means, the President of the Republic, in session with the council of ministers, may order the preventive detention of those persons whom there is strong reason to consider as implicated in said plans or activities. These measures shall be submitted, within ten days following their execution, to the consideration of the National Congress or, during the recess of that body, to the permanent commission, for approval or rejection; and they shall be suspended upon termination of the causes which motivated them. If they shall be approved by the National Congress or by the permanent commission and shall not have been suspended within sixty days following the said approval, the President of the Republic, upon termination of that period of time, shall submit the said measures to the cognizance of the Supreme Court of Justice which shall decide concerning their continuation or suspension, taking into consideration, in addition to the dispositions of law, the security of the State and the preservation of public order. Art. 78. The restriction of guarantees shall in no case affect the functioning of the public powers of the Nation, whose members shall always enjoy the prerogatives recognized by law. TITLE IV OF SOVEREIGNTY AND THE PUBLIC POWER
CHAPTER I OF SUFFRAGE

Art. 79. Sovereignty resides in the people, who may exercise it by means of suffrage and through the agency of the public power. Art. 80. Suffrage is the special right and public function of all Venezuelans; nevertheless, it may be extended for municipal elections and in accordance with the law to foreigners who have more than ten years of uninterrupted residence in the country. Art. 81.1 There shall be considered as electors all Venezuelans, male and female, over eighteen years of age, not subject by definitely final sentence to civil interdiction or to criminal punishment which carries with it political disqualification. Art. 82. There shall be eligible and competent for the fulfillment of any public office all electors who know how to read and write and are over twenty-one years of age, without any restrictions other than those established in this Constitution and those derived from the conditions of fitness which, in order to carry out the determinate offices, the law might require. Art. 83. The law shall regulate concerning the principle of proportionate representation of minorities, and shall see to it that no political party or group shall predominate in the electoral agencies.
CHAPTER II
OF THE PUBLIC POWER AND ITS EXERCISE

Art. 84. The public power shall be exercised in conformity with this Constitution and the laws which define its attributes and faculties. Every act which goes beyond the said definition shall constitute a usurpation of attributes. Art. 85. Since the Republic has possession of the right of ecclesiastical patronage, it shall exercise the same in conformity with the law. Nevertheless, there may be celebrated agreements or treaties to regulate relations between the Church and the State. I Voting age under Art. 32 of 1936 Constitution is twenty-one.

Art. 86. The public power shall be distributed among the municipal, state, and national powers; and its organization and functioning shall be governed in all cases by the principles of republican, federal, popular, representative, alternative, and responsible government. Art. 87. All usurped authority shall be ineffective and acts done under it shall be null. All decisions taken through direct or indirect use of force or through assembly of the people in subversive attitude shall be equally null. Art. 88. The exercise of the public power occasions the responsibility of the individual for exceeding the authority which this Constitution fixes or for violation of the law which determines its functions, in the terms established in the Constitution itself. All public officials shall also be subject to punishment, in accordance with the law, for the offenses committed by them. Art. 89. Every public official shall be obligated to take an oath before taking office, to make a sworn statement of his property in those cases fixed by law, and to submit to all the requisites and consequences determined by law for the exercise of offices which involve the administration of public funds. Art. 90. The State shall dictate a statute which shall govern its relations with public officials and employees in which the rules for entering into office, leaving office, removal, suspension, and retirement shall be established. All public employees shall be at the service of the Nation and not of any political party. Art. 91. No one shall fulfill more than one remunerated public office at any one time. The acceptance of a second office of this kind shall imply the renunciation of the first. There are excepted from this disposition all casual, academic, electoral, professorial, public-medical, and municipal-council offices. Art. 92. No public employee shall accept any offices, honors or compensations from foreign governments without obtaining the proper authorization from the Senate chamber. All violators shall be punished in conformity with the law.
CHAPTER III
OF THE NATIONAL ARMED FORCES

Art. 93. The national armed forces constitute a non-political institution, essentially professional, obedient, and not deliberative; and shall be organized in order to guarantee the national defense, maintain internal stability, and support the fulfillment of the Constitution and the laws. In time of peace it shall not be permitted to requisition or demand assistance of any kind except from the civil authorities and in the form and manner determined by the law. Art. 94. The national armed forces shall be classified and organized in conformity with the law and they shall have the special duties fixed by the law. Art. 95. The State shall see to it that the organization and functions which are assigned to the national armed forces correspond always to the standard of dignity of their members and to the concept of an impersonal institution at the exclusive service of the Nation.

The military armed forces shall have as their special mission that of guaranteeing the national defense, and only in those circumstances set forth by the law may they be assigned other incidental functions which, in all cases, shall refer to the maintenance of public order. Art. 96. The military armed forces shall be composed of that contingent which, in proportion to its population, may be called to the service in each one of the states, in the federal district, and in the federal territories and dependencies, in accordance with the law. Art. 97. The states and municipalities shall not maintain other forces except those of the municipal police. Art. 98. All weapons of war which may be found in the country, or which may be brought in from the exterior, belong to the Nation and they shall be under the control of the executive office fixed by law. Art. 99. As long as they remain in active service, the members of the national armed forces shall not exercise the right of suffrage, belong to any political parties, or take part in their activities. Art. 100. On election days the national armed forces shall have permanent service assignment and they may leave their barracks only for the purpose of guaranteeing public order and the normal and free prosecution of the elections. Art. 101. Military ranks shall be obtained only in conformity with the law, and those who possess them cannot be deprived of them or of the honors and pensions pertaining thereto, except in those cases and in the manner determined by law. Art. 102. The President of the United States of Venezuela is the commander-in-chief of the national armed forces, and he shall command them through the executive offices and by means of those officials fixed by law. Art. 103. The supreme council of national defense is the chief agency of direction and co-ordination of the national armed forces, and it shall be composed of the President of the Republic, who shall preside over the same, and of the members of the executive cabinet and of those functionaries of said armed forces which the law may determine.
CHAPTER IV
OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

Art. 104. The Nation shall co-operate in the international community for the realization of the ends of security and common defense, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and of international pacts duly approved and ratified. Art. 105. All international treaties, agreements, or accords which the executive power may celebrate must be approved by the National Congress in order to be valid, except those which deal with the execution or perfection of pre-existing obligations of the Republic, or with the application of principles expressly recognized by the Republic, or with the execution of ordinary acts concerning international relations or the exercise of faculties which the law expressly attributes to the executive power. Nevertheless, the permanent commission of the National Congress may authorize the temporary execution of international treaties or accords whose urgency may require the same, which treaties or accords shall be submitted in all cases to the subsequent approval or rejection of the legislative chambers.

In all cases, the national executive shall give an account of the treaties, agreements, or accords made by him, indicating the exact character and contents of the same, to the legislative chambers at their next sessions, regardless of whether or not they are subject to their approval. Art. 106. In all international obligations entered into by the Republic, there shall be inserted a clause by which the parties obligate themselves to decide through peaceful means recognized in international law, or previously agreed upon by them, should such be the case, all controversies which might arise among them concerning the interpretation or execution of the pact, provided that this is deemed necessary considering its nature, or provided that the procedure which must be followed for its celebration permits of the same. Art. 107. No contract involving the national, state, or municipal public welfare shall be made with foreign governments, nor may such a contract be transferred in whole or in part to any foreign government. Nor shall any contracts be made with companies which are not domiciled in Venezuela, nor may there be transferred to such companies any contracts made with third parties. In order to make such contracts with official or semi-official foreign entities having juridical autonomous personality, or in order to transfer such contracts to them in whole or in part, the authorization of the legislative chambers, or of the permanent commission in those urgent cases where the chambers are in recess, shall be required in all cases. Art. 108. In those contracts to which the previous article refers, if it is deemed compatible with the nature of the same, there shall be incorporated, even though not specifically expressed, a clause in which it is established that all doubts and controversies which may arise concerning the said contracts, and which shall not be settled amicably by the contracting parties, shall be decided by the competent tribunals of Venezuela in accordance with its laws, without any motive or reason which might give rise to a foreign claim. TITLE V OF THE MUNICIPAL POWER Art. 109. The municipal power shall be exercised in each district of the states, in the federal district, and in the federal territories by the municipal council which shall enjoy full autonomy in all matters concerning the economic and administrative management of the municipality, with no restrictions other than those established by this Constitution. The organic law of the federal district shall establish, nevertheless, a special regulation for its municipal power, in accordance with the needs of the departments which constitute it. Art. 110. In their character of moral persons of public law, all municipalities shall be legal entities, and their representation shall be incumbent upon the municipal council as deputy of the cities which make up the district. Art. 111. The Nation gurantees the autonomy of the municipalities and, by virtue thereof: (a) Municipal councils shall not be interfered with in the exercise of their functions by national or state authorities, and the ordinances, accords, or resolutions which they may issue shall not be vetoed nor in any manner impugned, except before the competent judicial authority in those cases and in the manner fixed by law. (b) No national or state authority shall restrain, hinder, or suspend municipal officials in the exercise of their functions. Only judicial authorities, by means of the procedure and for causes fixed by law, may decree the suspension of officials of the municipal power when they are guilty of the violations set forth in the appropriate law. (c) All authorities shall respect the fiscal autonomy of the municipalities and, as a result, they shall abstain from invading the power which belongs to them to organize and administer their income or to collect from the said income all or part of the sums of money collected by the municipality. (d) The municipalities shall not be required to pay for the national or state services which may be organized for their benefit and the administration of which they have not assumed except when such obligation results from legally celebrated contracts. Art. 112. The following are within the jurisdiction of the municipal power: (1) To organize its own services of police, food supplies, cemeteries, municipal embellishment, civil architecture, public lighting, aqueducts, city transportation, credit institutions, and other institutions of a municipal character; (2) To organize its own services of social assistance, subject to national laws and regulations and under the inspection and vigilance of the respective national service, without prejudice to the provisions of section 18 of Article 138 of this Constitution; (3) To organize services adequate to combat desertion, vagrancy, alcoholism, illiteracy, and prostitution, in accordance with the respective national laws and regulations; (4) To stimulate and promote city building in accordance with the rules established by law and in co-ordination with national technical agencies; (5) To organize and administer its own income, which shall consist of monies derived from the following sources: (a) License fees from industry, commerce and all types of vehicles; (b) Taxes and contributions from city realty and public spectacles; (c) Sale, rental, or exploitation of municipal lands and other municipal property, without prejudice, with reference to alienation of municipal lands, to the provisions of Article 119 of this Constitution; (d) Fees from weights and measures controls, aqueducts, cemeteries, public lighting, and other municipal services; (e) The income from money fines imposed by municipal authorities in the exercise of their legal attributes, and the income which by virtue of special laws is destined for the municipal treasury, regardless of the authority imposing the said fines; (f) The part of the constitutional allowance which is due the municipalities pursuant to Article 238 of this Constitution, and (g) Other income of a municipal character. Art. 113. The National Congress may, by special law, attribute other revenue matters to the municipal authority. Art. 114. The members of the municipal councils shall be elected by universal, direct, and secret vote, in conformity with the law. Art. 115. The president of the municipal council is the requisite agency for the execution of the decisions of that body, and he shall be elected by the body from among its own members in accordance with the law.

Art. 116. The office of councilman is obligatory and is incompatible with any remunerated office of the executive branch, except for casual, academic, teaching, and public-medical offices. Art. 117. In the exercise of their autonomy, the municipalities shall respect the provisions of Articles 121 and 138 of this Constitution and shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in Article 127 of the same. Art. 118. The Nation recognizes that for the progress and development of population centers the possession of municipal lands is an indispensable condition; and consequently, in conformity with the law, the Nation shall draw up a tax list of municipal lands; further, it shall endow each municipality with such lands and it shall lend its assistance for the recovery of municipal lands which are or may be unjustly occupied. Art. 119. Municipal lands shall be inalienable and cannot be prescribed against, except for constructions in those cases and subject to the formalities fixed in the respective municipal ordinances. TITLE VI OF THE POWER OF THE STATES
CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 120. The states shall reciprocally recognize one another's autonomy; they are declared to be equal as political entities; they shall retain fully the power in all matters not reserved by this Constitution to other powers, and they declare that their first duty is the conservation of the independence and the integrity of the Nation. Consequently, the states can never break the national unity, nor can they ally themselves with foreign powers, nor can they solicit their protection, nor can they cede to them any portion of their territory, but they shall defend themselves and the Nation against any violence contrary to the national sovereignty. Art., 121. The states shall have the following powers: (1) To preserve their present names or to change them; (2) To dictate their own constitutions or to organize and elect their own public powers, in conformity with this Constitution and the laws; (3) To establish ortheir modify political-territorial (4) To administer owntheir property, subject to thedivision; exceptions set forth in section 12 of Article 138, and to dispose of the constitutional allowances and other income to which they are entitled, subject to the provisions of Articles 238 and 247 of this Constitution; (5) To decree, in connection with reproductive works or works of public welfare, internal loans the annual obligations of which shall in no case exceed
ten per cent of the ordinary estimate of their income;

(6) To promote and stimulate the development of production and the increase of matters of general welfare to the states and to co-operate with the national or municipal power for the better supplying of food to the people and for the maintenance of a normal level of prices on articles of prime necessity in order to avoid speculation and the high cost of living; (7) To open and keep under repair local roads and to carry out those public works of the state which may be necessary, without prejudice to the right which belongs to the Nation and to the municipalities to undertake for their own account whatever public works they may determine.

All public works requiring the same must be previously submitted for the approval of the proper national technical agencies; (8) All those other powers not expressly reserved by this Constitution or by the laws to the Nation or to the municipalities. Art. 122. The states shall give full faith to the public acts of national authorities, of other states, and of municipalities and shall see to it that they are carried out and executed. Art. 123. Without prejudice to the right to require the services of the state powers in all cases in which they must lend their co-operation to the national government, the latter may maintain in the territory of the states all necessary national officials and employees, as well as the officials, soldiers, and employees of the armed forces. The army leaders and other national employees within the states shall have jurisdiction only in those matters which relate to their respective business, with no exemption or privilege to differentiate them from the other citizens residing in the respective state; nevertheless, the state shall not impose on them duties which may be incompatible with the national service which has been charged to them. Art. 124. The states can neither declare nor make war in any case, and they shall keep strict neutrality in those dissensions which might occur among other states, as long as they are not required to act on behalf of the national government, to which they must lend their co-operation in measures which it might dictate for the re-establishment of peace. Art. 125. The states shall not permit in their territory any enlistments or levies which might have as their object an attack upon the peace, liberty, or independence of other nations, or which might disturb the internal peace of the Republic. Art. 126. The national government may establish in the territories of the states fortifications, piers, arsenals, shipyards, airdromes, penitentiaries, quarantine stations, and other works necessary for the national administration. Art. 127. The states may not: (a) Negotiate loans abroad; (b) Create customs, charge import, export, or transit duties on foreign goods in transit and destined for foreign territory, or charge taxes in other fields of public revenue which belong to the national or municipal authority; (c) taxes the transit of any class of property, national or foreign; (d) Charge Maintain anyon forces other than those of the municipal police; (e) Prohibit the consumption of goods produced outside their jurisdiction, or burden the same with taxes different from these which are paid for the con(f) Tax of any consumable national or foreign, except upon sumption th class saeofclass of goodsgoods, when they are produced its within the state; entrance into circulation within the state; (g) Create taxes on grazing cattle o on their products or by-products. CHAPTER

II

OF THE ORGANIZATION OF THE STATES

Section I Of the Legislative Power Art. 128. The exercise of the legislative power and the control of the state administration belong to the legislative assembly, which shall ordinarily meet in the capital of the state on the first of June of each year, or on the nearest possible date thereafter. Art. 129. The legislative assembly shall be elected by direct, universal, and secret vote, in accordance with the law, and its composition shall be governed by the constitutions of the respective states. Art. 130. The office of representative in the legislative assembly during its entire respective term is incompatible with any office in the executive branch, except those of an academic, teaching, or publicmedical character. Art. 131. The following are the attributes of the legislative assemblies: (1) To dictate the constitution and the organic laws of the state and to legislate on all matters corresponding to the authority of the same; (2) To approve or reject the official conduct of the governor of the state. The rejection of the same shall occasion, as a matter of law, the removal of the governor when this shall be decided upon by two-thirds of the members of the assembly; (3) To approve or modify the proposed budget law of public income and expenditures presented to them by the governor of the state, without diminishing the provisions of Article 238 of this Constitution; and (4) All other powers granted to them by this Constitution, the state constitution, and the laws. Section II Of the Executive Power Art. 132. The government and the administration of the state, to the extent that they are not attributed to other authority, are within the power of the governor who, together with his secretaries, shall exercise the executive power in accordance with this Constitution, the state constitution, and the laws. Art. 133. In order to be governor, it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, of age, of secular status, and in full exercise of one's civil and political rights. Art. 134. The governor is the agent of the national power in the respective state, in which capacity he shall carry out and cause to be fulfilled the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, and he shall execute the orders and resolutions of the national executive power in those matters within the scope of same. Art. 135. In addition to their functions as agents of the national powers, the governors shall have the following duties and attributes: (1) To name and remove their secretaries, all officials of the executive branch, and other employees under them, without prejudice to the provisions of the laws which regulate the administrative career; (2) To present annually a detailed report of their government and an account of their administration to the legislative assembly for its approval or rejection; (3) To present annually to the state assembly the proposed budget law of public income and expenditures for their consideration and approval, and (4) Such other duties and powers as are granted to them by the constitutions and laws of the states. Art. 136. During the temporary absences of the governor, his place shall be filled by the secretary designated by him.

TITLE VII OF THE NATIONAL POWER
CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 137. The national power is divided into legislative, executive, and judicial. Each one of the branches of the national power shall have its own functions; nevertheless, the bodies carrying out each power shall collaborate among themselves and with the other public powers in the realization of the purposes of the State.
CHAPTER II OF THE AUTHORITY OF THE NATIONAL POWER

Art. 138. The following powers belong to the national power: (1) The international actuation of the United States of Venezuela as a sovereign Nation; (2) All matters concerning the flag, coat of arms, national anthem, and holidays and decorations and honors granted by the Republic; (3) The defense and supreme vigilance of the general welfare of the Nation, the conservation of public peace, and the just application of the laws in the entire national territory; (4) The administration of justice, the public ministry, and the management of prisons and penitentiaries; (5) The organization and management of the federal district and of the federal territories and dependencies; (6) All matters concerning elections, naturalization, admission, and expulsion of foreigners, immigration, and colonization, expropriation for public or social utility, literary, artistic, and industrial property, and public registry; (7) The administration of weights and measures; (8) All matters relating to banks and other credit institutions, without prejudice to the provisions of section 1 of Article 112 of this Constitution; (9) All matters relating to the national monetary system and to the circulation of foreign money in the country; (10) The organization, control, collection, and investment of taxes on income or capital; of taxes from fiscal stamps, inheritance, regist'tions, alcohol and liquor, matches, tobacco and cigarettes, mines and petroleum, and other incomes not attributed to the states or to the municipalities which the law may create as national taxes; (11) The administration of customs, and the organization, control, collection, and investment of taxes and fees collected therefrom; (12) The administration of salt-pits, public lands, mines and petroleum and pearl oyster beds, and the conservation, development, and use of forests, waters, and other natural resources of the country. The national executive may sell, lease, or give as a gift public lands, granting always the right of preference in favor of the occupants; however, it may not alienate salt-pits or grant mineral concessions for an indefinite period of time. The income from the said property, including the product of the sale of public lands, shall enter the national treasury. Public lands existing in the maritime, river, and lake islands shall not be alienated, and their use may be granted only in a form which does not involve, directly or indirectly, the transfer of the ownership of the land. The law may establish a system of special economic grants for the benefit of the states in whose territory the property mentioned in this section is situated;

(13) All matters relative to the national armed forces and to the component parts thereof; (14) The organization of the census and of national statistics. For all transactions in which population must be taken as a basis, for the Nation as well as for the states, the federal district, the federal territories, and the federal dependencies, the last census of the Republic approved by the National Congress shall serve as standard; (15) The planning and execution of national public works; (16) The opening and maintenance of national roads, aerial traction cables, and railroad cables, even though they may be within the limits of one state, except in the cases of trolley-cars or city traction cables, the granting and regulation of which shall belong to the respective municipalities; (17) All matters relating to national education; (18) The technical direction, the establishment of administrative standards, and the co-ordination of services destined for the defense of public health. The law may establish the nationalization of these public services in accordance with the collective welfare; (19) All matters relating to the health of animal and plant life; (20) The conservation and stimulation of agriculture and cattle raising; (21) All matters relating to labor, insurance, and pocial security; (22) All matters relating to land, maritime, aerial, river, and lake transportation; (23) All matters relating to the management of mails, telegraphic services, telephones, and wireless communications; (24) The regulatory legislation for the guarantees granted by this Constitution, the civil, mercantile, penal, and procedural legislation, and the legislation relating to all matters of national cognizance; and (25) All other subjects which the present Constitution grants to the national powers. Art. 139. The legislative chambers, by a vote of two-thirds of their members, may attribute to the states or to the municipalities determinate subjects which belong to the national power for the purpose of promoting administrative decentralization. Equally, the chambers may legislate concerning the organization and functioning of the police service in the entire territory of the Republic by means of the procedure and with the majority decision fixed in this Constitution for the validity of laws. Art. 140.1 The constitutional terms of the national public powers shall be for a duration of five years.
CHAPTER III
OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER

Section I General Provisions Art. 141. The exercise of the legislative power belongs to the National Congress, which shall be composed of two chambers: the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Senators. Art. 142. The following shall not be elected as deputies or senators: (1) The President of the Republic and the ministers of the executive offices, the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice; the attorney general of the Nation, the solicitor general of the Nation, and the comptroller general of the Nation, until three months following their separation from office; (2) All relatives of the President of the Republic within the second grade of consanguinity or affinity; Terms of members of Congress are four years under Article 55 of 1936 Constitution.


(3) The governors of the states, of the federal district, and of the federal territories, while they are in possession of their offices and for three months following the end of their terms; (4) The directors, administrators, or representatives of official autonomous institutes, or of agencies or companies in which the state has a decisive economic participation, as long as they are in possession of their respective offices and for three months following the end of their terms; (5) Any other public functionary or employee who, as of the date of his nomination or within thirty days prior to the date of his election, shall occupy a remunerated office, except in the cases of casual, electoral, teaching, or public-medical, or legislative offices; (6) All citizens who, as of the date of their nomination or within thirty days prior to the date of their election may have acted in their own name or in the interest of another as contractors or managers of state businesses. in the cases determined by law. Art. 143. Any deputy or senator may be named as a minister of state of the national executive, and he may be made head of any diplomatic mission, with the right to return to the body of his respective chamber upon termination of his functions; however, he may not accept any other remunerated public offices during the entire period of his trust, or within six months following the termination of the same, except that he may act as substitute until the principal actually takes over, and except in the cases of temporary, electoral, academic, teaching, or public-medical offices, in those cases determined by law. Art. 144. No deputy or senator may celebrate in his own name or as representative of another any contract with the Nation, the states, or the municipalities, nor may he handle any claims of third persons before them. Art. 145. Deputies and senators shall not be answerable, at any time, for the opinions which they may issue in the exercise of their functions. Art. 146. During the period of their trust, no deputy or senator shall be taken, arrested, confined, or in any manner detained or restrained in the exercise of his functions, unless he is caught in the commission of a crime. In such latter case, and in any other case in which there shall be imputed to a deputy or senator the commission of a punishable offense, a report shall immediately be made to the respective chamber, which shall have jurisdiction, by a vote of two-thirds of its members, over the corresponding trial and the suspension from office of the indidted member, who shall be reincorporated into the chamber upon the destruction by final sentence of the basis of the proceedings. In all cases, the investigating chamber shall order the initiation, continuation, or stoppage of the procedure within five days from the session in which the report shall have been made concerning the charges. Art. 147. Both chambers shall be vigilant to the end that there is fully respected the immunity which protects their members, and they may order the stoppage of proceedings initiated against their members and the freedom of any member who may be under detention for the duration of the sessions or for the period required for the termination of the respective constitutional term. Nevertheless, they must authorize the continuation of the proceedings when any deputy or senator who is a member of said chamber shall expressly request the same. Art. 148. During the recess of the legislative chambers, the permanent commission shall have jurisdiction over all causes which may affect the immunity of deputies and senators; however, their decisions shall require the vote of two-thirds of their entire memberships, and they shall be of no effect unless ratified by the respective chamber in the sessions of the National Congress immediately following. Art. 149. The law shall fix the monthly emoluments which the deputies and senators shall receive for their services during their full term of office; nevertheless, any increases which the chambers may grant in the said remuneration shall become effective only at the beginning of the new term of the chambers. Art. 150. The law shall determine the manner of filling permanent vacancies in the membership of both chambers when the respective list of substitutes shall have become exhausted. Second Section Of the Chamber of Deputies Art. 151. In order to form the Chamber of Deputies, the electors of each district shall elect, by universal, direct, and secret ballot and in accordance with the applicable law, a deputy for each forty thousand inhabitants' and one additional for the excess of not less than twenty thousand. The electoral district the population of which is not sufficient to elect two deputies shall elect this number in any case. The federal territories shall elect a total of two deputies, in the manner which the law may prescribe. First Paragraph: There shall likewise be elected in compliance with the law, alternates who will have to fill the permanent or temporary vacancies of the principals. Second Paragraph: On regulating the principle of proportional representation of minorities, the law may provide for the election of additional deputies. Art. 152. Venezuelans who fill the conditions provided in Article 82 of this Constitution and who are not included in the eventualities provided in Article 142, may be elected deputies; but Venezuelans by naturalization must, in addition, be domiciled in the country and have been naturalized for a period of not less than eight years. Art. 153. The exclusive duties of the Chamber of Deputies are: (1) To initiate and permit discussion of the proposed law of the general budget of public income and expenditures, and any other pertaining to the taxing powers of the Nation; (2) To impeach the ministers of state. The motion for impeachment must first be referred to the secretary of the chamber. It can only be discussed forty-eight hours after its presentation and shall be carried out only if it is approved by a two-thirds part of the deputies present, who, at the same time, if the impeachment carries, shall order the removal of the minister. In such case, the vote of impeachment shall be communicated to the President of the Republic in order that he may execute it and order commencement of suit against the minister if he has been found at fault; and (3) Others that the laws may provide. Third Section Of the Chamber of Senators Art. 154. In order to form the Chamber of Senators, there shall be elected in each state and in the federal district, by universal, direct, and 1

Thirty-five thousand, not counting uncivilized Indians, under Article 56 of 1936 Constitution.

secret ballot, and by the majority that the law may provide, two principal senators and two alternates.' On regulating the principle of proportional representation of minorities, the law shall establish the manner of electing additional senators, on the basis of a national quotient; but in no case shall there be granted by this system more than two senators to one political party or group. Art. 155. Venezuelans by birth, who, in addition to the conditions provided in Article 82 of this Constitution, are more than thirty years of age and who are not included in the eventualities provided in Article 142 of the same, may be elected senators. Art. 156. The exclusive duties of the Chamber of Senators are: (1) To accord outstanding Venezuelans, or foreigners who may have rendered valuable services to the Republic, the honors of the national pantheon, upon termination of twenty-five years after their death; (2) To authorize the promotion of military and aviation officers from the rank of colonel and of naval officers from captain of ship, both inclusive; (3) To authorize employees of the Nation, the states, or municipalities to accept office, honors, and rewards from foreign governments, without which they shall not accept them; and (4) Others that the laws may provide. Fourth Section Provisions Common to Both Chambers Art. 157. The legislative chambers shall assemble in the capital of the Republic the nineteenth of April each year, or the nearest possible day thereafter, without the necessity of being previously called. The ordinary sessions of the legislative chambers shall last ninety days, but shall be prolonged up to ninety days more on favorable vote of twothirds part of the Congress, on initiative of either of the chambers or the national executive power. During the period to which this Article refers, every day and hour shall be for work and as many sessions as may be held therein shall be deemed regular sessions. Art. 158. The legislative chambers shall also meet in extraordinary sessions when they are called thereto by the permanent commission on its own initiative or on request of the national executive, or by a fourth part of the members of Congress. There shall only be considered in said sessions the matters referred to in the order of convocation, except where, on legislating with respect to same, it may be necessary to amend existing legislation on related matters. In the same manner the chambers in extraordinary sessions shall be able to act on emergency matters and on those contained in sections 8 and 9 of Article 162 of this Constitution. Art. 159. The chambers shall be installed with at least two-thirds part of their members and in default of this number, those attending, organized as a preparatory commission, shall order the measures that may be necessary for the attendance of the absentees. After the opening session, the chambers shall be able to meet with attendance of the absolute majority of their respective members. Art. 160. The chambers shall both function in the same city, their sessions shall be installed and closed on the same day and at the same hours, and neither shall be able to suspend its sessions prior to the time set, or make a change of residence, without the consent of the other. In I Under Article 60 of 1936 Constitution, election is by State legislatures.

case of disagreement, they shall assemble in Congress and whatever Congress decides shall be done. The sessions shall be public, but they may be secret when the respective chambers agree to it. Art. 161. The common duties of both chambers are: (1) To adopt their internal regulations and rules of debate and to order the correction of anyone who may infringe them; (2) To establish and regulate the police service in their meeting places; (3) To remove obstacles which impede the lawful exercise of their duties; (4) To order the execution of their respective resolutions; (5) To qualify their members and hear their resignations; (6) To appoint investigation commissions, which shall have the right to demand from any national, state, or municipal authority the information and documents which they may require in carrying out their duties; (7) To appear before the ministers of State and to issue summons to them on matters within their jurisdiction; and (8) Others that the law may provide. Fifth Section Of the Common Functions of Both Chambers as Co-Legislative Bodies Art. 162. The legislative chambers, as co-legislative bodies, have the following duties: (1) To approve or reject international treaties, contracts, or agreements which are subject to this requirement under Article 105 of this Constitution; (2) To decree a state of emergency, approve measures necessary for the national defense, and authorize those that are required for compliance with the obligations of the Republic in international society in accordance with the pacts to which it may be a party; (3) To authorize or require the federal executive to negotiate peace and to approve or reject treaties which may be executed concerning it; (4) To decree all national taxes; (5) To approve the general budget of public income and expenditures, with the modifications it may consider practical; (6) To decree government loans and to determine everything relative to the national debt; (7) To increase the population basis fixed by this Constitution for the election of deputies, in accordance with the last approved census; (8) To authorize the federal executive branch, under penalty of nullity, to alienate private real properties of the Nation and to enter into contracts of national interest, which shall not be valid or become effective until after they may have been approved by the chambers. There are excepted mineral and public land contracts or titles and any others that may be necessary for the normal development of the public administration except in the cases provided by law (9) fo authorize temporarily the President of the Republic to exercise determined and necessary extraordinary functions for the purpose of protecting the economic and financial life of the Nation, when public necessity or convenience requires it; (10) To approve, in each instance, the national census, when all legal formalities may have been complied with in its procurement, and, if not, to order its revision, in whole or in part; (11) To grant pardons; (12) To legislate regarding the operation of the national powers;


(13) To legislate regarding the creation, organization, and operation of institutes or official autonomous establishments; (14) To pass laws of a general character regarding civil pensions, retirement benefits, military retirements, or gratuity funds for widows and children, to be paid by the national treasury; ang5), To pass laws regarding development of social betterment institutions; (16) To legislate regarding all matters within the national jurisdiction which may require it. Sixth Section Of the Chambers Assembled in Congress Art. 163. The chambers shall function separately, but they shall assemble in Congress when this Constitution and the laws so determine, or when one of the chambers agrees to it on request of the other. In this latter case, the invited chamber shall have the right to fix the day and hour of the assembly. Art. 164. The presidents of the Chambers of Senators and Deputies must be Venezuelans by birth and are, as a matter of right, president and vice-president, respectively, of the National Congress. Art. 165. The'duties of the chambers assembled in Congress are: (1) To elect the officials whose appointment is attributed to them by this Constitution and the laws; (2) To proclaim as President of the United States of Venezuela the elected candidate in accordance with findings made by the competent body and to administer the oath of office; (3) To take cognizance of the resignation of the President of the Republic or the person who exercises his functions; (4) To take cognizance of the annual message of the President of the Republic; (5) To examine and approve or reject the reports and accounts of the ministers of state and of any other body or official when, in accordance with this Constitution or the laws, the chambers must be advised directly of the matter to which it refers; (6) To examine and approve or reject additional credits, which are decreed by the President of the Republic in compliance with legal requisites; (7) To raise to the category of state, the federal territory so soliciting, provided always that it fulfills the conditions set forth in Article 8 of the Constitution; (8) To count the votes of the legislative assemblies in the cases provided in Article 252 of this Constitution; (9) To authorize the President of the Republic to leave the national territory; (10) To prepare the interior regulations and rules of debate of the National Congress; and (11) Others that this Constitution and the laws may provide. Seventh Section Of the Passage of Laws Art. 166. Laws can be initiated in either of the two chambers by at least three of its respective members, or by the national executive branch, by means of the ministry having jurisdiction over the matter, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 153 and section 4 of Article 184 of this Constitution.

Art. 167. A bill having been presented, it shall be read, and if it is admitted, it shall be passed to the respective permanent commission for its study, consideration, and report, unless the chamber decides to consider it immediately after first discussion. In any case, bills shall receive three readings in each chamber, with intervals of at least two days, and in accordance with the rules which are established for debates. A bill which has been definitely approved in one of the two chambers shall be sent to the other for discussion, and if this chamber likewise approves it, it shall be returned to the originating chamber with any amendments. Art. 168. When the initiating chamber accepts the changes approved by the other, it shall become law. If not, the chambers shall assemble in Congress and shall decide, by majority vote, the action which should be taken with respect to the articles in which there may be disagreement, and those related to them, having the right to agree on a draft different from the one adopted in either of the chambers. Art. 169. Bills rejected in the sessions of one year shall not be presented again except in those of the following: Special Paragraph: Bills which may remain pending in the ordinary sessions of the chambers shall continue being discussed in immediately following extraordinary sessions when declared urgent by the National Congress, by means of vote of two-thirds part of its members. Likewise, the chamber where they were being discussed can continue discussion on them in ordinary sessions of the following year, upon agreement to do so by the majority provided in this article. Art. 170. The following clause shall always precede the body of the laws: "The Congress of the United States of Venezuela Decrees." Art. 171. The ministers of state shall have the right to take part in the discussion of laws, without the right to vote. Likewise, the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice have a voice in the discussion of procedural laws and in those relative to the organization of the Judicial Power. Art. 172. Once approved, the legislative acts shall be drawn in duplicate as they remain written in the discussions, without making any modifications or alterations of the text. Both copies shall be signed by the president, the vice-president, and the secretaries of Congress and shall bear the date of final approval of the act. One of the said copies shall be sent to the President of the Republic by the president of Congress in order that he may promulgate the legislative act. Art. 173. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the legislative acts within ten days following their receipt, but in the same period he can recommend reconsideration by Congress, and request that their approval be reviewed or modified for technical reasons or national expediency, which he shall reduce to writing, directed to the president of the same. When the President of the Republic requests that approval of a legislative act be reviewed, Congress shall decide on his request in a single discussion and by majority vote, and, in the event that he only recommends changes in the text of the same, the proposed modifications and the articles related thereto shall receive two discussions in each chamber, in

compliance with the procedure established in the previous articles. In either case, the President of the Republic shall comply with the decision of Congress and shall promulgate the legislative act returned by the chambers within the following five days. Without prejudice to the responsibility which the President of the Republic incurs by his omission, the president of Congress shall order the promulgation of the legislative acts when the President of the Republic does not do so within the periods provided by this clause. Art. 174. When the ten days provided in the foregoing article expire after the session periods of the chambers are terminated, the President of the Republic shall have the right to solicit the extension to which Article 157 refers in order to exercise the right which is conferred on him in the first of the cited clauses. Art. 175. The promulgation of the legislative acts shall be by means of their publication, with the corresponding order of execution, in the official gazette of the United States of Venezuela. In case of apparent discrepancy between the original and the legal print, it shall be published again, as corrected, in the cited official publication. Art. 176. The law shall go into effect on the date provided therein, and, in the event it lacks such provision, from the date of its publication in the official gazette of the United States of Venezuela. Art. 177. The laws can only be revoked by other laws and can be amended in whole or in part. Art. 178. The partial amendment of a law having been initiated, the amendment of another or other articles shall not be proposed and considered after the first discussion unless the chamber studying the amendment decides to substitute for the bill another broader one, which shall be considered anew. Art. 179. Both chambers having approved the partial amendment, the amended law shall be printed in full in a single text, the amended articles being substituted by the newly approved ones and the numbering being corrected in case of addition or omission of articles. The amended law shall revoke the prior law in its entirety, shall bear the date on which the amendment was approved, and shall be signed by the officials who authorized it in accordance with Article 172 of this Constitution and shall stipulate the numbers of the amended articles. Art. 180. The right of legislating, which belongs to Congress, cannot be delegated. Art. 181. No legislative provision shall have retroactive effect, except when it imposes a lesser penalty. Laws of procedure shall be applied from the moment they go into effect, even in the proceedings that are in progress; but, in such case, if the trial is criminal, the proofs already offered shall be considered, in so far as they benefit the accused, in accordance with the law in force when they were offered. Eighth Section Of the Permanent Commission of the National Congress Art. 182. During recess of the legislative chambers, the permanent commission of the National Qongress, which shall be elected each year within the last fifteen days of the ordinary sessions of the chambers, shall function.

The said commission shall be composed of the president, vice-president, and twenty-one members of the National Congress, who, with their corresponding alternates, shall be elected by it in the manner and under the conditions which the law may establish, to the end of guaranteeing proportional representation of minorities. The president and vice-president of the National Congress shall exercise the duties of president and vice-president of the permanent commission. Art. 183. The members of the permanent commission shall cease in their duties when the chambers assemble anew in ordinary sessions, but they can be re-elected. Art. 184. The duties of the permanent commission of the National Congress are: (1) To watch over the observance of the Constitution and respect of citizenship guarantees, without invading the jurisdiction of the judicial power, and to denounce before the President of the Republic irregularities which it may observe, to the end that they may be corrected; (2) To report to the legislative chambers concerning irregularities which it may observe in the investment of the accounts of the budget of public expenditures and in the general administration proceeding; (3) To review the proposed bills which remain pending in the sessions of the year and to report to the chambers concerning those which in its judgment should continue in discussion in the sessions immediately following; (4) To prepare proposed bills and initiate them in either of the chambers on the first opportunity, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 166 of this Constitution; (5) To take cognizance of the cases that may affect immunity of the members of Congress, and to report its decisions to the respective chamber within the first ten days of the immediately following sessions; (6) To convoke Congress to extraordinary sessions when the urgency of some matter demands it, in compliance with the provisions of Article 158 of this Constitution; (7) To collaborate with the national executive in the preparation of the proposed bill for general budget of public income and expenditures and to report on it to the chambers when its discussion is commenced; (8) To authorize the national executive to create and endow new public services and to decree additional credits to the budget of public expenses; (9) To authorize the President of the Republic to leave the national territory temporarily accompanied by the other members of the executive power whom he may designate; (10) To give its opinion when this Constitution or the laws demand it, or on request of the national executive, in matters within its jurisdiction; (11) To prescribe its internal regulations and rules of debate; and (12) Others that this Constitution and the laws may grant it. Art. 185. The permanent commission shall be installed with at least two-thirds part of its members within twenty days following termination of the ordinary sessions of the chambers; it shall function with an absolute majority of them, and its decisions shall be taken by vote of the majority of those present, except in cases where this Constitution or the regulations of the said commission may establish a special majority. The commission shall have at its service the subordinate personnel which it may need to carry out its duties. Art. 186. The members of the permanent commission shall make a detailed annual report of its activities to the National Congress on the first opportunity which it provides.

CHAPTER IV
OF THE NATIONAL EXECUTIVE POWER

499

First Section Of the National Government and Administration Art. 187. Everything pertaining to the government and the national administration, not granted to another authority by this Constitution, is within the jurisdiction of the President of the Republic in union with the ministers of state. Art. 188. The national executive power shall exercise its duties in the capital of the Republic, not being able to do so in any other place except in the cases provided by sections 18, subdivision (b), and 31 of Article 198 of this Constitution. Art. 189. The national executive power shall exercise the administration entrusted to it by legal means and the employees of its dependencies. Second Section Of the President of the Republic Art. 190. The President of the Republic is the representative of the Nation and the chief of the national executive power. Art. 191. Any Venezuelan by birth who, in addition to the conditions provided in Article 82 of this Constitution, is of secular status and over thirty years of age, can be elected President of the Republic. Art. 192. The President of the Republic shall be elected by universal, direct, and secret ballot 1 at least three months prior to the nineteenth of April of the year in which each constitutional period commences, and on the date that the National Congress determines in its ordinary sessions of the immediately preceding year. The citizen who may have obtained the relative majority of votes shall be proclaimed elected. Art. 193. The President of the Republic shall not be re-elected for the constitutional period immediately following. Nor shall there be elected for the same period anyone who may have occupied the presidency for all of the last year of the preceding constitutional period, nor the relatives of either up to the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity. Art. 194. On the nineteenth of April of the year in which the new constitutional period commences, the outgoing President shall resign his powers to the President-elect, immediately after he shall have taken the oath of office before the National Congress. If for any reason the President-elect cannot take the oath before the National Congress, he shall do so before the Supreme Court of Justice. When the President-elect cannot take office on the date indicated in this Article, the outgoing President shall resign his powers before the president of the Supreme Court of Justice, who will then exercise them as acting head of the national executive power until the President-elect can enter upon the exercise of his duties. Art. 195. In the permanent absence of the President of the Republic, the president of the National Congress will substitute, and, in his absence, the vice-president of the same. When for any reason none of the said officials can take the said office, the president of the Supreme Court of Justice will do so. In these cases, Under Article 100 of 1936 Constitution, election is by the Chambers in joint session.

the provisional acting head of the executive power shall immediately request convocation of Congress to extraordinary sessions in order that within thirty days following the convocation, it may order the election of a new President of the Republic in compliance with the provisions of Article 192 of this Constitution, if the absence occurs during the first half of the constitutional period, or elect someone to fill the presidential vacancy, if the absence occurs during the second half of the constitutional period referred to. When action is taken to call elections, Congress shall elect the citizen who shall be in charge of the executive power until the new President of the Republic takes office. Art. 196. In temporary'absences of the President of the Republic, the minister whom he may designate shall substitute. The latter shall request the permanent commission immediately to convoke Congress to extraordinary sessions if the absence is prolonged more than ninety days. Having assembled, the National Congress shall decide whether to continue the provisional status and shall elect an acting head of the presidency, or, if appropriate, shall elect a new President in compliance with the provisions of the preceding Article. Art. 197. Neither the President nor anyone acting in his place shall be able to leave the national territory without authorization of Congress or the permanent commission of the same, until the expiration of six months following cessation of his duties. Third Section Of the Attributes and Duties of the President of the Republic The attributes and duties of the President of the Republic

Art. 198. are:

1) To execute and enforce this Constitution and the laws of the Republic; (2) To represent the Nation in its relations with other nations, to name diplomatic and consular agents of the Republic, and to receive the diplomatic representatives of other states; (3) To direct, by means of the corresponding ministry, the foreign relations of the Republic and the diplomatic negotiations and to enter into treaties, contracts, and agreements with other nations through the plenipotentiaries whom he may designate in council of ministers; (4) With the approval of the permanent commission of Congress and the council of ministers, to adhere to multilateral treaties which may interest the Republic, and to execute, in the name of Venezuela, through the plenipotentiaries whom he may designate, those treaties in the discussion of which he has participated; (5) To submit the international treaties, contracts, and agreements requiring it to the legislative chambers for approval, to ratify, exchange, settle, and put them into effect as circumstances require; (6) To negotiate, by means of the respective minister, with the approval of the council of ministers, loans which Congress may decree, in full compliance with its provisions; (7) To adopt measures necessary for the defense of the Republic, the integrity of its territory, and sovereignty in case of international emergency, and to carry out, when he may be required to do so, the obligations which may result from the pacts to which it may be a party, for the common security and defense. In these cases, he shall urgently request convocation of Congress to extraordinary sessions, if it is not in assembly, and shall advise it of all that has happened and propose measures which he may consider necessary; (8) To prohibit the entrance of foreigners into the national territory or to expel them in cases provided by the Constitution and the laws of the Republic or permitted by international law; (9) To promulgate the Constitution and laws. The time in which a law approving an international treaty or contract should be promulgated is within the discretion of the national executive in conformance with international usage and convenience of the Republic; (10) To regulate the laws without altering their spirit, purpose, or reason, in council of ministers, and to amend or change, wholly or partially, the regulations of the same. In any case, the new regulations shall be published fully with the respective revocation of the former; (11) With approval of the council of ministers, to request the permanent commission to convoke the National Congress to extraordinary sessions when the gravity of some matter demands it; (12) To decree, in council of ministers, the creation and endowment of new public services which may be necessary during recess of the legislative chambers, or the modification or revocation of those in existence, on prior authorization of the permanent commission of Congress; (13) To decree, in council of ministers and on prior authorization of the National Congress or the permanent commission of the same, additional credits to the budget of public expenditures when it may be necessary due to insufficiency of funds provided in the respective chapter of the law of general budget and public income and expenditures, or due to failure to have foreseen the expenditure, and provided always that there are funds in the national treasury with which to cover the additional credit without prejudice to the ordinary expenses, which shall have preference over extraordinary ones. The minister of finance shall accompany the request for authority with an explanation of how the said credit is to be invested; (14) To execute, by means of the respective minister or ministers, and with approval of the council of ministers, the contracts of national interest permitted by the Constitution and the laws, and to submit them to the consideration of the National Congress, or the permanent commission of the same in emergency cases during recess of the legislative chambers, except as provided in section 8 of Article 162 of this Constitution. In any case, the National Congress shall be advised of such contracts in its next ordinary sessions; (15) To fix the number of the armed forces of the Republic and to exercise supreme hierarchical authority over them, in compliance with Article 102 of this Constitution; (16) To direct military operations in case of international emergency or to designate the person who should represent the Republic in command of the combined forces when they may have to co-operate with other nations; (17) To offer his services for the purpose of putting an end to an armed conflict between two or more states of the Republic or to utilize public force when his peaceful intervention is ineffective; (18) To decree restriction or suspension of guarantees in the cases provided for in Article 76 of this Constitution, and in case of disturbance of the internal peace of the Republic or armed international conflict, he shall, in addition, for their duration, have power: (a) To request and authorize necessary aid to the states for the defense of the Nation or its institutions; (b) To fix the place where all or part of the powers of the Republic may have to be moved temporarily, when urgent necessity for doing so exists; (c) To order trial of the Venezuelans and foreigners who, in case of international emergency, may be hostile to the interests of Venezuela;

(d) To reorganize the states which may have been overthrown by rebelling forces or whose governments may participate in the rebel(e) To order that the national merchant vessels be armed for their defense in case of necessity; (f) To incorporate into the national navy the national merchant vessels or foreign ones which may be in ports of the Republic and which may be necessary for defense, and to provide personnel, distinctive markings, and required military equipment. In those cases, there shall be provided the means of indemnifying the losses which the owners may suffer; (g) To authorize any other measures of a military nature permitted by international law; (19) To appoint and remove the ministers of state; (20) To administer the federal territories and dependencies, in compliance with their organic laws; (21) To exercise, according to law, the highest civil and political authority of the federal district, by means of a governor; (22) To appoint and remove the governor of the federal district, and, by means of the minister having jurisdiction, in compliance with the statutes on administrative careers, the other national employees whose designation is not granted to another official; (23) To administer, by means of the respective minister, the public income of the Nation, in accordance with this Constitution and the laws; (24) To cause titles to gratuitous adjudication, sale or lease of public lands, and the titles to mining concessions to be issued by the respective minister, in accordance with the laws; (25) To cause navigation permits to national vessels to be issued by the appropriate minister, as provided by law; (26) To cause letters of naturalization to be issued by the respective minister, in accordance with the law; (27) To decree, in council of ministers, the measures necessary to carry out the census of the Republic at such time as the law or its regulations may indicate, and thereafter to submit it to the approval of Congress; (28) To order, by means of the competent minister and with the approval of the council of ministers, that the national public ministry make complaints against the employees who may give reason therefor; (29) To grant pardons; (30) To exercise, on the terms which Congress may prescribe, the extraordinary duties to which section 9 of Article 162 of this Constitution refers; (31) To declare himself, with all or some of the ministers of state, on official visit to any state or states of the Republic or federal territory which the declaration may indicate. During official visit the seat of the national executive power shall be the place where the President may be. In the same decree in which the visit is ordered, everything pertaining to current administrative functions of office in Caracas shall be regulated; (32) To appoint the minister of state who shall replace him in case of temporary absence; (33) Others which this Constitution and the laws accord him. Art. 199. The President of the Republic shall, personally or by means of one of the ministers, present to the National Congress each year, within the first ten days of its ordinary sessions, a concise message containing the general lines of political administrative conduct which have been carried out during the year, and shall point out the projects of his government in the said plan of administration.

In the last year of the presidential period, the message shall be presented on the date of installation of the legislative chambers. Art. 200. The President of the Republic is absolutely responsible, along with the ministers of state, for the acts of his administration, in addition to the personal responsibility which attaches to him for treason to the country and for common violations of the law. Fourth Section Of the Ministers of State Art. 201. The President of the Republic shall carry out his duties by means of the ministers provided by law, which shall determine their functions and duties, and shall organize their offices. Art. 202. In order to be a minister of state it is required that one be Venezuelan by birth, over thirty years of age, of secular status, and possessed of his civil and political rights. Art. 203. The ministers are the legal agents of the President of the Republic, in view of which he shall supervise their activity, in accordance with their respective jurisdictions, and they shall execute his resolutions within the limits of their authority. Special Paragraph: A written order of the President of the Republic does not excuse the ministers from personal responsibility which they may incur in exceeding their authority. Art. 204. In addition to the duties which attach to them as agents of the President of the Republic, the ministers have those which they derive from their positions as members of the council of ministers, in which they collaborate with him in the functions of government and the national administration. The law shall provide the norms relative to the organization and operation of the council of ministers. Art. 205. The council of ministers shall meet when this Constitution or the laws require it, or when the President of the Republic convokes it for the purpose of taking cognizance of some matter which, in his judgment, should be submitted to their consideration. Art. 206. With respect to the resolutions adopted in council of ministers, the President of the Republic and the ministers who may not have recorded their adverse or negative vote in the manner which the law on the matter may establish, shall be responsible. Art. 207. Each minister shall submit an annual report to Congress, within the first ten days of its sessions, in a rationalized and documented memorandum, of that done by his office and of that which he may consider advisable to be done in his respective branch. He shall likewise present an account of the funds which he may have managed. In the last year of the Constitutional period, the ministers shall present the memoranda and accounts on the day fixed for the installation of the legislative chambers, and if they shall not yet have been installed, they shall present them to the permanent commission of Congress in order that it may refer them to the body when it assembles. Art. 208. The minister of finance, within the first five days of the installation of the legislative chambers, shall present to the deputies, along with the corresponding explanation of reasons and the specification of the global accounts, not including those whose publication may prejudice the security of the State and the national interest, the project of law of the

general budget of public income and expenditures, which he shall explain fully in consultation with the ministers of state and with the co-operation of the permanent commission of Congress. The chambers are free to modify the said project; but they shall not accord increases to its accounts except by vote of two-thirds part of their members. Along with the project, the federal executive shall likewise present, by means of the minister of finance, the administrative plan in accordance with which the investments provided for shall be carried out. Art. 209. The ministers have the right of voice in the chambers and in the permanent commission of Congress, and they shall be required to attend them when they may be called to report, or to answer summons which may be issued to them. Art. 210. The ministers are penally and civilly responsible for the illegal acts they may commit.
CHAPTER V OF THE JUDICIAL POWER

First Section General Provisions Art. 211. The judicial power of the Republic is independent of the other public powers and is made up of a Supreme Court of Justice and other courts which the laws may establish. Art. 212. The law shall determine the organization, jurisdiction, and duties of the courts which may be necessary for the administration of justice, as well also as the manner of designating their members and that relating to the establishment of a judicial career, in so far as it is not covered in this Constitution. Art. 213. The law may establish a supreme council of judges with representatives of the legislative, executive, and judicial powers, to the end of insuring the independence, efficiency, and discipline of the judicial power and the effectiveness of the benefits of the administrative career in the same. In the same manner, it shall determine the number and manner of election of the said representatives, and the authority which, within the limits of its jurisdiction, the cited agency requires. Art. 214. The authorities of the Republic are under the obligation of furnishing the judicial officials the assistance which they may require for the purpose of carrying out their decisions. Art. 215. The officials of the judicial power are responsible in accordance with the law. Art. 216. The judges shall not be removed during the respective constitutional period, except by means of a final judicial decision, and in the cases provided by the law. Art. 217. Judiqial positions are a bar to the practice of law and are incompatible with any other remunerated public post, except academic, professorial offices, memberships on technical commissions, or drafters of laws or similar instruments, memberships on international courts and representation of the Nation in conventions or international meetings of a technical character.

Second Section Of the Supreme Court of Justice Art. 218. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of ten judges, lawyers of the Republic who shall meet the same conditions required for being President of the Republic. Special Paragraph: The National Congress, on proposal of the Supreme Court of Justice, can, by special law, increase the number of judges. Art. 219. Within the first fifteen days of the ordinary sessions of the year in which each constitutional period commences, the National Congress shall, separately and by absolute majority of votes, elect the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice. In the same session and in the same manner it shall elect ten alternates, who, in the order of their election, shall fill the permanent absences of the principals. The temporary absences and those resulting from special circumstances in any matter shall be filled by the said court in accordance with the law. When a permanent absence of one or several alternates occurs, Congress shall elect those that may be necessary, who shall occupy the vacant posts. Art. 220. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be divided into autonomous courts of justice, which shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the matters of their respective competence and they shall function with the number of judges that the law may determine. The Supreme Court of Justice shall have the following duties: (1) To take cognizance of accusations against the President of the Republic or the person who is acting in his place, the ministers of state, the attorney general of the Nation, the solicitor general of the Nation, the comptroller general of the Nation, the governors, its own members and other high officials that the laws may indicate, in the cases in which said officials may incur criminal responsibility; (2) To take cognizance of criminal cases which may be brought against diplomatic agents, for acts done in the public service. Responsibility for other acts shall be made effective before the courts and by means of ordinary judicial proceedings; (3) To take cognizance of the recourse of cassation and other matters whose decision the law attributes to it. On deciding that there are grounds for recourse to cassation for violation of law, the court shall decide in full concerning the appealed sentence; (4) To take cognizance on appeal of cases of seizure; (5) To settle the controversies of whatever nature that may arise, reciprocally, between the national power, the states, and municipalities, or between their legal agencies, in the cases in which such authority is not attributed by law to some other body. (6) To settle jurisdictional conflicts which may arise between two or more courts of the Republic, provided always that the law does not indicate some other authority; (7) To declare the nullity of national laws, state laws, or municipal ordinances, when they violate the Constitution of the Republic. The nullity shall be limited to the paragraph, article, or articles in which the violation appears, except where they are of such importance, by reason of their relation to the remainder, that, in the judgment of the court, their nullity causes the nullity of the entire law; (8) To decide which law shall prevail when the national laws are found in conflict, either among themselves or with those of the states, and to decide at the same time which article or articles of a law must prevail when a conflict exists between its provisions;

(9) To declare the nullity of the acts of the legislative chambers, of the legislative assemblies, of the municipal councils, of the national executive power, or of the states, and of the governors of the federal district or of the federal territories, which violate this Constitution. The court shall likewise declare the nullity of those acts to which reference is made in Articles 84 and 87 of this Constitution when no other agency is authorized by law to do so. The action to nullify an administrative act for illegality or abuse of power is barred after thirteen months, provided always that no constitutional provision has been violated by the said act. The illegality of the said act can always be opposed as an exception. If the act challenged for nullity is a ministerial resolution, the court shall not decide except in accordance with the procedure established in the following paragraph; (10) To take cognizance, in a contested administrative proceeding, of all the questions which may arise between the Nation and others, as a result or because of contracts executed by the national executive on mining concessions or on public lands, except those points which by reason of the law existing at the time of execution of the contract, of the issuance of the concession, or of the refusal to grant it, are subject to the decision of the national executive without judicial recourse; (11) To order the execution of foreign sentences, when in accordance with law; (12) To take cognizance in contested administrative proceedings of suits filed against the Nation for losses and damages and of all other suits that may be brought against it for sums of money; (13) Others which this Constitution and the laws may provide in matters of national jurisdiction. Art. 221. In the cases provided in the first section of the preceding Article, the court shall make a summary finding as to whether or not there are grounds for filing suit, in view of the documents introduced and those which may have been officially executed. If it should declare the former, the accused official shall be suspended from carrying on his position while the trial lasts. If it should declare the latter, the proceedings shall terminate. When the violation is of an ordinary nature, the proceedingq shall be passed to the ordinary competent court, and when it is of a political nature, the court shall continue to take jurisdiction until final sentence. Art. 222. The Supreme Court of Justice shall present a memorandum each year to the National Congress covering its work and shall point out the reforms which, in its judgment, should be introduced for legislation.
CHAPTER VI

Of the Public Ministry Art. 223. The public ministry shall be in charge of the attorney general of the Nation and the auxiliary agents which the law may provide. Art. 224. The attorney general of the Nation shall be Venezuelan by birth, of secular status, over thirty years of age, a lawyer of the Republic, and shall possess his civil and political rights. The attorney general of the Nation shall be elected by the National Congress in the first thirty days of sessions of the year in which the respective constitutional period commences, and shall continue in his duties for the entire period. For the purpose of substitution during his temporary or permanent absences, the Congress, in the same act in which it makes its appointment, shall likewise elect five numbered alternates who

fulfill the same conditions required for the attorney general, and they shall be called by the national executive in the order of their election to occupy the vacant post. Art. 225. It is the responsibility of the public ministry to see that the courts of the Republic justly apply the laws in criminal proceedings and in all those in which the national treasury, public order, or good customs are interested and in general for the good progress of the administration of justice. Art. 226. The duties of the attorney general of the Nation are: (1) To propose, either personally or by means of his subordinate officials, on his own motion or at the request of the national executive, complaints against national employees who may give reason for being tried; (2) To represent the public ministry before the Supreme Court of Justice in the cases to which reference is made in sections 1 and 2 of Article 220 of this Constitution; (3) Others that this Constitution and the laws may provide. Art. 227. The attorney general of the Nation and the person who may be acting in his place are responsible in accordance with the law. Chapter VII Of the Solicitor General of the Nation Art. 228. The solicitor general of the Nation shall be Venezuelan by birth, of secular status, over thirty years of age, a lawyer of the Republic, and shall possess his civil and political rights. The solicitor general of the Nation shall be elected by the National Congress in the first thirty days of its sessions of the year in which the respective constitutional period commences and shall continue in his duties for the entire period. For the purpose of substituting him during his temporary or permanent absences, the Congress, in the same act in which it makes its appointment, shall likewise elect five numbered alternates who fulfill the same conditions required for the solicitor general, and they shall be called by the national executive in the order of their election to occupy the vacant post. Art. 229. The duties of the solicitor general of the Nation are: (1) To represent and support either personally or by means of his subordinate officials the rights of the Nation in all cases to which it may be a party in accordance with the laws and the instructions which the national executive may issue to him; (2) To furnish juridical reports which may be requested of him by the President of the Republic, the ministers of state, the legislative chambers and the Supreme Court of Justice; (3) Others that this Constitution and the laws may provide. Art. 230. The solicitor general of the Nation and the person who may be acting in his place are responsible in the same manner as the ministers of state.
CHAPTER VIII
OF THE NATIONAL PUBLIC TREASURY

First Section General Provisions Art. 231. The national treasury includes the properties, income, and debts which form the assets and liabilities of the Nation and all other
properties and income the administration of which attaches to the national power. The supreme direction and administration of the national treasury are within the jurisdiction of the federal executive power which shall exercise it by means of its legal agencies in accordance with this Constitution and the laws. Art. 232. The national finance system shall be organized and shall function on the basis of justice and equality of taxation to the end of providing distribution of taxation and progressive contributions proportionate to the economic capacity of the contributor, improvement of the social level and purchasing power of the consumer, and the protection and development of national production. Exoneration shall be granted only in the cases where the law permits it. Art. 233. No tax or contribution shall be assessed which is not authorized by law, nor shall any expenditure be made from the national treasury for which a sum has not been provided in the law of general budget of public income and expenditures, unless, prior to making the expenditure, an additional credit is allowed by means of executive decree. Those who violate this provision shall be civilly responsible for the sums the payment of which has been effected or ordered. Art. 234. No tax payable in personal services shall be established nor shall there be taxed the natural products of agriculture or breeding prior to being offered for consumption. Art. 235. No tax shall be assessed on navigation of rivers or other navigable waters which have not required special projects for it. Art. 236. No tax or contribution shall go into effect or be increased or decreased until after termination of the period which shall be provided in each case. This provision does not limit the extraordinary powers which are granted to the executive power in the cases established by this Constitution. Art. 237. Except for the expenses which are included in the law of the budget, Congress shall not order any others either by special laws or agreements. Art. 238. In the general budget of public income and expenditures of the Nation there shall be included annually an item equivalent to at least twenty-five per cent of the total revenue from income, taking as a basis for each economic year the total of the said revenue in the civil year immediately preceding; the said item shall be distributed among the states, federal district, and federal territories in the following manner: thirty per cent of the said percentage, in equal parts and the seventy per cent remaining, in proportion to the population of each one of the cited entities. Of the part which belongs to each state in the constitutional allowance, at least twenty per cent shall be earmarked for distribution among the municipal districts in the same manner established in this Article for the distribution of the allowance between the federal entities. The law shall determine whatever may be necessary for the co-ordination of the budgets of the states, the federal district, and the federal territories with the budget of the Nation with respect to matters which, by their nature, must conform to a uniform plan; and, at the same time, shall determine how the national government shall orient and control the

investment of the allowance by the regional governments and the municipalities, there being excepted, however, the provisions of Article 247 of this Constitution. Art. 239. It shall be provided by special laws that certain official, scientific, professional, financial, or industrial institutes may have juridical personality and their own funds distinctly and independently from the national treasury. During recess of the legislative chambers, the mentioned institutes shall be created by means of organic decrees on prior authorization of the permanent commission of the National Congress. The said institutes shall annually submit their respective budgets and a report of their expenditures in the immediately preceding year to the National Congress, or to the authority designated in the act of their creation. Art. 240. The national executive shall not contract any loan except by virtue of express authorization which the National Congress may grant in order to meet urgent necessities and projects of public necessity. Second Section Of the Comptroller General of the Nation Art. 241. The auditing of all the income and expenditures of the national treasury, as well as the centralization, examination, and control of all of the financial accounts and operations of national properties, including money, valuables, materials, and effects acquired or administered by national offices or by autonomous institutes, shall be the responsibility of an autonomous agency known as "office of the comptroller general of the Nation," without prejudice to the auditing which the executive power may carry out directly through its subordinate agencies. Art. .242. It is within the jurisdiction of the office of the comptroller general of the Nation, in addition to the duties which the law designates to it, to denounce before the proper party any irregularities which it may observe in the management of public funds. To this end the comptroller shall either personally, or by means of his employees, make any type of investigation in the departments and offices subject to his auditing, the officials or employees in charge of them being required to make available to them, on their summons, the data or information necessary. Art. 243. The office of the comptroller shall be under the supervision of an official who shall be called comptroller general of the Nation and shall be organized and operated in accordance with the law. Art. 244. In the year in which each constitutional period commences and within the first thirty days following its installation, the National Congress shall elect the comptroller general of the Nation and an assistant comptroller, who shall act as assistant and substitute during permanent and temporary absences. In the same act, the Congress shall elect three alternates who shall fill the absences of the assistant comptroller in accordance with the law. Art. 245. The comptroller and the assistant comptroller shall fulfill the same conditions required for being President of the Republic; shall continue in their duties during all of the constitutional period, and shall be civilly and criminally responsible for the illegal acts which they may commit. Art. 246. In the examination and approval or disapproval of the ministerial and autonomous institute accounts, the office of the comptroller general of the Nation shall be the assistant of the National Congress and shall annually present to it an itemized report of the expenditures corresponding to the year of the account and others which may be expressly demanded of it. Art. 247. The auditing and control which correspond to the comptroller general of the Nation may be made to extend to the state or municipal administrations by means of special law. TITLE IX OF CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT Art. 248. This Constitution shall be amended in whole or in part on the initiative of the legislative assemblies or the National Congress in either of its chambers. Art. 249. When the proposal is made in the legislative assemblies, the National Congress shall order it in accordance with law if two-thirds part of it, assembled in ordinary sessions, have considered the amendment necessary or expedient by means of agreements approved in each assembly by the absolute majority of all of their members. Having ordered the proposal to be in accordance with the law, the chambers shall discuss the amendment by the system established in this Constitution for the discussion of ordinary laws. Having agreed to amendments or additions, the president of the Congress shall submit them to the legislative assemblies for their ratification which shall be done by the same procedure provided for the proposal. Art. 250. When the proposal is made in either of the chambers of Congress, it must be proposed by a one-fourth part of all of its members, following the system established in this Constitution for the discussion of ordinary laws. Having agreed to amendments or additions, the president of the Congress shall submit them to the legislative assemblies in their ordinary sessions of the following year for their ratification, which shall be considered valid when it has been approved by two-thirds majority of them in their ordinary sessions and by means of vote of the absolute majority of all of the members of each assembly. Art. 251. Neither amendments nor additions shall be made except on the points to which the above mentioned majority of the legislative assemblies agree. Art. 252. In any case, the final vote of the legislative assemblies shall be returned to Congress for its final study, after which, if it appears that the amendments or reforms have been legally ratified by the legislative chambers, the Constitution thus amended or reformed shall go into effect the same day of its publication in the Official Gazette of the United States of Venezuela. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS FIRST: The mandate of the National Assembly as the constitutional power shall continue in force until it declares itself in recess. When the Assembly decides to declare itself in recess, then it shall designate from its body a permanent commission, composed of a president, two vice-presidents and twenty-two additional members, elected by secret ballot, from the lists which the different political groups may
present, in a manner which will permit proportional representation of them in the said commission. In the same manner, an equal number of alternates shall be designated for the principals. The permanent commission shall have the same duties as the permanent commission of the National Congress in so far as they may be applicable and shall cease in its functions upon the installation of the legislative chambers which may be elected in accordance with this Constitution. Until the said chambers shall have been installed, the Assembly shall meet anew, with functions of the legislative power, when it is convoked for this purpose by the agency and within the provisions to which Article 158 of this Constitution refers. SECOND: The President of the Republic, the members of the National Congress and those of the legislative assemblies shall be elected simultaneously within ninety days following the promulgation of the electoral statute which this Assembly must approve and on the date the supreme electoral agency shall fix. The legislative chambers shall be installed in ordinary sessions thirty days after the general proclamation of the candidates elected in order to comply with the provision of section 2 of Article 165 of this Constitution and to consider the matters which may have been submitted to them in accordance with the provisions of Article 158 of the same. The legislative assemblies shall be installed the first of January, 1948, or on the nearest possible date thereafter, to prepare the constitution and fundamental laws of the states, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 128 of this Constitution. THIRD: The municipal councils of the federal district and the federal territories shall be elected and shall be installed at the same time provided for the legislative assemblies. FOURTH: Within ten days following the installation of the legislative assemblies of the states and of the municipal councils of the federal district and federal territories, the respective governors shall present to them for their examination and decision a detailed memorandum of the acts of the government and an itemized account of the administration corresponding to the period between October 18, 1945, and December 15, 1947. FIFTH: To make up the legislative assemblies, the electors of each state shall elect, at this time, twelve principal deputies and their alternates when their population does not exceed one hundred thousand inhabitants; and when the population is greater, they shall elect one deputy more for each excess of twenty-five thousand inhabitants or fraction thereof in excess of ten thousand. If on the date of election of the municipal councils the respective organic laws have not yet been promulgated, in each district of the states of the Republic there shall be elected, in compliance with the Third Transitory Provision, five principal councillors and their respective alternates, when the population does not exceed thirty thousand inhabitants; and when their population is greater, they shall elect one councillor more for each excess of fifteen thousand inhabitants or fraction thereof in excess of ten thousand. This provision, in so far as it may be applicable, shall be extended to the municipal power of the federal territories. Sole Paragraph: Until such time as the law organizes the municipal power in the federal district, the municipal council shall be composed of
twenty-two councillors and their alternates elected in accordance with the electoral law. SIXTH: The legislative assemblies and the municipal councillors to which reference is made in the preceding provision shall continue in their duties until June 1, 1950. SEVENTH: A national plebiscite, which shall be taken within two years from the date of promulgation of this Constitution and at the time which the National Congress may fix, shall decide whether the governors of the states shall be selected and removed freely by the President of the Republic in council of ministers, or whether they shall be elected by universal, direct, and secret ballot. The procedure decided upon by this consultation shall be considered incorporated as a title of this Constitution. Until such time as this plebiscite is held, the governors shall be selected and removed freely by the President of the Republic in council of ministers, without prejudice to the provisions of section 2 of Article 131 of this Constitution. EIGHTH: The mandate of the officials of the national public power elected in compliance with this Constitution and the electoral statute for the period immediately following, shall begin to be in force from the moment in which they take the oath of office, but they shall necessarily terminate the nineteenth of April, 1952. NINTH: By special decree, the Assembly shall decide on the location of the executive power which must act until the date on which the President of the Republic who may be elected in accordance with this Constitution takes office. TENTH: The functions of the attorney general of the Nation shall be exercised by the solicitor general of the Nation until such time as the laws which set forth their respective functions are promulgated. ELEVENTH: Until such time as the Congress, in ordinary sessions, provides for the office of solicitor general of the Nation in accordance with the sole paragraph of Article 228 of this Constitution, the said office shall be occupied by the citizen whom the Assembly may elect prior to terminating its sessions. In the same act the respective alternates shall be designated. TWELFTH: Before declaring itself in recess; the Assembly shall elect in the manner provided in Article 219 of this Constitution the Supreme Court of Justice of the Republic, which shall act until the next Congress in its ordinary sessions carries out the final election for the remainder of the constitutional period. Until such time as the legislation to which Article 212 hereof refers is promulgated, the judicial power of the Republic shall continue functioning in accordance with the laws which organize its duties; but the election of the judges shall be regulated by the following norms: (a) The National Constitutional Assembly, or in lieu thereof the permanent commission, shall draw up the respective lists of candidates, in triple the number of the officials to be elected, for members of the Supreme Court and courts of superior judges of the states and the federal district and for judges of first instance of these entities and the federal territories. Within five days following, the federal executive shall appoint the officials of the respective tribunals in council of ministers. The remaining candidates shall remain as alternates in the order of their election.

In like manner, the public defenders of prisoners, the auditors of the public ministry and the members of the special courts shall be elected. (b) Within five days following their installation, the supreme courts of the states and the federal district and the judges of first instance of the federal territories shall draw up corresponding triads for judges of instruction of district or department and of municipality, parish or department. Within five days following their receipt, the regional executives shall designate the respective judges from such lists. The other candidates shall remain as alternates in the order of their election. In the preceding cases, the actual territorial jurisdictional organization shall be complied with. THIRTEENTH: In the election of the provisional comptroller general, and assistant comptroller and their respective alternates, the procedure followed in Provision Eleventh for filling the office of provisional solicitor shall be adopted. FOURTEENTH: The norms for distribution of the constitutional allowance established in Article 238 of this Constitution shall be considered in force from the first of July of this year in accordance with the budget which this Assembly shall prepare. From the date referred to, the office of the federal power shall assume the expenditure relative to the administration of justice and the public ministry. FIFTEENTH: Until such time as the law establishes the general jurisdiction, courts of first instance in criminal matters shall have attributed to them jurisdiction of habeas corpus proceedings. Within twenty-four hours following receipt of complaints, the said courts shall request of the officials under whose custody the detained are being held, the reasons for the deprivation of liberty and in the following act, having in mind the results of the inquiry, shall order: (1) Submission to trial, if there is reason therefor; (2) That the corresponding administrative resolution be dictated if the detention is due to cause of this kind, or (3) The immediate liberty of the detained if he does not fall within the preceding cases, without prejudice to the proceeding for which there is cause if the executive officials have incurred criminal responsibility for abuse of their duties. SIXTEENTH: The sealed paper tax shall continue being collected in the states until such time as the fiscal stamp tax law is modified in accordance with this Constitution. SEVENTEENTH: Those persons who have Venezuelan nationality together with another shall be required to elect within a period of five years that which they may finally prefer. After the said period shall have elapsed, without their having complied with this requirement, notwithstanding the notification which will be given them in accordance with the terms which the law may prescribe, it shall be presumed that they prefer Venezuelan nationality. As to the minors, the period stipulated shall commence to run when they reach majority according to Venezuelan law. EIGHTEENTH: During the recess of the National Constitutional Assembly, the provisions of Articles 143 to 146 of this Constitution shall be applicable to its members, but, except for the members of the permanent commission, they shall not earn daily allowances.

NINETEENTH: Until such time as it is modified or implicitly revoked by this Constitution, the existing judicial order shall continue in force. FINAL DISPOSITION Art. 253. The Constitution prescribed the sixteenth-of July, 1936, as amended the twenty-third of April, 1945 and ordered to be complied with by the executive power and published in the Official Gazette of the United States of Venezuela on the twentieth of July, 1936, and the fifth of May, 1945, respectively, is hereby revoked.

