 (April 27, 1904.)

The Constitutional Congress of the United States of Venezuela, in the name of Almighty God and by authority of the people of Venezuela, decrees the following Constitution:
TITLE I.
THE NATION AND ITS TERRITORY.

ARTICLE 1. The territory of the United States of Venezuela is the same which in the year 1810 corresponded to the Captaincy General of Venezuela, with the modifications resulting from subsequent public treaties. ART. 2. The territory of the United States of Venezuela is divided into Federal Districts and Territories, each one with the limits and names established by the respective State laws on territorial division and by the laws organizing the Territories. ART. 3. The Districts constituting the Venezuelan Federation shall be so grouped as to form the States of Aragua, Bermfidez, Bolivar, Carabobo, Falcon, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Tachira, Trujillo, Zamora, and Zulia.

1. The State of Aragua shall consist of the following Districts: Bruzual, Girardot, Marino, RIcaurte, Roscio, San Casimiro, San Sebastian, Urdaneta, and Zamora. The State of Bermudez shall consist of the following Districts:


Acosta, Aragua, Arismendi, Benitez, Bermudez, Bolivar, Bruzual, Cajigal, Cedeño, Freytes, Libertad, Mejias, Monagas, Montes, Penalver, Rivero, Sucre, and Zaraza. The State of Bolivar shall consist of the following Districts: Cedeño, Heres, Independencia, Miranda, Sotillo, Sucre, and Tadeo Monagas. The State of Carabobo shall consist of the following Districts: Bejuma, Falcon,Guacara, Montalban Nirgua, Ocumare, Puerto Cabello, an Valencia. d	 The State of Falcon shall consist of the following Districts: Acosta, Bolivar, Buchivacoa, Colina, Democracia, Falcon, Federation, Miranda, Petit, Urdaneta, and Zamora. The State of Guarico shall consist of the following Districts: Achaguas, Infante, Miranda with the municipality of El Calvario, Mufioz, and San Fernando. The State of Lama shall consist of the following Districts: Barquisimeto, Bruzual, Cabudare, Crespo, Quibor, San Felipe, Silva, Sucre, Tocuyo, Torres, Urachiche, and Yaritagua. The State of Merida shall consist of the following Districts: CampoElias, Libertador, Miranda, Pedraza, Range], Rivas Davila, Sucre, Torondoy, and Tovar. The State of Miranda shall consist of the following Districts: Acevedo, BriOn, Lander, Monagas, Paez, Paz Castillo, Plaza, Urdaneta, and Zamora. Tie State of Tachira shall consist of the following Districts: Ayacucho, Bolivar, Cardenas, Castro, Junin, La Grita, Lobatera, Paez with the municipality of Elorza, San Cristobal, and Uribante. The State of Trujillo shall consist of the following Districts: Betijoque, Bocono, Carache, Escuque, Trujillo, Urdaneta, and Valera.


The State of Zamora shall consist of the following Districts: Acarigua, Anzoftegui, Araure, Arismendi, Barinas, Bolivar, Es- . teller, Girardot, Guanare, Guanarito, Obispos, Ospino, Pao, Ricaurte, Rojas, San Carlos, Sosa, Tinaco, and Turen. The State of Zulia shall consist of the following Districts: Bolivar, Colon, Mara, Maracaibo, Miranda, Nez, Perija, Sucre, and Urdaneta. 2. The controversies pending between the States of Tachira Merida, and Trujillo, and that of 'Zulia and between the State of Aragua and that of Carabobo, as well as any other difference between the States on account of their respective boundaries, shall be decided by the tribunal referred to in article 126 of this Constitution. ART. 4. The Federal Territories, which shall be organized by special laws, are the following: Amazonas, Cristobal ColOn, ColOn, DeltaAmacuro, and Yuruari. Sole paragraph. The Federal Territories shall have the right to ask to be admitted to the rank of States upon proof of the following circumstances: 1. That their population is at least one hundred thousand inhab itants. 2. That they are able to attend to the public service in all its branches and to meet the expenses which it requires.
ART. 5. The Federal District, which shall be organized by a special law, shall consist of the departments of Libertador, Vargas, Guaicaipuro, and Sucre, and the island of Margarita. Sole paragraph. The seat of the Federal Government shall be the Department of Libertador in the Federal District; but the Executive power may establish its temporary residence in any other part of said District when required by any unforeseen circumstance.


ART. 6. The territory of the nation can not be alienated in any way to any foreign power. TITLE II.
BASES OF THE UNION.

ART. 7. The States composing the Venezuelan Union are autonomous and politically equal; they shall preserve in all its plenitude the sovereignty not delegated in this Constitution, and bind themselves: 1. To organize their own Governments, in such a way as to make them popular, elective, Federal,. representative, alternative, and responsible, and to frame their respective Constitutions in accordance with the principles of this fundamental compact. 2. To comply and cause others to comply with the Constitution and laws of the Union and the decrees, orders, and resolutions issued by the National authorities in use of their legal rights and. powers. 3. To acknowledge in their respective Constitutions the municipal autonomy of the Districts, and their independence of the political power of the State, in everything relative to economic and executive matters; and consequently the Districts shall have the power to . establish their own revenue system in accordance with Nos. 10,11,12, and 13 of the Bases of the Union. In case of foreign or civil war the executive power of the States. shall also assume the administration of the Districts under their jurisdiction in revenue and economical matters, with the advice of their legislative assembly, and, if the latter is not in session, with that of its supreme court. 4. To defend themselves against any aggression which may endanger their independence or the integrity of the Nation.


5. Not to alienate any portion of their territory to any foreign power, implore foreign protection, or establish or cultivate political and diplomatic relations with other nations. 6. Not to annex or ally themselves to any other nation or secede from Venezuela. 7. To cede to the Government of the Federation the territory necessary for the erection of forts, wharfs, warehouses, navy-yards, penitentiaries, or any other establishments indispensable for the administration of the General Government. 8. To leave to the Government of the Union the free administration of the Territories of Amazonas, Cristobal Colon, Colon, Delta-Amacuro, and Yuruari; said Territories to have the right of asking to be admitted as States upon fulfillment of the conditions required by article 4 of this Constitution. 9. To reserve to the Federal Government full jurisdiction, legislative as well as executive, in Matters of navigation, whether maritime, coastwise, or fluvial, and of wharfs and national roads; and the navigation of rivers and other waters shall not be subject to the payment of dues or to privileges, except when some special work has been required to expedite said navigation. Roads leading from a State to another, or from a State to the Federal District or to any Federal Territories, shall be national. 10. Not to levy taxes on domestic products intended for exportation. 11. Not to levy taxes upon foreign products already burdened by national duties or exempted by law from duty, or upon cattle, products, effects, or articles of merchandise of any class whatever before being offered for consumption. 12. Not to forbid the consumption of cattle, articles, and other


products of other States, or burden the consumption thereof with heavier or lighter taxes than those levied on similar articles of the locality. 13. Not to establish customhouses for the collection of duties,as all the custom-houses shall be national.	 . 14. To reserve to each State the right to dispose of its natural prod= ucts in the manner established by item 27 of the present article. 15. To give entire faith and. credit to the public acts and judicial proceedings of the other States, the Federal District and the Federal Territories, and cause the same to be complied with and executed. 16. To organize their own tribunals and courts, and cause justice to be administered according to the same substantive legislation in civil, commercial; and criminal matters as well as in matters of procedure. 17. To concur to the organization of the supreme Federal court in the manner provided for by this Constitution. 18. To abide by the decisions of the supreme Federal court as supreme court of the Federation and the States. 19. To adopt the system of di: rect vote for the election of members of the municipal councils, legislative assemblies, and House of Deputies, and that of indirect vote, or vote through delegation, for the election of other officials. The vote shall be secret in both cases and based on the electoral census, according to the Federal law on the subject. 20. To reserve to the Nation the right to legislate on superior public instruction. The Nation as well as the States shall make primary education gratuitous and compulsory. Instruction in arts and trades shall be gratuitous.


21. Not to impose obligations upon national employees, except in the capacity of citizens of the State, and provided that these obligations are not incompatible with the national public service. 22. To furnish the disarmed contingent proport ion ally corresponding to them for the composition of the national public forces as provided by law. 23. Not to permit enlistments, or impressments into military service, to be made in their territories, having for their object an attack on liberty or independence, or a disturbance of the public order of the Nation, or of other States, or of another Nation. 24. Not to engage in war with each other, in any case, and observe strict neutrality in all the controversies that may arise between other States. 25. To abide by the decisions of the supreme Federal court, as supreme court of the Union, in all controversies that may arise between two or more States, when they can not, by themselves and by peaceful means, reach an agreement. If, for any reason, when resorting to arbitration, they fail to designate the arbitrator by whose decision they shall abide, it shall be understood by this fact that the controversy is referred for settlement to the supreme Federal court. Controversies relative to boundaries are excepted and shall be settled according to articles 3 and 126 of this Constitution. 26. To recognize the jurisdiction of the Federal court, as supreme tribunal Of the States, in all cases and causes arising out of treason, or of violation of the Constitution and laws of the Union, instituted against officials exercising the highest executive authority in the States, it being their duty to include this provision in their own constitutions. These trials shall be conducted according to the rules


of procedure established by the general laws, and the decisions shall be rendered in conformity with the same. 27. To consider as their own only revenue: (1) The proceeds of the tax collected in all the custom-houses of the Republic under the name of territorial tax.	 . (2) All the revenue yielded by mines, public lands, and salt mines. This revenue shall be distributed proportionally among all the States according to the number of their inhabitants, to which effect sixty thousand inhabit ants is established as the minimum number corresponding to one State. (3) The share of the tobacco and alcohol revenue which the law may set apart in their favor, said share to be distributed in proportion to the production and consumption of the States. (4) The proceeds of taxation on their natural products. (5) The yieldings of the stamped paper created by them in accordance with their own laws. 28. To delegate to the Congress of the Union the power to levy and collect the taxes referred to in Nos. 1, 2, and 3 of the foregoing Base 27. 29. To cause political ref ugees to reside at a certain distance from the frontiers when so requested by the interested State.
TITLE III.

NATIONALITY.
SECTION I.

Venezuelans.
ART. 8. Venezuelans are such by birth or naturalization.


(a) Venezuelans by birth are: 1. All persons born on Venezuelan soil, and 2. The children of Venezuelan fathers whatever the place of their birth may be. (b) Venezuelans by naturalization are: 1. All persons born in the Spanish-American Republics, provided that they have acquired domicile in the Republic and shown their desire to become Venezuelans. 2. Foreigners who have obtained naturalization papers according to the laws. 3. Foreigners who become Venezuelans by virtue of special laws. 4. Foreign women married to Venezuelans, as long as the matrimonial bond is in existence; but after the dissolution 'of the marriage the Venezuelan nationality shall not be retained by the foreign wife, unless she makes, within one year after the said dissolution, the declaration to which the following article refers. ART. 9. The declaration of the desire to become a Venezuelan shall be made before the principal registrar of the jurisdiction in which the person has established his residence, and the said registrar on receiving such a declaration shall enter it in the respective Book, and forward - copy thereof to the National Executive in order that it be published in the Official Gazette. ART. 10. Venezuelans over twenty-one years of age are electors and eligible, subject to no other conditions than those expressed in this Constitution and the laws. ART. 11. All Venezuelans are bound to serve the nation as prescribed by law.


ART. 12. Venezuelans shall have the same rights and duties throughout the whole territory of the Republic, without any other conditions than those established in this Constitution. ART. 13. The rights and duties of foreigners shall be determined by law. ART. 14. Foreigners, if taking part in the political disputes of the country, shall incur the same responsibilities as Venezuelans, and shall be subject to the provisions of item 8 of article 80. ART. 15: Neither Venezuelans nor foreigners shall have, in any case, the right to claim indemnity from the Nation, or the States, for damages, losses, or seizures of property, not caused by lawful authorities acting in their public capacity. ART. 16. The Government of Venezuela shall not conclude treaties with other nations to the detriment of the principles established in the two preceding articles. SECTION II.

The rights of Venezuelans.
ART. 17. The Nation guarantees to Venezuelans: 1. Inviolability of life, capital punishment being abolished. 2. of property with Enjoyment all its attributes and privileges. Property shall only be subject to taxes levied by the legislative authority, to decisions of the courts, and to condemnation for public use upon previous indemnification and regular proceedings. 3. Inviolability of correspondence and private papers, which shall not be taken possession of, except by order of competent authority and with the formalities established by law. The secrecy


of domestic and private matters shall always be respected. 4. Inviolability of domicile, no one being allowed to enter a home, uninvited, except to prevent the perpetration of crime. Even in this case the entering has to be done in the manner and form provided by law. 5. Enjoyment of personal liberty, and therefore: (1) Forcible recruiting for military service is abolished, said service to be rendered in accordance with the provisions of the law. (2) Slavery is forever forbidden. (3) Slaves treading upon Venezuelan soil shall be free. (4) All shall have the right to (4) do all that does not injure another person. (5) Nobody is bound to do what the law does not command, or prevented from doing what it does not prohibit. 6. Freedom of thought expressed by word or by the press. In cases of libel the, injured party shall have the right to call the offenders to account before the competent courts according to law. 7. Liberty of travelling without passport and of changing their residence on observing the-legal formalities. 8. Liberty of industry; thelaw, however, may grant temporary privileges to authors of discoveries and new products, and to those who establish any new industry in the country. 9. Freedom of reunion and association without arms, ,publicly or privately, without the authorities having power to exercise any act of coercion. 10. Freedom of petition. Petitions may be addressed to any functionary, authority, or corporation, and shall be promptly acted upon.


If the petition is made by several persons, the first five shall answer for the authenticity of the signatures, and the whole number, for the truth of the. facts. 11. Freedom of suffrage without other restrictions than those established by this Constitution and the laws. 12. Freedom of teaching. 13. Religious liberty according to the laws and under the supreme inspection of the President of the Republic. 14. Personal safety, and therefore: First. No Venezuelan shall be imprisoned or arrested for debts not arising out of fraud or criminal offense. Second. Nor shall he be tried by special .courts or commissions, but by ordinary judges and according to ,preexisting laws. Third. Nor shall he be imprisoned or detained except upon summary investigation, showing that an offense deserving corporal punishment has been committed, and a written order of the competent functionary who, except in case of flagrante delicto shall set forth the reasons of the imprisonment. Fourth. Nor shall he be deprived of communication with the outside world, for any reason or pretext. Fifth. Nor shall he be compelled in a criminal case to give testimony against himself, or against his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity, or against his consort. Sixth. Nor shall he be kept in prison if the grounds upon which the arrest was decreed. are destroyed. Seventh. Nor shall he be condemned to suffer punishment in criminal matters except after having been legally tried and convicted. Eighth. Nor shall he be con, demned to corporal punishment for over fifteen years.


. 15. Right of equality. In virtue of which : First. All shall be subject to the same laws, and bound to do the same duty, render the same services, and pay the same taxes. Second. No titles of nobility, honors, and hereditary distinctions shall be granted, nor employments or offices the salaries or emoluments of which continue after the termination of the service. Third. No other official designation than " citizen " and " you " shall be given to employees and corporations. ART. 18. The foregoing enumeration does not abridge the power of the States to grant other rights to their inhabitants. ART. 19. These rights and guaranties may be suspended in the cases and with the formalities provided by item 8 of article 80 of this Constitution. ART. 20. Those who should issue, sign, execute, or cause others to execute, except in the cases set forth in item 8 of article 80, any decrees, orders, or resolutions which violate the guaranties accorded to Venezuelans, are violators of the law, and shall .be punished accordingly. ART. 21. The rights recognized and guaranteed in the foregoing articles shall not be abridged or impaired by laws regulating their exercise, and all laws violating this principle shall be, as provided in item. 11 of article 95, unconstitutional and inefficient.

TITLE IV.
THE NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY AND THE PUBLIC POWER.

ART. 22. The sovereignty is vested essentially in the people who exercise it through the public powers.


ART. 23. The definition of the duties and prerogatives of the public power shall mark its limits, and any-act not comprised within the said definition shall constitute an usurpation of power. ART. 24. All usurped authority is inefficient and its acts are null and void. ART. 25. Decisions reached through direct or indirect use of force, or dictated by a mass of people in subversive attitude, are null de jure and produce no effect. ART. 26. The Government of the Union is and shall always be republican, federal, democratic, elective, representative, alternative, and responsible. ART. 27. The exercise of public power carries with it personal responsibility for going beyond the limits marked by the Constitution, or for violation of the law which organizes its functions; said responsibility to be exacted in the manner provided by the Constitution. ART. 28. The Public power is distributed between the Federal and the States powers, within the limits established by this Constitution. ART. 29. The Federal power is divided into legislative, executive, and judicial. TITLE V.
LEGISLATIVE POWER.
SECTION I.

Legislative power.
ART. 30. The Legislative power is vested in an assembly called "Congress of the United States of Venezuela," consisting of two chambers, one of Senators and the other of Deputies.
SECTION II.

Tile Chamber of Deputies.
ART. 31. To form the Chamber of Deputies, each State shall elect by


direct vote, in accordance with the electoral law, one deputy for each forty thousand inhabitants, and one More for an excess of twenty thousand. The State whose population does not reach forty thousand inhabitants shall elect one deputy. In the same manner it shall elect a number of substitutes equal to that of the Deputies, said substitutes to fill, in the order of their election, the vacancies which may occur. Sole paragraph. The Deputies shall serve for six years. ART. 32. The Deputies shall be Venezuelans by birth, and not less than twenty-one years of age. ART. 33. The Federal District and the Federal Territories shall, when having the population required by article 31, elect their Deputies by direct vote, with the formalities provided by law. Sole paragraph. Wild Indians shall not be computed as forming part of the population. ART. 34. The House of Deputies shall have power: 1. To issue a vote of censure against any cabinet minister, and by this fact the position of the latter shall be vacated. 2. To elect, within the first fifteen days of its meeting, in the first year of the corresponding period, the Attorney-general of the Nation and two substitutes. This shall be done separately, by votes taken successively, and by absolute majority. These officials shall make before the supreme Federal court the legal promise to faithfully discharge their functions, as determined by law. 3. To do anything else the law may specify.


SECTION III.

The Senate. ART. 35. To form this Chamber the Legislative Assembly of each State shall elect from outside its own membership,two Senators and two substitutes, the latter to fill the vacancies of the former according to the order of election. Sole paragraph. Senators shall serve for six years. ART. 36. Senators shall be Venezuelans by birth, and not less than thirty years old. ART. 37. The Senate has power: 1. To grant to illustrious Venezuelans, twenty-five years after their death, the honor that their remains be placed in the National Pantheon. 2. To give, or withhold, its consent to the acceptance by national functionaries of gifts, commissions, honors, and ?rewards from foreign countries. 3. Lo do any thing else the law may provide.
SECTION IF.

Provisions common to both Chambers. ART. 38. The legislative Chambers will meet every two years in the capital of the Union -on the twenty-third day of May, or as soon thereafter as possible, without the necessity of previous convocation. The sessions shall last for ninety days, and this period shall not be extended. ART. 39. The Chambers shall begin their sessions, if at least twothirds of their members are present. If this quorum is not obtained, the members present shall resolve into a preparatory committee and adopt proper measures to compel the attendance of the absentees.


ART. 40. After the sessions are opened an absolute majority of the members elected shall constitute a quorum. ART. 41. The Chambers shall act separately; but they may assemble in Congress when so provided by the Constitution or the laws, or when anyone of them may deem it necessary. In the latter case, if the invited Chamber agrees to hold the joint session, it shall have the privilege of fixing the day and , hour. ART. 42. The sessions shall be public, but they may be secret when so decided by the Chamber. ART. 43. The Chambers have the right: 1. To make rules for their own government and punish the violators thereof. 2. To establish its own police in the building in which their meetings are held. 3. To punish spectators who violate the rules. 4. To remove the obstacles that may obstruct the free exercise of their functions. 5. To enforce their own resolutions. 6. To pass upon the qualifications of their members and to consider their resignations. ART. 44. Both Chambers shall hold their sessions in the same city, and shall close them on the same day. Neither shall be permitted to suspend their meetings, or change their residence without the consent of the other. In case of disagreement they shall assemble in Congress and do as the latter may resolve. ART. 45. The exercise of any other public function, during the sessions, is incompatible with the duties of a Senator or Deputy. The law shall fix the salaries that the members of the national legisla-


ture shall receive for their services, which salaries shall not be increased except for the following term. ART. 46. Senators and deputies shall enjoy immunity from thirty days previous to the twenty-third of May, until thirty days after the close of the session; and the immunity shall consist in the suspension of all civil or criminal proceedings, whatever their origin or nature may be. But if the offense committed is one deserving corporal punishment, the investigation shall continue until the case for the prosecution is made. No further steps shall then be taken until the period of immunity terminates. ART. 47. The Chambers shall have no power in any case to surrender any of their members and allow the immunity provided for in the preceding article to be violated. Magistrates, authorities, corporations, or their agents, which may deprive a Senator or Deputy of his liberty during the enjoyment of his immunity shall be prosecuted and tried before the competent judicial authority, and removed at once from their offices, without relieving them of the penalties imposed by law to violators of the Constitution. The right of accusation in these cases belongs to any citizen. ART. 48. Congress shall be-presided over by the President of the Senate, and the presiding officer of the Chamber of Deputies shall act as vice-president. ART. 49. The members of the Chambers shall not be responsible for their votes or for the opinions expressed by them in the sessions. ART. 50. Senators and Deputies shall not enter by themselves, or in behalf of third parties, into contracts with the national executive; nor shall they prosecute before it claims of other persons.


ART. 51. When, through death, or any other cause producing absolute vacancy, the number of substitute elected in one State for the Senate has been exhausted, or reduced below the proper rate, the respective legislative assembly shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term of the Senator or his substitute. In regard to vacancies occurring in the Chamber of Deputies the Constitutions of the States shall determine the manner of filling them. SECTION V.

Powers vested in

Congress.

ART. 52. The powers vested in the Congress of the United States of Venezuela are: 1. To take cognizance of the resignations of the President and Vice-presidents of the Republic. 2. To examine, approve, or disapprove the accounts that must be submitted to it by the cabinet ministers in conformity with article 86 of this Constitution. 3. To enact the organic and electoral laws of the Federal District and Federal Territories. In the Federal District the law shall proclaim the autonomy of the municipality in economical and executive matters, and shall determine how the said municipality shall discharge its power in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution, so as to prevent the liberty of political action of the high Federal powers residing therein from being embarrassed. In case of war its highest civil and political authority shall assume the administration of the two departments 'mentioned. 4. To raise to the condition of States the Federal Territories which may ask for it, provided that the conditions of article 4 of this Constitution are complied with.


5. To levy and collect the national taxes. 6. To sanction, according to item 16 of article 7 of this Constitution, the national Codes, and also the Federal Code of public instruction, the fiscal and military and naval Cod es and the laws conducive to the organization of the national militia. 7. To fix the standard, value, fineness, weight, and coinage of the national money, provided that it be on a gold basis, and to decide in regard to the admission and circulation of foreign currency. S. To create, abolish, and fix the salaries of national offices. 9. To determine everything relating to the national debt and interest thereon. 10. To make, loans on the credit of the Nation. 11. To decree everything relating to statistics and the national census, the latter to be taken every ten years. 12. To approve or disapprove diplomatic treaties and conventions, which, without the required approval, shall not be valid or capable of ratification or exchange. The law of approval passed by Congress shall not be executed until it is known that the treaty has been accepted by the other party.. Treaties shall not be published until they have been ratified and exchanged. 13. To approve or disapprove contracts of national interest entered .into by the Federal Executive. 14. To approve the general budget of public revenue and expenditure. 15. To fix the standard of national weights and measures and make them uniform. 16. To enact all laws relating to the exercise of the powers vested by this Constitution in the Fedby eral authorities, and all other


laws of general character which may be necessary. 17. To elect the electoral body provided for by article 70 of this Constitution. 18. To elect the supreme Federal court in conformity with articles 91, 92, and 93 of this Constitution. ART. 53. The acts passed by the legislative Chambers of Venezuela when sitting separately, as branches of the legislative body, shall be called "laws," and when passed by the two chambers in Congress assembled, or separately, on matters of their own exclusive incumbency, shall be called "resolutions."
SECTION VI. Enactment of laws. ART. 54. The power to initiate legislation is equally vested in both Chambers and belongs to their respective members. ART. 55. Bills introduced shall be read and considered for the purpose of admission, and if admitted shall be submitted to three discussions, which shall be conducted according to the rules established for the debates. One day at least shall mediate between each discussion. ART. 56. Bills approved in the Chamber of origin shall be sent to the other Chamber for the purposes of the foregoing article, and if not disapproved shall be returned to the Chamber of origin, with the amendments, if any, made thereto. ART. 57. If the Chamber of origin does not accept the amendments it shall have the right to insist upon its own bill, and shall send it to the other Chamber with a statement in writing of its reasons therefor. It can also invite the other Chamber to assemble in Congress and consider the matter in committee of the whole, so as to


facilitate an agreement. If no arrangement can be obtained, the bill shall become of no effect from the moment in which the Chamber of origin resolves separately to ratify its insistence. ART. 58. When bills are sent from one Chamber to the other, a statement showing the days on which they have been discussed shall go with them. ART. 59. Bills rejected in the sessions of one year shall not be again introduced except in some other year. ART. 60. Bills pending in one Chamber at the close of the sessions shall be taken up by it in the following year and submitted to three discussions as usual. ART. 61. enacting clause to be used in the laws shall be as follows: " The Congress of the United States of Venezuela decrees:" ART. 62. Amendatory laws shall be drafted as entirely new statutes, taking the place of the former ones, and repealing all their provisions. ART. 63. Laws shall be repealed with the same formalities as are established for their enactment. ART. 64. Legislative acts, once sanctioned, shall be communicated. in duplicate to the President of the Republic and published in the Journal of the debates of the Senate. They shall have binding force as soon as the formalities established in item 1 of article 80 of this Constitution are fulfilled. The President of the Republic, through the Minister who countersigns said acts, shall return one of the two copies to Congress, with the order for its enforcement. Sole paragraph. In the publication that shall be made in the Journal of the debates, the date on which the laws and decrees were laid before the President of the Republic shall be given, so as to secure for them, after the lapse of the fifteen days, to which the aforesaid item 1 of article 80 re-


fers, the condition of being, under all circumstances, in full force and vigor. ART. 65. The power to legislate vested in Congress shall not be delegated. ART. 66. No legislative provision shall be given retroactive effect, except in matters of judicial proceedings, or when the new law imposes a lesser penalty. ART. 67. When bills maintedhCbrs,ytepciv cabinet Minister, to be unconstitutional, are nevertheless passed, the Attorney-general shall denounce the fact, in order that the point may be settled according to article
95.
TITLE VI.
THE FEDERAL EXECUTIVE POWER.

SECTION I.

The general administration of the government of the Union.
ART. 68, Everything concerning the general administration of the national Government, not vested by this Constitution in any other authority, shall fall under the j urisdiction of the Federal Executive. This power is vested in a magistrate who shall be called President of the United States of Venezuela, and shall be assisted by the cabinet Ministers, who are his organs. The President shall be elected in the manner and form provided ,in the following section. ART. 69. The functions of the National Executive can not be performed outside of the Federal District, except in the cases described in this Constitution. -SECTION II.

Election of the President f the United States of Venexuela.
ART. 70. There shall be an electoral body consisting of fourteen


members of the National Congress,' elected by the latter within the first fifteen days of its meeting in the first year of each presidential period, so that the body may consist of one representative, either a senator or a deputy, for each one of the political entities, and an additional deputy for the Federal District. ART. 71. 0n the day following the election by Congress of the said electoral body, the latter shall proceed to its organization with the number of members present, provided that this number is not less than two-thirds of all those elected to compose the body, and it shall select out of their number the one who is to act as chairman. ART. 72. The electoral body, as soon as it is organized, shall set apart one of the three following days to elect out of their number or elsewhere, in permanent public session, the President of the United States of Venezuela. Information concerning this date shall be published by the press, and in order to effect the election at least twothirds must be present of the total number of members composing the electoral body, and the one who shall have obtained the absolute majority of said total shall be proclaimed elected. The electoral body shall then declare its labors at an end, and the minutes of its proceedings shall be signed by all the members, who shall return to their places in the respective chambers. Sole paragraph. The electoral body shall in the same session in which the President of the United States of Venezuela is elected, proceed also to the election, with the same formalities and conditions, of a first an 1 second vice-president to fill the temporary or absolute vacancies of die Presidency.


SECTION III.

The President of the United States of Venezuela.
ART. 73. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall be a Venezuelan' by birth, over thirty years of age. Before entering into the discharge of his functions, he shall make before Congress the legal promise. Sole paragraph. The Vice-presidents shall make their legal promise before Congress, or, if Congress is not in session, before the President of the Republic. ART. 74. In case of temporary or absolute vacancy of the Presidency, the place shall be filled by the first or second Vice-president, according to the order of their election. In case the second Vice-president takes charge, owing to the absolute vacancy of the Presidency and of the first Vice-presidency, or if this vacancy occurs during the time he is in charge, he shall immediately call the Senate to meet for the election of the person who shall replace him. ART. 75. The powers originally and exclusively vested in the President of the United States of Venezuela, are the following: 1. To appoint and remove the cabinet Ministers. 2. To receive and welcome the public ministers of other nations.

3. To sign the official letters to the sovereigns or chief magistrates of other countries. 4. To administer the govern-ment of the Federal District according to law and to act therein as the chief civil and political authority. 5. To administer the government of the Federal Territories according to their own organic laws. 6. To direct the operations of


war, command in person the army or appoint some one else in his place. 7. To leave temporarily the capital of the Republic, when so demanded by the public interest, also to withdraw temporarily from the exercise of his functions, in which case he shall call the person qualified to do so under this Constitution to take his place, it being understood that when the cause of his withdrawal ceases, he shall again take charge of the office, with no other formality than giving notice thereof to the official who is acting as President. ART. 76. The President of the Union shall lay before Congress personally, or through one of his Ministers, within the first ten days of the ordinary sessions, a comprehensive message in which he shall give an account of his administrative and political acts, the condition of public affairs in the Republic and the improvements, if any, to be made in the existing legislation. ART. 77. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall not be reelected for the next succeeding period. ART. 78. The law shall establish the salary to be paid to the President of the Republic or to the functionary who replaces him, and this salary shall not be increased, unless the increase is to take place in the following constitutional period. ART. 79. The President of the Republic or the functionary who replaces him, is responsible for treason and for common offenses
SECTION IV.

Powers vested in the Federal Executive.
ART. 80. The powers vested in the Federal Executive are: 1. To cause this Constitution and the laws and decrees of the National Congress to be complied


with and obeyed, as well as published in the Official Gazette within fifteen days after their being received, except as provided in item 12 of article 52. 2. To issue decrees or rules for the better execution of the laws whenever it may be necessary, taking care, however, that the spirit or intent of said laws is not affected thereby. 3. To call Congress to extraordinary session when so demanded by the gravity of the occasion. 4. To organize the army and the national militia according to law. 5. To preserve the Nation from any foreign attack. 6. To declare war. 7. To defend the Federal District when there are serious apprehensions that it may be invaded by foreign forces. 8. To make use, in cases of foreign war, or domestic disturbance, or rebellion in arms against the institutions, upon previous declaration that public order is disturbed, and only for the time of the disturbance, of the following faculties: A. To ask the States for the aid necessary to defend the nation and its institutions. B. To collect taxes in advance. C. To arrest, confine, or expel from the territory of the Republic, citizens or foreigners interfering with the reestablishment of peace. D. To suspend the rights the exercise of which may be incompatible with the defense of the country or the reestablishment of order, except the inviolability of life. E. To fix the place where the general power of the Union may be established temporarily when serious motives may demand it. F. To prosecute for. treason those Venezuelans who in any way


may be hostile to the national defense. G. To issue letters of marque and reprisals. 9. To make use of the public force in case that the interposition of its good offices proves to be insufficient to put an end to an armed conflict between two or more States and compel them to depose arms and cause their controversies to be decided according to item 25 of article 7 of this Constitution. This power shall also be exercised in case of armed rebellion in any of the States of the Union, after all peaceful and conciliatory means to reestablish peace and public order are exhausted. 10. To direct the Attorney-general of the Nation to ask the annulment of any act violating the Bases of the Union, and to initiate impeachment proceedings whenever proper. 11. To grant amnesties and pardons. 12. To negotiate the loans ordered by Congress, in strict conformity with the law authorizing them. 13. To take charge of and superintend the collection of the national revenue. 11. To manage the public lands, mines, salt mines, and the tobacco and alcohol revenue, according to law. 15. To conduct diplomatic negotiations and conclude all kinds of treaties with other nations through the diplomatic agents of the Republic, submitting said treaties to the national Congress for the purposes set forth in item 12 of article 52. 16. To enter into contracts of national interest according to law. 17. To regulate the Federal post-office, telegraphic and telephonic seryices, with power to create or abolish stations or offices


when urgently required, reporting said action to Congress at its next meeting. 18. To adopt such measures as may be necessary for the taking of the census of the Republic every ten years. 19. To issue patents of navigation to all national vessels. 20. To issue certificates of nationality according to law. 21. To allow or forbid foreigners to enter the service of the Republic. 22. To forbid, when so deemed expedient, the admission into the national territory, or to expel there'f rom, foreigners who have no established domicile in the country. 23. To prohibit and impede the entrance into the territory of the Republic of foreigners especially engaged in the service of any worship, or religion, no matter what their order or rank may be. 24. To appoint the national employees whose appointment is not to be made by another f unctionary. 25. To remove the functionaries freely appointed by it, or direct that they may be suspended or tried if there is any reason therefor. 26. To discharge all other functions entrusted to it by law.
SECTION V.

The cabinet Ministers.
ART. 81. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall have the cabinet Ministers which the law may determine. The law shall also establish the powers and duties of these functionaries and shall organize their departments. ART. 82. To be a cabinet Minister it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, over twenty-five years of age. ART. 83. The Ministers are the only legal and necessary organs


of the President of the United States of Venezuela. All his acts shall be countersigned by the Minister or Ministers to whose departments the acts may belong, and without this formality the acts shall be void and shall not be obeyed or carried into execution by authorities, functionaries, or private persons. ART. 84. All the acts of the Ministers shall be in accordance with this Constitution and the laws. An order to the contrary from the President of the Republic, even if given in writing, shall not exempt them from responsibility. ART. 85. The responsibility for those acts of the President which must be transacted in cabinet meetings corresponds to the Ministers who countersigned them. ART. 86. The Ministers shall submit to the Chambers, every two years, within the first ten days of their ordinary sessions, an itemized report, accompanied with documents, of what has been done, or is intended to be done, by them, in their respective Departments. They shall also give the written or verbal information which may be asked of them, and they shall submit likewise within the first ten days of the second month of the sessions of the Chambers the general budget of revenue and expenditure and the general account of the two preceding years. ART. 87. The Ministers shall be entitled to the floor of the Chambers and to address them. They shall also be bound to appear before them when summoned to give information. ART. 88. The Ministers shall be responsible: 1. For treason. 2. For violation of the Constitution and the laws. 3. For spending money in excess of the appropriation. 4. For bribery in the transac-


tion of business or in the appointment of national functionaries. 5: For embezzlement of public funds. 6. For common offenses.
TITLE VII. SECTION I.

judicial power.
ART. 89. The judicial power of the Republic is vested in the supreme Federal court and in the other tribunals and courts which may be established by law. ART. 90. The functionaries of the judicial power are responsible, in the cases determined by law, for treason, bribery in the fulfillment of their functions, violation of the constitutional laws, and common offenses.
SECTION II.

Supreme Federal Court.
ART. 91. The supreme Federal court is the supreme tribunal of the Federation and of the States, and shall consist of seven members elected by Congress, within the first thirty days of its session, in the first year of each constitutional period. Sole paragraph. The members of the supreme Federal court shall be Venezuelans by birth, thirty years of age and lawyers of the Republic. ART. 92. For the appointment of the members of the supreme Federal court the representatives in Congress of the States and of the Federal District shall be grouped as herein provided, and each group shall nominate two candidates from among whom Congress shall choose one who shall represent the group in the said court.


First group: State of Miranda and the Federal District. • Second group: States of Aragua and Guarico. Third group: States of Carabobo and Zamora. Fourth group: States of Lara and Faleen. Fifth group: States of Tachira and Trujillo. Sixth group: States of Merida and Zulia. Seventh group: States of Bermudez and Bolivar. ART. 93. The members of the supreme Federal court shall be elected by Congress by secret vote' and in permanent session. Sole paragraph. The seven candidates of the groups, who are not elected, shall, by this very fact, be considered substitutes, respectively, of the elected members. ART. 94. The members of the supreme Federal court shall hold office for six years and may be reelected. The 'absolute vacancies of the places of members and substitutes shall be filled by Congress, and during its recess by the President of the Republic. The court shall be bound to give notice to either Congress or the President when a vacancy occurs. ART. 95. The supreme Federal court has power: 1. To take cognizance of cases of impeachment of the President of the Republic or of the official acting as such, the cabinet Ministers, the Attorney-general of the nation, the Governor of the Fed-' eral District, and its own members, in the cases in which said functionaries are responsible according to this Constitution. To take cognizance of criminal prosecutions, or of impeachment proceedings, instituted against the Presidents of the States, or other high functionaries of said States, according to the


laws thereof. In cases of impeachment the laws of the respective States shall prevail, but there being no State laws, the general laws of the Nation shall be observed. In the two preceding cases the court shall decide whether or not the trial shall take place. If the decision is affirmative, the functionary shall by this fact be suspended; and if it is negative, the proceedings shall be at once discontinued. When the offense is a common one the case shall be referred to the ordinary tribunals, and when it is political the court shall go on with the proceedings until final decision. 3. To take cognizance of civil or criminal prosecutions against diplomatic agents, in the cases allowed by the Public law of nations. 4. To take cognizance of cases of impeachment of diplomatic agents of the Republic accredited to other countries, for malfeasance in office. • 5. To take cognizance of the civil cases in which the Nation appears as defendant, when so allowed by law. 6. To take cognizance, on writs of • error, in the form and terms established by law, of all cases in which this remedy is allowed. 7. To take cognizance of prize cases. 8. To decide, except in the cases established in articles 3 and 126 of this Constitution, the controversies that may arise between olitical functionaries of different States, between those of one or more States and those of the Union or the Federal District, between those of the Union among themselves or with those of the Federal District, and between national tribunals and functionaries in matters within the jurisdiction of the court. 9. To decide the conflicts of jurisdiction that may arise between

p


judicial employees or functionaries of different States, and between those of the States with those of the nation, or of the Federal District, and between those of one State or of the Federal District with each other, when there is no other authority especially called upon to decide them. 10. To declare the nullity of such laws, national or State, which conflict with the Constitution of the Republic. 11. To declare which laws shall prevail when the national ones are in conflict with each other, or with those of the States. 12. To declare the nullity of any act or acts of the legislative Chamber or of the Federal Executive, when done in violation of the rights guaranteed to the States or attacking the autonomy of the same. 13. To declare the nullity of all the acts referred to in articles 24 and 25 of this Constitution, when done by a national authority or by one of the Federal District or by high functionaries of the States. 14. To take cognizance of all the controversies arising out of contracts or negotiations entered into by the President of the Republic. 15. To declare, save in case of treaty stipulation to the contrary, when and in what cases foreign judgments can be enforced in accordance with the conditions established by law. 16. All the other powers that may be granted to it by this Constitution and the laws. ART. 96. The supreme Federal court shall render, every two years, to the National Congress, an account of its labors, setting forth at the same time what obstacles, if any, are, in its opinion, to be overcome to secure uniformity of civil, criminal, and commercial legislation. ART. 97. The members of the supreme Federal court after hav-


ing entered into the discharge of their functions and during the time they are discharging them, shall not accept any office in the Department of the Federal Government. ART. 98. The law shall determine the salaries to be paid to the members of the supreme Federal court. SECTION III.

The Attorney General of the _Nation.
ART. 99. The representation of the Government in judicial matters belongs to the Attorney General of the Nation in the manner to be established by law. ART. 100. To be Attorney General of the Nation it is required to be a Venezuelan by birth, over thirty years of age and a lawyer of the Republic. ART. 101. The Attorney General of the Nation shall serve for two years and may be reelected. The temporary or absolute vacancy of his place shall be filled by two substitutes in the order of their • election. ART. 102. The powers of the Attorney General are: 1. To cause the laws and executive orders to be enforced. 2. To render an opinion in matters of law when so requested by the Federal Executive and the supreme Federal court. 3. To see that all Federal functionaries duly fulfill their duties. 4. To prefer charges, in behalf of the President of the Republic, before the competent authority, against such Federal functionaries as may be guilty of malfeasance in office, holding them to be responsible for their acts. 5. To act as prosecuting officer in the cases referred to in items 1, 2, 4, and 5 of article 95 of this Constitution. 6. To report to the President of


the Republic the action taken by him in the fulfillment of his duties as specified in items 1, 3, and 4 of the present article. 7. To appear as plaintiff in the name of the Nation in the cases in which the latter has an interest to maintain, and as defendant in all suits or claims brought against it, acting in either case in accordance with the instructions given him by the Federal Executive. 8. To fulfill all the other duties assigned to him by the Constitution and the laws. TITLE VIII.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.

ART. 103. All that is not expressly attributed in this Constitution to the general administration of the Nation shall belong to the States. The States shall provide, in their respective Constitutions, that the constitutional periods of their public powers are to be of three years beginning on the first of January, nineteen and five. ART. 104. Every magistrate, authority or corporation is forbidden to exercise any function which has not been especially entrusted to him by the Constitution and the laws. ART. 105. The courts of justice in the States are independent. The cases and causes instituted before them shall be ended in the same States, subject to no other revision than that of the supreme Federal court when so provided by law. ART. 106. All acts of the legislative chambers or of the Federal Executive, which violate rights guaranteed to the States, or impair their autonomy, shall be declared void by the supreme Federal court, in use of the powers given it by item 12 of article 95.


ART. 107. The public national force shall consist of land and sea forces, formed by the citizens' militia which shall be organized by law. ART. 108. The public force under the command of the national power shall be made up of contingents to be furnished by each State in proportion to its population, selected from among those citizens who, according to law, must render this service. ART. 109. In case of war these contingents may be increased by calling on the militia until the number of men necessary to fill the demand of the national government is complete. ART. 110. Military and civil authority shall never be exercised simultaneously by one and the same person or corporation, exce pt in cases of disturbances of public order. ART. 111. The Nation being, as it is, in possession of the right of ecclesiastical patronage shall exercise it according to the provisions of the law of July twenty-eighth, eighteen hundred and twenty-four. ART. 112. The National Government shall not have in the States any other employees residing therein, and having jurisdiction or authority, .than the employees of the same States, except the following: Treasury employees; those of public instruction; those who may be required according to the organization that Congress may give to the service of mines, public lands, and tobacco and alcohol, according to the power vested in it by item 28 of article 7 of this Constitution; members of the forces destined to guard the frontiers, or garrison fortresses, arsenals, naval stations, and ports of entry, their jurisdiction to be limited to the exercise of their respective functions within the limits of the fortresses and armories, naval stations, and ports


of entry. But they all shall remain subject to the general laws of the State in which they reside and liable to be immediately removed or replaced by the Federal Executive or by whomsoever it may be proper, on demand of the respective State government, for sufficient legal reason. ART. 113. National employees shall not receive gifts, commissions, honors, or compensations from foreign countries without the consent of the Senate. ART. 114. All war material belongs to the Nation. ART. 115. Every citizen shall have power to prefer charges against national or State employees before the tribunals or superior authorities which the laws may designate. ART. 116. No payment shall be made by the national treasury which is not expressly authorized by an item in the general appropriation bill; and whoever should violate this provision shall be held civilly responsible to the national Treasury for the amounts paid: In making payments ordinary expenditures shall be given preference over extraordinary ones. ART. 117. Neither the legislative power nor any authority of the Republic shall under any circumstances whatever, or for any reason, issue paper money or declare bank notes to be legal tender, or create any value represented in paper. No silver or nickel shall be coined without previous authority from the National Congress given with the same formalities as are established for the enactment of laws. ART. 118. The offices for the collection of national taxes and the disbursing offices shall always be separate. The former shall pay nothing except the salaries of their own employees.


ART. 119. At election times the national public force and that of the States shall be kept within their respective armories. ART. 120. In all international treaties a clause shall be inserted to the effect that "all differences between the contracting parties shall be decided by arbitration without appeal to war." ART. 121. No person shall hold, at the same time, more than one paid office depending on Congress or the Federal Executive. The acceptance of any other office shall be considered equivalent to the resignation of the former one. This provision does not apply to the employees of public instruction. ART. 122. The armed force shall not deliberate; it is passive and obedient. No armed force shall make requisitions or demand as sistance of any kind, excep to the civil authorities and in the manner and form determined by law. Commanders of forces violating this provision shall be tried and punished according to law.. ART. 123. A law shall regulate the manner in which national employees, before entering into the discharge of their duties, shall take, their oaths of office. ART. 124. No contract of public interest entered: into by the Federal Government or by that of a State, municipality, or any other public power, shall be assignable, in whole or in part, to any foreign government; and in all contracts the following clause shall be included, and if omitted it shall be considered as included, viz: "The doubts and controversies of any nature that may arise in regard to this contract, and which can not be amicably settled by the contracting parties, shall be decided by the competent tribunals of Venezuela according to the Venezuelan laws, and shall not in my case be


made a subject of international claims." All companies formed

for the carrying out of said contracts shall be Venezuelan, and for this reason they shall have to establish their legal domicile in the country.
ART. 125. The Law of nations forms part of the laws of the country; but its provisions shall not be invoked when they are opposed to the Constitution and the laws of the Republic. ART. 126. The controversies now existing between Districts on account of their limits, and those which in the future may arise for the same cause, shall be submitted by the respective States for decision to a court of arbitration the members of which shall be freely appointed by the Federal Executive. ART. 127. This Constitution may be amended, but no amendment shall be made by the National Congress except in ordinary sessions, and at the request of threefourths of the legislative assemblies of the States in ordinary session. ART. 128. Amendments to the Constitution shall be made with the same formalities as are established for the enactment of laws. ART. 129. When an amendment has been agreed upon by the National Congress, the President of the latter shall submit it to the legislative assemblies of the States for ratification. ART. 130. Congress may also initiate amendments and make them through the process indicated in the foregoing article, but in this case the amendments shall not be considered sanctioned without the ratification of three-fourths of the legislative assemblies of the States. ART. 131. Whether the amendments to the Constitution originated with the legislative assem-


blies of the States or with the legislative chambers the votes given by the States shall always come back to the National Congress, which is the one called upon to count them and order the amendment if sanctioned to be promulgated. ART. 132. The constitutional periods of the Federal power shall be six years to be counted from the twenty-third day of May, nineteen hundred and five. ART. 133. At the expiration of each period, and precisely on May twenty-third, the President of the United States of Venezuela shall . cease in the exercise of his functions, and the Minister of Interior Relations shall enter into the dis charge of the Presidency of the Republic for the purpose of transferring it. ART. 134. The basis of population for all the acts of the civil and political life of the States shall be determined by the last census of the Republic approved by Congress. ART. 135. In all public acts and official documents of the Nation and of the States, mention shall he made of the date of the Independence, July fifth, eighteen hundred and eleven, and of that of the Federation, February twentieth, eighteen hundred and fifty-nine. ART. 136. The present Constitution signed by all the members of ' the Constitutional Congress who are in this capital, and the order of the Federal Executive, directing it to be complied with, shall be immediately promulgated in the Federal District and in the States and Territories of the Union, as soon as received there. ART. 137. The Constitution of March twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred and one, is hereby repealed. Given at the Federal Legislative Palace, at Caracas, on the 27th of April, 1904, the 93d of the independence and the 46th of the Federation.

