
CONSTITUTION of the United States of Venezuela. Caracas, June 21, 1893.
WE, the Representatives of the people of Venezuela, having met together by virtue of the convocation contained in the Decree of the 1st January last, in Constitutional Assembly, invoking the favour and inspiration of the Supreme Law-giver of the Universe, have decreed the following Constitution of the United States of Venezuela:


I.-Of the Nation and its Territory.

ART. 1. The States of Los Andes, Bermudez, Bolivar, Carabobo, Falcon, Lara, Miranda, Zamora, and Zulia continue united and form the nation under the denomination of the United States of Venezuela. 2. The boundaries of these States will be determined in conformity with the limits fixed for the old provinces by the Law of the 28th April, 1856, which settled the last territorial division with the exception of the old Department of Nirgua, which forms part of the State of Carabobo. 3. The territory of the United States of Venezuela is the same -s constituted in the year 1810 the Captaincy-General of Venezuela. 4. The States to which Article 1 of this Constitution refers retain the faculty of uniting themselves in groups of two or more, in order to form one single State, with the agreement always or their respective Legislative Assemblies: the States declared independent by the Constitution of the 28th March, 1864,* and converted into sections by that of the 27th April, 1881,t have the right to recover the character of States should there be a demand to that effect by the Representatives in the Legislative Assembly of two-thirds of the districts of any one of such States, and should the population exceed 100,000 inhabitants. If such limit of population does not exist a demand may be made, in the same form, for the separation from one, and annexation to another, State, provided that that from which it separates itself remains on the basis required of 100,000 inhabitants. In either case it will take a share in the Congress, the National Executive, and the other States of the Federation. The procedure will be determined by law.

TITLE

II.-Of the Venezuelans.

5. Venezuelans are such either by birth or by naturalization. (a.) The following are Venezuelans by birth:(1.) All persons who have been or may be born in the territory of Venezuela, whatever may be the nationality of their parents. (2.) The children of a Venezuelan father or mother by birth, who may have been born abroad, if in the event of their being domiciled in the country they shall declare before the competent authority their wish to become so. (3.) The legitimate children who may be born abroad or at sea of a Venezuelan father who may be residing or travelling in the discharge of a Diplomatic Mission, or who may be employed in a Legation of the Republic.
*

(b.) Venezuelans by naturalization are (1.) The children of a naturalized Venezuelan father or mother, born without the territory of the Republic, if they take up their domicile in the country and declare their wish to become Venezuelans. (2.) Persons born in the Spanish-American Republics or in the Spanish Antilles who may have fixed their residences in the territory of the Republic and have manifested their desire to be Venezuelans. (3.) Foreigners who may have obtained letters of naturalization or of citizenship, in conformity with the laws. 6. All Venezuelans of the male sex and over 21 years of age are eligible for public appointments, except in the cases excluded by this Constitution. 7. All Venezuelans are under the obligation to serve the nation in conformity with the dispositions of the law, sacrificing their property and their lives if necessary in its defence. 8. Venezuelans enjoy in all the States of the Republic and in the Federal district the same rights and have the same duties as the natives domiciled therein. 9. Foreigners enjoy all civil rights in common with the nationals, and may make use of them to the same extent, in the same form and manner of proceeding, and in -the same cases, on absolutely the same terms as the nationals. 10. The nation shall not hold or recognize, as regards foreigners, any obligations or responsibilities other than those which in similar cases have been established as regards the nationals by the Constitution and the laws. 11. The Government of Venezuela shall not conclude with other nations any kind of Treaties unless they recognize the principles laid down in the two preceding Articles. 12. The law shall determine the rights and duties of foreigners not domiciled. TITLE III.-Bases of the Union. 13. The States which form the Venezuelan Union are autonomous, and have equality as political entities. They agree (1.) To organize themselves in accordance with the principles of a popular, elective, federal, representative, alternative, and responsible Government. (2.) To recognize in their respective Constitutions the autonomy of the Municipality and the independence of the same of the political power of the State in all that concerns its economical and administrative regimen. (3.) To defend themselves against violence threatening their independence or the integrity of the nation.

(4.) Not to alienate to a foreign Power any portion of their territory, nor to ask its protection. The States will not establish or cultivate political relations with other nations. (5.) Not to join themselves to nor to ally themselves with any other nation, nor to separate themselves from Venezuela to the diminution of the national existence or territory of the latter. (6.) To cede to the nation, for the Federal district, unpopulated land not exceeding 100 square kilom. in extent, upon which will be built the capital city of the Union. For the present the said district shall be the city of Caracas, with its parishes of El Reero, El Valle, La Vega, Antimano, Macarao, and Macuto. (7.) To cede to the Government of the nation the territory necessary for the erection of fortresses, magazines, workshops, and other buildings indispensable to the general administration, which shall exercise ownership over the ceded territory subject to the restrictions imposed by Article 131 of this Constitution. (8.) To relinquish to the Government of the Union the free administration of the Colon and Amazonas territories. The Delta and Goagira territories shall be reincorporated with the States to which they belonged prior to their being erected into territories. (9.) To reserve to the General Power all jurisdiction, legislative and executive, in all that relates to maritime, coasting, and river navigation, as well as the national roads. By the latter shall be understood those which cross the frontiers of a State and lead into another State or into the Federal district. (10.) Not to restrict by taxation the navigation of the rivers and other navigable waters which have not required artificial canalization. (11.) Not to subject to taxation, before being offered for consumption, the products or articles that have already been taxed for national purposes or that have been exempted from such taxation by law. (12.) Not to impose contributions upon cattle, goods, or any kind of inerchandize in transit for another State. (13.) Not to prohibit the consumption of cattle, goods, and other produce of other States, nor to burden such consumption with taxes greater or less than those paid by local produce. (14.) Not to establish custom-houses, for the collection of taxes upon imports, other than those possessed by the nation. (15.) To reserve to each State the right to dispose of its natural products. (16,) To cede to the Government of the Union the administration of mines, salt works, and waste lands in order that the first two may be regulated by a uniform and beneficial system of working, and that the last shall be applied, preferentially, to the development of national industries,
 (17.) To respect the property, arsenals, and fortresses of the nation. (18.) To execute and cause to be executed and enforced the Constitution and Laws of the Union and the Decrees and Orders issued by the National Powers in the exercise of their lawful attributes and faculties. (19.) To fully attest and cause to be carried into effect the public acts and judicial proceedings of other States. (20.) To organize their Tribunals and Courts of Law for the complete administration of justice, and to maintain for all a similar substantive, civil, commercial, and peual code, and similar laws regulating civil and criminal procedure. (21.) To send to Congress, through the Legislative Assembly, the nomination of principal and deputy members of the High Federal Court, and to elect members for the Court of Cassation. (22.) To submit to the decisions of the Court of Cassation as the Supreme Tribunal of the States. (23.) To include extradition as a political principle in their respective Constitutions. (24.) To establish in popular elections direct and secret suffrage. (25.) To establish free and compulsory primary education, and free instruction in the arts and sciences. (26.) To reserve to the powers of the Union the right to dictate the Code of National Public Instruction. (27.) To provide the unarmed contingent, in the proper proportions, for the formation of the national public force in time of peace, in accordance with the annual Decree of the National Congress. (28.) Not to permit in the States the enlistment or levy of forces which have or may have for their object an attack upon the liberty or independence, or a disturbance of public order of the nation, of other States, or of other countries. (29.) Not to declare or make war in any case, one State against another, and to preserve strict neutrality in all conflicts which may arise between other States. (80.) To refer and submit to the decision of the High Federal Court all differences which may arise between two or more States when they are unable by themselves, and by peaceful means, to arrive at an understanding. If, for any reason, in a case for settlement by arbitration they should not appoint an Arbitrator to whose decision they agree to defer, the decision shall rest with the High Federal Court. (31.) To recognize the competency of the Court of Cassation for the trial of persons exercising superior executive authority in the States who may be accused of treason or violation of the Constitution and the laws of the Union. This principle shall

 1207 


1208



be included in the Constitutions of the States. The procedure in these cases shall be in conformity with that established by the general laws, and shall be decided in accordance with the same. (32.) To receive as the revenue of the States:(a.) The total produced by the transit tax levied in the customhouses of the Republic; (b.) The total produce of the mines, unoccupied lands, and salt works administered by the Federal Power. (33.) To distribute their income periodically among all the States of the Federation in proportion to the population of each (34.) If any of the taxes, to which Article 32 refers, should be abolished or reduced by law, it shall be the duty of the Congress to establish the means by which such deficit shall be made good to the States. (35.) To keep at a distance from the frontiers such persons as, for political motives, have sought asylum in one State, whenever the interested State shall so request. (36.) Not to coin money or issue paper currency, nor to legalize anything for the payment of debts except money of gold or silver.
TITLE IV.-The RBqhts of Venezuelans.

14. '[he nation guarantees to Venezuelans the following effective rights:(1.) Inviolability of life, capital punishment being abolished, whatever law may have established the same. (2.) Property, with all its powers, rights, and privileges. It will be subject only to the imports established by the Legislative authority, and may be seized only for works of public utility and after compensation has been judicially awarded. (3.) Inviolability of correspondence and other private papers which may not be interfered with except under the order of the competent judicial authority and the formalities established by law: domestic and private secrecy shall, however, be always guarded. (4.) Inviolability of domicile, which may not be entered except to prevent the perpetration of an offence, and even then must be carried out in conformity with the law. (5.) Personal liberty, and therefore:(i.) Forced recruiting for military service is abolished (ii.) Slavery is proscribed forever ; (iii.) Slaves who set foot on Venezuelan territory are free; (iv.) All have the right to do or execute anything not to the detriment of another; (v.) No one is obliged to do that which is not ordered by law,

nor hindered from doing that which is not forbidden by the same. (6.) The free expression of thought by word or through the
press. In cases of slander or injury, the aggrieved person may take the necessary proceedings before the competent Courts of Justice in accordance with the common law, but the defendant may not be detained or confined in any case except after conviction and sentence by a competent Tribunal. (7.) Freedom to travel without a passport, of changing domicile, legal formalities being duly observed, and of absenting oneself from and returning to the Republic, taking away and bringing back 1 one's property and effects. (8.) Freedom of industry, and, therefore, proprietorship in inventions and discoveries. Owners of such shall by law be granted temporary privileges, and shall be compensated in the event of their agreeing to make public their inventions. (9.) Liberty of meeting and association in public or private without arms: the authorities shall not exercise any act of inspection or interference. (10.) Right of petition and the power of obtaining redress. The matter may be brought before any official, authority, or corporation. 8hould the petition be made by more than one individual, the first five shall be answerable for the authenticity of the signatures, and all shall be responsible for the truth of the facts. (11.) Freedom of suffrage without any other restriction than being below the age of 21 years, or the interdiction declared by Executive sentence by the competent Courts. (12.) Liberty of instruction, which shall be protected to its fullest extent. The public authority shall be obliged to establish free education, both primary and in the arts and sciences. (13.) Religious liberty. (14.) Individual security, and by that(i.) No Venezuelan may be imprisoned or fbrcibly arrested for debts which do not result from fraud or crime ; (ii.) Nor may be compelled to receive in his house troops, whether billeted or quartered ; (iii.) Nor shall he be tried by special Tribunals or Commissions, but by the usual Judges and by virtue of laws enacted previous to the commission of the offence or action to be tried ; (iv.) Nor shall he be imprisoned or arrested except after a summary inquiry showing that he has committed a punishable offence, and upon a written warrant of the official ordering the arrest, the motive for the same being stated; exception shall, however, be made when the individual is taken in the act, but even in that case he shall not be put in prison except by order of the

judicial authorities, nor shall those arrested by the police be detained more than three days without being either set at liberty or carried before the competent Judge; (v.) He shall not be cut off from communicating with his fellowcitizens for any reason or pretext ; (vi.) He shall not be compelled to make oath nor to submit to cross-examination in a criminal case implicating either himself, his relations within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second of affinity, or his wife (vii.) Nor shall he be condemned to suffer any penalty in a criminal matter except after having been legally heard; (viii.) Nor shall he be kept in prison if the causes for the same have been removed; (ix.) Nor sentenced to penal servitude for more than ten years; (x.) Nor to be deprived of his liberty for political reasons except upon previous summary investigation, the result of which shall prove that he has been implicated in public disturbances, and show that he is inimical to the restoration of order. In such cases he shall not be immured in the same prison as criminals confined for common offences, nor shall he be detained once order has been re-established ; (xi.) He shall not be tried a second time for the same offence, nor condemned to suffer any kind of torture ; (xii.) All infamous punishments remain abolished by whatever law they may have been established. (15.) Equality, in virtue of which(i.) All shall be tried by the same laws, and shall be subject to equal duties, obligations, and contributions; (ii.) There shall not be granted titles of nobility, honours, or hereditary distinctions, or employments or offices the salary or emoluments of which are in excess of the period of service ; (iii.) Officials and Magistrates shall not be addressed in any other style than " Ciudadano" and " Usted." 15. The preceding enumeration does not restrict the States from exercising the faculty of granting other rights to their nhabitants. 16. Those persons who shall issue, sign, execute, or order to be executed, Decrees, Orders, or Resolutions which violate any of the rights guaranteed to Venezuelans are held to be guilty, and shall be punished in conformity with the laws. Any citizen is free to make an accusation against such persons, and the right to proceed against them shall endure for five years. 17. The rights acknowledged and laid down in the preceding Articles shall neither be diminished nor altered by the laws

regulating their exercise; those laws which do so shall be held to be unconstitutional and shall be of no effect.

TITLE V.-Of the Congress of the United States of Venezuela,

its Composition and Attributes. Section 1.-Of the Composition of Congress. 18. The Congress of the United States of Venezuela shall be composed of two Chambers, one of Senators, the other of Deputies 19. The States have the competency to regulate the mode of election of Deputies. Section 2.-Of the Chamber of Deputies. 20. In order to form the Chamber of Deputies each State shall elect one Deputy for every 35,000 inhabitants, and one other for any excess not less than 15,000. Substitute Deputies shall likewise be elected equal in number to the Deputies, and to be substituted for them in the order of their election. 21. In order to be a Deputy it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth. 22. The election of Deputies and Substitute Deputies is popular, and shall be carried out in conformity with paragraph 24 of Article 13 of this Constitution. 23 The Federal district, as provided for by paragraph 6 of Article 13 of this Constitution, shall likewise elect its Deputies in accordance with the same rules as laid down for the States. 24 The Deputies shall hold their office for four years, and shall be renewed in full. Sole paragraph.-When through death or from any other cause the representation of a State is reduced to less than its proper number, it will proceed, in conformity with the law, to hold an election to fill up the vacancies that have occurred for such time as may be required to complete its period. In this case the Substitute Deputies remaining from the first election shall be held to be Principal Deputies. 25. The Chamber of Deputies has the following attributes (1.) To examine the Annual Report to be presented by the President of the Unigcd States of Venezuela. (2.) To elect every two years, within the first fifteen days of its Sessions, the Attorney-General of the nation, and two substitutes, by an absolute majority of votes, in successive ballots. These shall make a legal declaration before the high Federal Court, promising

to enter upon the exercise of their functions in the manner determined by law. (3.) To pronounce a vote of censure upon the Ministers of State, who, ipso facto, vacate their office. Section 3.-Of the Senate. 26. To form this Chamber the Legislative Body of each State shall elect three principal Senators, as also three substitutes to fill up vacancies among the former in the order of their election. 27. In the event of death, resignation accepted by the Chamber, or of any other cause, the total number of Principal and Substitute Senators of a State is reduced, the Legislative Assembly shall proceed to hold elections, for the remainder of its Constitutional period, to complete the number referred to in Article 26 ; the substitutes elected at the first election shall, in their proper order, be held to be principals. 28. To be a Senator it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth and to be 30 years of age. 29. The Senators shall hold office for four years, and shall be renewed in full.

Section 4.-Dispositions common to both Chambers. 30. The Legislative Chambers shall assemble every year in the capital of the Union on the 20th February, or as nearly as possible on that date, without being specially convoked. The Sessions shall last seventy days, but may be prolonged to ninety days if so decided by the majority. 31. The Chambers shall open their Sessions with at least twothirds of their members; in default of that number those present shall form a Preparatory Commission, and dictate the measures required to bring up the absent members. 32. Once opened, the Sessions may continue with the presence of two-thirds of those who took part at the installation, with the proviso that such number does not fall below one-half of the total number of members. 33. Although the tAo Chambers shall discharge their functions separately, they shall unite in Congress when prescribed by the Constitution or the laws, or when either of the two Chambers shall deem it necessary. If agreed to, the Chamber invited shall fix the day and hour of the assembly. 34. The Sessions shall be public, but the deliberations may be held in secret if the Chamber so directs.


35. The Chambers have the right (1.) Of framing rules to be observed in their Sessions, and for the regulation of debates. (2.) Of inflicting penalties upon offenders. (3.) Of establishing a police for the building in which their Sessions are held. (4.) Of reproving or punishing spectators who fail to observe order. (5.) Of removing those obstacles which may interfere with the free exercise of their functions. (6.) Of ordering their private Resolutions to be carried out. (7.) Of confirming the election of their members and of receiving their resignations. 36. The two Chambers shall discharge their functions in the same city, shall open and close their Sessions each on the same day, and neither shall have the power to suspend its sittings or to change its residence without the consent of the other. In case of a divergence of opinion, the will of the majority assembled in Congress shall be carried out. 37. The exercise of any public function, whether national or under any of the States, is incompatible, during the Session, with the office of Senator or Deputy. 38. The amount of compensation to be received by Senators and Deputies for their services shall be determined by law. No increase to the same shall, however, take effect until the period following that in which such increase has been sanctioned. 39. Senators and Deputies, from the 20th January of each year until the termination of thirty days after the close of the Sessions, shall enjoy persona] inviolability. This shall consist of the suspension of all civil or criminal proceedings, whatever may be their origin or nature. If any member should commit any penal offence the investigation may continue until the termination of the summary proceedings, but nothing further shall be done during the period of immunity. 40. The Chambers shall not, in any case, be liable to any of their members whose immunity established by the preceding Article has been violated. The magistrates, authorities, and corporations, and their agents, who deprive a Senator or Deputy of his liberty during the enjoyment of' immunity may be prosecuted before the Court of Cassation or the High Federal Court according to circumstances, and may be condemned to loss of office, with inability to exercise any public employment, either national or under the States, for a period of four years, and shall be responsible for the damages involved. The right of prosecution shall not expire until after the lapse of five years.


41. Congress shall be presided over by the President of the Senate, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall be Vice-President. 42. Members of the Chambers shall not be responsible for the opinions expressed nor the speeches made by them. 43. Senators and Deputies may not conclude with the National Executive contracts of any kind whatsoever, nor may they support before it the claims of others. Section 5.-Of the Attributes of Congress of the United States of Venezuela. 44. The Congress of the United States of Venezuela has the following attributes:(1.) To establish and organize the Federal District at the place ceded by the States for that purpose. (2.) To decree national taxes and to organize all matters relating to the Customs. (3.) To settle all questions relating to the working and security of the ports and the maritime and river coasts. (4.) To establish and organize the national posts and telegraphs, and to fix the charges for the carriage of correspondence and the transmission of telegraphic messages. (5.) To sanction the national Codes of law in accordance with paragraph 20 of Article 13 of this Constitution. (6.) To fix the type, value, alloy, weight, and mintage of the national currency, and to decide upon the admission and circulation of foreign money. (7.) To design the coat-of-arms and national flag, which shall be the same for the nation and for all the States. (8.) To create, suppress, and grant funds for national appointments. (9.) To have the exclusive settlement of all that relates to the National Debt and its interest. (10.) To decree loans on the national credit. (11.) To dictate the measures necessary to perfect the system of national statistics and of the census of the population. This shall be carried out every ten years. (12.) To fix annually the numbers of the armed land and naval forces, and to dictate the army regulations. (13.) To define rules for the formation and replacement of the forces referred to in the preceding paragraph. (14.) To declare war, and to call on the National Executive to negotiate peace. (15.) To approve or reject Treaties and diplomatic agreements

which, without this proceeding, shall not be valid, neither shall they be ratified nor the ratifications exchanged. (16.) To approve or reject contracts of national interest concluded by the President of the Union : the same shall not be carried into effect without such approval. (17.) To prepare the Budget of national revenue and expenditure, which in no case shall be omitted to be voted every year. (18.) To promote measures conducive to the prosperity of the country, and its progress in the knowledge of arts and sciences. (19.) To fix and make uniform the national weights and measures. (20.) To grant amnesties. (21.) To establish the special administrative control applicable to the territories of Colon and Amazonas. (22.) To establish the increase which may be necessary in the ratio of inhabitants for the election of Deputies. (28.) To permit or refuse the admission of foreigners to the service of the Republic. (24.) To dictate laws respecting the retirement and pensioning of military men. (25.) To issue the law for the elections of President of the Republic and of the Deputies for the Federal District and National Congress. (26.) To define the law relating to the responsibility of all public officials, whether of the nation or the States, for infractions of this Constitution and of the general laws of the Union. (27.) To settle the method of conferring grades and promotions in the army, and to grant such grades from the rank of " Commandants" upwards. 45. Besides what is enumerated previously, the National Congress may issue laws of a general character whenever necessary. 46. The acts sanctioned by the Legislative Chambers of Venezuela discharging their functions separately as co-legislative bodies shall be denominated "Laws" or " Decrees"; and those sanctioned by the Chambers united in Congress, or separated for private reasons of either, shall be called " Resolutions" (" Acuerdos ").

Section 6.-Of the Formationof the Laws.
47. The Laws and Decrees of Congress may be initiated in either of the Chambers and in the manner ordered by their respec. tive regulations. 48. When a Bill shall have been presented it shall be read, and it will then be taken into consideration whether the Bill shall be admitted; if it is accepted it shall be discussed on three separate


occasions, with an interval of at least a day between each, the rules for debate being duly observed. 49. Bills approved in the Chamber in which they originated shall be passed on to the other for the purposes specified in the preceding Article, and, if not negatived, shall pass back to the Chamber in which they originated with such amendments as they may have undergone. 50. If the Chamber originating the Bill should not admit the amendments, they may insist upon their objections and may send in writing to the other Chamber their reasons for the same. They may then invite the other to unite vith them in Congress, and may resolve in a General Committee to seek for a mode of agreement. If, however, that is not brought about, the Bill will remain without effect even if the Chamber of origin resolves, separately, to confirm its insistence upon its objections. 51. On the passage of the Bills from one Chamber to another, the days on which they have been discussed shall be indicated. 52. The Law which reforms any other Law shall be enacted as a whole, and the preceding Law shall be abrogated in full. 53. The following formula shall be used in all laws "The Congress of the United States of Venezuela,".
" decrees."

54. Bills rejected in the Sessions of one year may not be brought forward again until the Sessions of a subsequent year. 55. Bills standing over in a Chamber at the end of its Sessions shall be subjected to the necessary three discussions in the Sessions following. 56. Laws may be abrogated with the same formalities as are applicable to their being sanctioned. 57. Laws need not be observed except after being published with due solemnity. 58. The faculty held by Congress of sanctioning laws may not be delegated. 59. No legislative act shall have retroactive effect except in matters of judicial procedure, in which case the lowest penalty only shall be inflicted.

TITLE VI.-Of the General Administration of the Union.

Section 1.-Of the National Executive. 60. All matters relating to the general administration of the nation which are not defined by this Constitution as being within the powers of any other authority are in the competency of the National Executive. The latter shall be exercised by a Magistrate

with the' title of President of the United States of Venezuela in conjunction with the Ministers of Departments, who will be his organs, and with the Council of Government, with all those attributes as are conferred by this Constitution. 61. The functions of the National Executive shall not be exercised outside the Federal District except in the case foreseen by section (v) of paragraph (9) of Article 77 of this Constitution. 62. When the President takes command of the army or absents himself from the Federal District as described in paragraph (7) of Article 77, he shall be replaced in the manner indicated by Article 70. Section 2.-Of the Presidentof the United States of Venezuela. 63. The election of President of the United States of Venezuela shall be made by the citizens or each of the States and of the Federal District by direct and secret ballot. The qualifications for election are to be a Venezuelan by birth and to have completed 30 years of age. 64. On the eighth day of the ordinary Sessions of the Chambers the same shall assemble in Congress, and shall proceed to the scrutiny of the votes for the election of the President of the United States of Venezuela. If by this time they should not all have been registered, the measures necessary to obtain them shall be decided upon, further proceedings being deferred for forty days if necessary. Once that term has elapsed, the scrutiny shall be carried out of the votes actually registered, it being, however, understood that they shall not be less than two-thirds of the whole. If they should actually fall below that number the case shall be treated as an absolute vacancy in the Presidency, and the procedure shall then be in accordance with Article 72 of this Constitution. 65. The scrutiny having been carried out in accordance with the preceding Article, the citizen who has obtained an absolute majority of votes of the electors shall be declared the elected President. If there should not be an absolute majority, Congress will elect one of the two who have obtained the highest number of votes. In this election the votes shall be taken by States, each State having one vote, and unless there shall be two-thirds of the States, represented by an absolute majority of the total number of Senators and Deputies, the election shall not be carried out. The vote of each State shall be that of an absolute majority of its Senators and Deputies: in the event of equality, the decision shall be taken by lot. The vote of the Deputies for the Federal District shall be computed with those of the State of Miranda.


66. The election of President should be definitely completed in one Session of Congress, and with that object no menrber shall absent himself without the consent of Congress. 67. If, in the year in which the election of President should take place, fifty days elapse after the 20th February without Congress being installed through the absence of the Constitutional quorum, and the Preparatory Committee of the Senate should find itself with a sufficient nutiber of votes registered to make possible the said election, the citizen presiding over the Committee shall pass on the votes, with the concurrence of the other members, to the High Federal Court, which shall fix one of the four days following that upon which it shall receive the said votes for proceeding to compare them with those received directly from the States, in order to carry out, in public Session, the scrutiny referred to in Article 65. In case of combination, the election shall not take place except in full assembly, when the citizen who obtains the votes of two-thirds of the members shall be declared elected. 68. The President elected in the manner described in the preceding Article shall take the legal oath before the same High Federal Court. 69. If by the 14th April Congress shall not have been installed and the High Federal Court shall not have received the votes registered by the Preparatory Committee of the Senate, it shall proceed forthwith to fix a day to carry out the scrutiny, and shall verify at the same time the votes received directly from the States. If the latter shall be entirely wanting, or either the one or the other shall not be sufficient in number, an absolute vacancy in the Presidency shall be declared. 70. A temporary or absolute vacancy in the Presidency of the Republic shall be filled by the citizen who may be exercising the functions of President of the Council of Government. 71. The President shall remain in office for four years, dating from the 20th February, ou which day in the year in which his term of office comes to an end, even if he has not entirely completed his duties, he shall cease to exercise his functions. In the interval between such date and the date upon which the newly-elected President takes office, the Presidency shall be exercised by the citizen who may be President of the Council of Government. 72. If an absolute vacancy in the Presidency of the Republic should occur during the first two years of a Constitutional period, the President of the Council of Government who enters upon the exercise of the futnctions of President of the Republic shall immediately order elections to be carried out so that such functionary may be nominated for the remainder of the period. 73. The President, even although he may not have been in office

for a full term, may not be elected for the following period. Nor shall be elected President for the next period the citizen who may have discharged the office of President during the last year of thepreceding term, nor the relations of either within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second of affinity. 74. The remuneration of the President or of those who take his place shall be fixed by law, and such remuneration shall not be augmented or diminished during the period in which such law is issued. 75. The President of the United States of Venezuela may be impeached for treason to the country, for infractions of this Constitution and of the laws of the Republic, and for ordinary offences. Section 3.-Of the Attributes of the President of the United States of Venezuela. 76. The attributes of the President of the Union are:(1.) To order the execution of the Laws and Decrees of the National Congress within fifteen days of having received them, and to see that they are fulfilled and carried into effect. (2.) To appoint and remove the Ministers of State. (3.) To receive and compliment the Public Ministers of other countries. (4.) To sign the official letters directed to the Sovereigns or Presidents of other States. (5.) To administer the waste lands, mines, and salt works of the States in conformity with law. (6.) To convoke the Legislative Chambers for their periodical meetings, and to take care that they assemble upon the date fixed by this Constitution. (7.) To organize the Federal district according to law, and to administer it as the first civil and political authority. (8.) To issue navigation warrants to national vessels. (9.) To give an account to Congress during the first eight days of its annual meeting of all the acts performed by him in the exercise of his attributes. (10.) To issue letters of nationality in conformity with the law. (11.) To appoint national officials whose appointments do not rest with other functionaries. (12.) To remove such officials at his free will, and to order their suspension or commit them for trial should there be grounds for such a course. (13.) To defend the Federal district when there may be grounds for fearing a foreign invasion. 412

 1219 

(14.) To dictate the measures necessary for making a census of the people of the Republic every ten years. (15.) To negotiate loans decreed by Congress in entire conformity with the dispositions prescribed. (16.) To look after and protect the collection of the national revenue. (17.) To discharge the other duties attributed to him by law. (18.) To promulgate Decrees and Regulations for the better execution of the laws whenever such laws in their text so require it, taking care that the spirit and reason of such law is not altered. 77. Besides the foregoing attributes which are peculiar to the President of the United States of Venezuela, he shall, with the consultative vote of the Council of Government, exercise also the following:(1.) To preserve the nation from all external attacks. (2.) To convoke Congress in Extraordinary Assembly when any matter may be of sufficient gravity to require it. (3.) To fill up the diplomatic appointments and the posts of Consuls-General and Consuls, the two former being conferred only on Venezuelans by birth. (4.) To direct diplomatic negotiations and conclude all kinds of Treaties with other nations by means of the Diplomatic Agents of the Republic, submitting such Treaties to the National Congress for its approval. (5.) To declare war in the name of the Republic when so decreed by Congress. (6.) To organize the national forces in time of peace. (7.) To direct warlike operations and to command the army in person, or to nominate some person to do so. He shall, moreover, be able to leave the capital if affairs of public importance so require. (8.) To grant general or special amnesties. (9.) In the event of foreign war he shall(i.) Require of the States the assistance necessary for the defence of the nation; (ii.) Levy contributions in advance; (iii.) Arrest or expel the individuals belonging to the nation against which war is declared if they should be opposed to the defence of the country ; (iv.) Suspend rights the exercise of which would be incompatible with the defence of the Republic, except the inviolability of life ; (v.) Indicate the place to which the General Power of the Union shall be temporarily transferred when there may be grave reasons
for the same;

 1220 




1221

(vi.) Commit for trial for treason to the country any Venezuelans who may in any manner be hostile to the national defence; (vii.) Issue letters of marque and reprisals, and indicate the laws to be followed in the matter of prizes. 78. Besides the foregoing attributes, the President of the Republic, with the previous deliberative vote of the Council of Government, shall exercise the following:(1.) To make use of the public forces and of the powers indicated in paragraphs (i), (ii), and (v) of section (9) of the foregoing Article, with the object of re-establishing Constitutional order in the event of armed insurrection against the institutions which the Republic has given itself. (2.) To dispose of the public forces in order to put an end to armed collisions between two or wore States, where the interposition of friendly offices has proved inefficacious, and to require such States to lay down their arms and submit their differences to arbitration as required by section (30) of Article 13 of this Constitution. (3.) To conclude contracts of national importance in accordance with the laws, and to submit the same to Congress for its approval or rejection. Without the latter formality they shall not be able to be put into execution. (4.) To prohibit the entrance into the national territory, or to expel from it, foreigners who are not domiciled therein, and who may be notoriously prejudicial to public order. Section 4.-Of the Council of Government. 79. There shall be a Council of Government composed of nine members nominated by Congress every four years within the ten days following the verification of the votes for the election of the President of the Republic. In this election the votes will be given by the States, each State holding one vote, represented by an absolute majority of its Senators and Deputies. In case of equality the decision shall be taken by lot. There shall likewise be elected in the same form the supplementary members, who shall, in the order of their election, fill any temporary or absolute vacancy among the principal members. 80. The duration of the term of the Council of Government is the same as the Presidential period for which it has been elected. 81. The same qualifications are required for a Councillor as for the President of the Republic. 82. The Council will elect among its own members a President, and first and second Vice-Presidents to fill vacancies, temporary or absolute, in the Presidency. It will also elect a Secretary and such lesser officials as may be necessary.


83. The Council will meet on such occasions as may be determined by its own rules, but may not deliberate unless there are present at least two-thirds of its members. 84. The Ministers of State have the right to speak in the Council, may attend at its sittings whenever it may be considered convenient, and must assist at the same whenever they are called upon to supply information on any subject. 85. The Council of Government has the following attributes:(1.) To give its consultative vote in the cases referred to in Article 77, submitted to its consideration by the President of the Republic through the Minister concerned. (2.) To give or refuse its assent to the exercise by the President of the Republic of any of the attributes conferred upon him under Article 78. (3.) To give its decision in any other matter relating to the general administration which may be submitted to its attention. (4.) To watch over the lawful administration and collection of the national revenue, presenting annually to Congress the information and observations which may be necessary. To look after the due delivery of the sums assigned to the States under section 32 of Article 13 of this Constitution, and the detailed quinquennial publication of the operations of the Treasury. 86. The laws may attribute to the Council of Government such other functions as may be consonant with its high character. 87. The vote of the Council of Government is that of an absolute majority of the members present. The Councillors who do not agree with the opinion of the majority have the right to preserve their vote, and may present it, in writing, at one of the subsequent sittings. 88. The Council will keep a register of all its decisions, an authentic copy of which shall be forwarded every year to the National Congress within the first fifteen days of its ordinary Sessions. There shall be excluded from such copy those matters which relate to diplomatic questions about which reserve may be necessary. 89. The Councillors are responsibleFor treason to the country ; For subornation or bribery in the discharge of their functions; For infractions of the Constitution and of the laws; And for common offences. Section 5.-Of the Ministers of State. 90. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall have for the dispatch of business such Ministers as may be determined

 1222 




1223

by law. The same law shall define their functions and duties, and shall organize their departments. 91. To be a Minister of State it is necessary to have completed 25 years of age and to be a Venezuelan by birth. 92. When the appointment of Minister falls upon a person who is a Senator or Deputy, such person shall not be able to occupy his place in the Chamber to which he belongs, except after the lapse of one year from the date upon which he has given up his office as Minister. 93. The Ministers of State assembled together for the discussion of matters within their competency, constitute the Council of Ministers which will be presided over by the President of the Republic. 94. The Ministers are the sole legal and necessary mouthpieces of the Presideut of the United States of Venezuela. All the acts of the latter shall be countersigned by the Minister or Ministers to whose branches such acts relate: without such formality they shall be of no effect, and shall not be fulfilled or executed by the authorities, officials, or private individuals. 95. All the acts of the Ministers shall be regulated by this Constitution and the laws : they shall not be divested of responsibility by an order of the President, even though the same be in writing. 96. All matters other than the domestic affairs of the DepartThe ments shall be considered in the Council of Ministers. responsibility of the latter shall be collective and mutual ; the only exception to this being the Minister who, not being able to agree with the opinion of the majority, resigns his post. 97. The Ministers shall give an annual account to the Chambers, during the first eight days of their ordinary Session, of their conduct of their respective branches. They shall, moreover, give such verbal or written information as may be required of them. They shall also present within the first ten days of the second month of the Sessions of the Chambers, the general Budget of Revenue and Expenditure and the general account for the preceding year. 98. The Ministers have the right of speech in the Chambers, and shall be obliged to be present when called upon for information. 99. The Ministers are responsible (1.) For treason to the country; (2.) For infraction of this Constitution and of the laws; (3.) For excess of expenditure over the estimates; (4.) For subornation or bribery in the dispatch of the business intrusted to them, or in their nominations of public officials ; and (5.) For malversation of public funds, and for common offences.

 1223 


1224



TITLE VII. Section 1.-Of the Judicial Power of the Nation. 100. The Judicial Power of the United States of Venezuela resides in the High Federal Court, in the Court of Cassation, and in the other Tribunals and Courts established by law. 101. The officials of the Judicial Power are responsible, in the cases determined by law, for treason to the country, for subornation or bribery in the discharge of their functions, for inifractions of the Constitution and the laws, and for common offences.

Section 2.-Of the High Federal Court.
102. The High Federal Court is composed of nine members. 103. Each member of the High Federal Court shall have a substitute to take his place during temporary absence or absolute vacancy. 104. To be a member of the High Federal Court it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth and to have completed 30 years of age. 105. For the composition of the High Federal Court the Legislative Assembly of each State shall send a nomination list of its own to the National Congress, which shall elect from it the principal member and his substitute. Sole paragraph.-The election of the principal and substitute referred to in this Article having been carried out, Congress, in the same Session, shall number, by absolute majorities, the candidates remaining on the nomination lists sent in by the Legislative Assemblies of the States. This enumeration shall be from one to seven, so that in that order they may replace the principal or substitute member should occasion arise. 106. Should the number of States exceed nine they shall, by law, Such law shall be divided into groups ("circunscripciones "). determine the form in which shall be presented the nominations referred to in section 21 of Article 13 of this Constitution, in order that the number of members of the High Federal Court shall never Should the number of States be diminished, a exceed nine. corresponding diminution should take place in the number of members. 107. The election of the members of the High Federal Court shall take place every six years. 108. The law shall determine the functions of the members and of the other officials of the High Federal Court, amongst whom shall be two Secretaries designated by the same.

 1224 




1225

109. The members who have exercised for three years or who still may be in exercise of their functions shall not be admitted, during the period, to any employment in the nomination of the National Executive, even though they renounce their office. 110. In addition to those indicated by this Constitution and the laws, the following are the attributes of the High Federal Court:(1.) To try the accusations made against the President of the Republic, Councillors of Government, Ministers of State, and Members of the High Federal Court and Court of Cassatiou on the grounds respectively determined by Articles 75, 89, 99, and 101 of this Constitution. (2.) To prove and decide the cases referred to in the preceding paragraph. (8.) To take cognizance of the suits, civil or criminal, formulated against Diplomatic Agents in the cases permitted by the law of nations. (4.) To take cognizance of cases of responsibility which, for improper exercise of their functions, are laid against the Diplomatic Agents of the Republic accredited to other countries. (5.) To try civil proceedings when demanded by the nation as determined by law. (6.) To settle disputes which may arise between the officials of the various States in political matters and in matters of jurisdiction or competency. (7.) To take cognizance of all matters of a political nature which the States submit for its consideration. (8.) To define the law, decree, or resolution which may be in force when there may be contradiction between the national laws and decrees themselves, between the laws and decrees of the States and the national laws, between the laws and decrees of the States themselves, or between any of them and this Constitution. (9.) To declare the nullity of all the acts referred to in Articles 118 and 119 of this Constitution, whether emanating from the national authority or that of the Federal district. (10.) To take cognizance of prize cases. (11.) To take cognizance of differences resulting from the contracts or negotiations entered into by the President of the Union. (12.) To carry out the scrutiny of the election of the President of the Republic in the cases provided for in Articles 67 and 69 of this Constitution. (13.) To exercise all other attributes determined by law.

 1225 


1226

 Section 8.-Of the Court of Cassation.

111. The Court of Cassation is the Tribunal of the States, and will be composed of nine members, who shall hold office for six years. 112. To be a member of the Court of Cassation it is necessary -

(1.) To be a lawyer of the Republic with a practice of at least six years; (2.) To be a Venezuelan by birth, and have attained the age of 30 years. 113. To compose the Court of Cassation, the Legislative Assembly of each State shall elect every six years a principal and substitute member, and, furthermore, a list of others from which to fill temporary or absolute vacancies amongst the members in the order of election. Members having exercised their office for three years, or who may still be in discharge of their functions, shall not be admitted during such period to any official post in the nomination of the National Executive, even although they renounce their office. 114. Should the number of States at any time exceed nine, they shall be divided into groups by law. Such law shall determine the form in which these groups shall carry out the election in order that the number of members of the Court of Cassation shall not be more than nine. If the number of States be diminished, a corresponding diminution shall take place in the number of members. 115. The Court of Cassation has the following attributes:(1.) To take cognizance of criminal cases or cases of responsibility instituted against the high officials of the States, applying the respective State laws in matters of responsibility. In the absence of any such laws the general laws of the nation shall be applied. (2.) To declare the nullity of all the acts referred to in Articles 118 and 119 of this Constitution whenever they emanate from the authority exercised by the high officials of the States. (3.) To take cognizance of matters of appeal in the form and manner determined by law. (4.) To report annually to Congress the obstacles which preclude uniformity in matters of civil and criminal legislation. (5.) To decide the questions which may arise between the officials and legal authorities in the different States, as well as between those in the same State, whenever there shall not exist in it an authority competent to settle the same. (6.) To ascertain the qualifications of its members in conformity %ith Article 112 of this Constitution.

 1226 




1227

(7.) To discharge such other functions as may be attributed to it by law.
TITLE

VIII.-General Dispositions.

116. All those matters which are not expressly attributed to the general administration of' the nation by this Constitution are within the competency of the States. 117. The definition of attributes and faculties indicate the limits of the Public Power; all that which exceeds the said definition constitutes an usurpation of power. 118. All usurped authority has no effect, and its acts are null. 119. All decisions brought about by the direct or indirect intervention of the armed force or by the subversive attitude of a popular insurrection are null and void. 120. All magistrates, authorities, or corporations are prohibited from exercising any function which is not expressly attributed to them by this Constitution or by law. 121. The Courts of Justice of the States are independent ; proceedings initiated in any State shall be terminated in the same without any further investigation than that of the Court of Cassation in such cases as are permitted by law. 122. Neither the National Congress nor the Legislative Assemblies of the States shall be able in any case, for any motive, or under any pretext, to confer extraordinary powers upon or to pass votes of confidence in the President of the Republic, or upon or in any person or corporate body composing the National Executive. 123. All acts of the Legislative Chambers or of the National Executive which violate the rights guaranteed to the States or which attack their autonomy shall be declared null by the High Federal Court even when the declaration of nullity may have been petitioned for by only one of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. 124. The Judges of the High Federal Court and of the other Tribunals of the nation shall receive for their services the compensation determined by law ; such remuneration shall neither be diminished nor augmented so long as they continue in their appointments. 125. The national forces are divided into naval and land troops, and shall be composed of the citizen militia organized by the States according to law. 126. The public force at the command of the National Power shall consist of a contingent furnished by each State in proportion to its population. The States shall call into such service the citizens who are bound to give the same in accordance with the internal laws. 127. In the event of war the contingent may be augaiented by

 1227 


1228



the addition of bodies of citizen militia until the number of men called for by the National Government is reached. 128. The National Government may make changes amongst the chiefs of the forces supplied by the States in the cases and with the formalities determined by the national military laws, and may in that event call upon the States to replace them. 129. Military and civil authority shall never be exercised simultaneously by one individual or corporate body. 130. The nation being in possession of the right of ecclesiastical patronage shall exercise it as the law on the subject determines. 131. The National Government shall not maintain in the States any resident officials possessed of jurisdiction or authority other than the officials belonging to such States. Exceptions to this are : the Fiscal Agents ; those who may be necessary for carrying on the administration ceded by the States under section (16) of Article 13 of this Constitution; officers of the forces in command of fortresses, arsenals, garrisons, and open ports, whose jurisdiction shall be restricted solely to their particular office, and shall be exercised only within the precincts of the fortresses and barracks in their command, remaining otherwise subject to the general laws of thd State in which they reside. They shall be subject to immediate removal or replacement by the National Executive or other authority corresponding to it upon the lawful request of the Government of any particular State. 132. All war material existing in the territory of the Republic at the promulgation of this Constitution shall be the property of the National Government. 133. The States have the right to acquire such armament as may be necessary for their militia, and such warlike stores as may be required -for their internal security, and shall be able to import the same from abroad free of all import duties. In every case of such importation the formalities established by the Military Code and the corresponding fiscal law shall be observed. 134. The National Government shall not quarter in any State troops or officers in command, whether of the same State or of any other, without the permission of the Government of the State in which the force is quartered. 135. In the event of an absolute or temporary vacancy in the office of President of the Republic, the States shall immediately be notified of the accession of the individual who replaces him. 136. Exportation is free in Venezuela, and shall not be weighted with duties of any kind. 137. Any citizen may bring an accusation against the national officials or those of the States, before the Courts or before their superiors, as determined by law.

 1228 




1229

138. The National Treasury shall not disburse any expenditure for which provision has not been made by Congress in the general annual Estimates, and those who infringe this disposition shall be civilly responsible to the National Treasury for the sums paid. In the general payments ordinary expenditure shall have the preference over extraordinary. 139. The offices for the collection of national contributions and those for making payments shall be maintained separately. The former shall have no power to make any payments other than the' salaries of their respective officials. 140. In the election periods the public, national, or State forces shall remain in barracks as long as the polling continues. 141. In international Treaties the following clause shall be inserted: "All differences between the Contracting Parties shall be decided without appeal to war by the arbitration of a friendly Power or Powers." 142. No person may fill at one and the same time more than one appointment in the nomination of Congress or of the National Executive. The acceptance of a second post of any kind whatever is equivalent to resignation of the first. 143. The law will create and designate any other national Tribunals which may be necessary. 144. National officials shall not be able to accept gifts, appointments, honours, or rewards from foreign countries without the consent of the Senate. 145. The armed forces may not deliberate; they are passive and obedient. No armed body may make requisitions, nor exact supplies of any kind except from the national authorities and in the form and manner prescribed by law. The chiefs of the army who infringe this disposition will be tried and punished in accordance with law. 146. The nation and the States shall promote the immigration of, and colonization by, foreigners in accordance with the respective laws. 147. A law will define the manner in which the national officials on taking up their appointments shall take the oath of proper discharge of their duties. 148. The National Executive shall negotiate with the other Governments of America respecting Treaties of Alliance or Confederation. 149. No contract of public interest concluded by the National Government or by that of the States shall be transferred, in whole or in part, to a foreign Government. In all such contracts the following clause shall be inserted : "The doubts and controversies which may arise respecting the interpretation or execution shall be

 1229 


1230



decided by the Venezuelan Tribunals in conformity with the laws ot the Republic, and such contracts shall in no case be a motive for international claims." 150. The prescriptions of the law of nations forms part of the national legislation ; they rule generally in cases of civil war. Consequently, war may be terminated by means of a Treaty between the belligerents, who shall be bound to accept the practices of civilized nations, the guarantee of life being in every case inviolable. 151. This Constitution may be amended or added to, but neither amendment nor addition shall be decreed by Congress except in the ordinary Sessions, and when a petition to that effect has been made by three-fourths of the Legislative Assemblies of the States in ordinary Session. Such alterations shall not be effective until after the re-appointment (" renovacion ") of the Public Powers of the nation by whom they may have been solicited or sanctioned. 152. The Constitutional amendments or additions shall be made by procedure similar to that established for the enactment of the laws. 153. The amendments or additions having been agreed to by the National Legislature, the President of Congress shall submit them to the Legislative Assemblies of the States for final ratification. 154. Congress may likewise take the initiative in formulating amendments or additions, and may agree to them by the procedure indicated in the foregoing Article, but in that case they shall not be held-to be sanctioned without the ratification of three-fourths of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. 155. Whether the Legislative Assemblies of the States or the Legislative Chambers initiate amendments or additions, the final vote of the States shall always be passed to the National Congress, which will then examine and order the promulgation of the amendment or addition as sanctioned. 156. The Constitutional periods will be reckoned from the 20th February, 1894. 157. For all the acts of the civil and political existence of the States the basis of population shall be that determined by the last census of the Republic approved by Congress. 158. In all public Acts and official documents of the nation and of the States shall be recited the fact of the independence dating from the 5th July, 1811, and that of the Federation, dating from the 20th February, 1859. 159. This Constitution becomes effective from the date of its promulgation in the Federal district and in each of the States of the Union. 160. By a special law to be enacted by the National Constituent

Assembly, rules shall be made to be observed in carrying out the final and strictly Constitutional organization of the Republic. 161. The Constitution of the 16th April, 1891, is abrogated. 162. The present Constitution, signed by all the members of the National Constituent Assembly, met together in this capital, and with the assent of the National Executive, shall be promulgated immediately in the Federal district, and, as soon as it is received, in the States of the Union. Given in the room of the Legislative Palace, in which are held the Sessions of the National Constituent Assembly, at Caracas, the 12th June, 1893, in the 83rd year of the Independence and the 35th of the Federation. FILTOIAxo ACEVEDO, President. P. FEBRES CORDERO, First Vice-President. J. BERtrO, Second Vice-President. F. TOSTA GARCIA, Secretary. Federal Palace of Caricas, the 21st June, 1893, the 83rd year of the Independence and the 35th of the Federation. Let it be enacted and carefully executed. JOAQUIN CRESPO. 
