Constitution of the United States of Venezuela29 March 1901The National Constituent Assembly, in the name of God Almighty and by theauthority of the People of Venezuela, decrees:Title IOf the Nation and Its TerritoryArticle 1The territory of the United States of Venezuela is the same that in the year 1810corresponded to the General Captaincy of Venezuela, with the modificationsresulting from the public Treaties.Article 2The States of Apure, Aragua, Bolívar (previously Guayana), Barcelona, Carabobo,Cojedes, Falcón (previously Coro), Guárico, Lara (previously Barquisimeto),Mérida, Miranda (previously Caracas), Maturín, Sucre (previously Cumaná),Nueva Esparta (previously Margarita), Portuguesa, Táchira, Trujillo, Yaracuy,Zamora (previously Barinas), Zulia (previously Maracaibo), that the Constitutionof 28 of March of 1864 declared [as] independent, form the Nation, with the nameof United States of Venezuela.Article 3The limits of the States will be determined by those specified to the former[] Provinces [by] the Law of 28 of April of 1856, concerning theterritorial division, with the alterations that should result by the creation of theFederal District and Territories.Article 4The States referred to by Article 2. reserve the right to unite two or more forforming only one, and for this effect, the two-thirds part, at least, of the MunicipalCouncils of the Districts which compose the respective States, must so request tothe Legislative Assemblies, which will accord with what was requested, and willgive account to the National Congress. It will make the declaration of the case,within the ordinary sessions in which it received the file [] which mustbe remitted to it by such Assemblies, and will prescribe the procedure that shall beobserved, in accordance to the law, in use of the Attribution 30 of Article 54. Inevery case, the reduction will not govern except for the following period to that inwhich it was made, and always as long as the States, so united, may still []resume their prior condition, observing [the] identical procedure.Article 5The national territory may not be sold [] in any mode to a foreign power[].Title IIBases of the UnionArticle 6The States which form the Venezuelan Union are autonomous and equal inpolitical entity, and are obligated:1. To organize in accordance to the principles of popular, elective, federal,representative, alternative and responsible Government;- 4 -2. To comply with and enforce and execute the Constitution and the laws of theUnion and the decrees and orders that the National Powers should issue in use oftheir legal attributions and faculties;3. To recognize in their respective Constitutions the autonomy of the Municipalityand its independence from the Political power of the State, in all of what concernsits economic and administrative regime; and in consequence, the Municipality canestablish its income earning [] system, being subject to the provisionscontained in Bases 11, 12, 13 and 14, without there being consideration in anymode comprehended in the obligation present in Numeral 28 of this Article.4. To defend themselves against all violence which damage its independence orthe integrity of the Nation;5. To not sell [] to a foreign power any part of its territory, or to imploreits protection, neither to establish nor cultivate political relations with otherNations;6. To neither adhere nor ally with other Nations, or separate from Venezuela;7. To cede to the Nation for the Federal District the city of Caracas, which will bethe Capital of the Union, and the parishes [of] El Valle, La Vega, Antímano,Macarao, La Guaira, Maiquetía, and Macuto;8. To cede to the Government of the Nation the territory necessary to erect forts,docks, storage [facilities], shipyards [] of construction and otherbuildings indispensable for the General Administration, which will exercise thedomain over the ceded territory, with the restrictions of Article 125 of thisConstitution;9. To leave to the Government of the Union the free administration of theTerritories of Yuruary, Colón, Amazonas and Delta Amacuro, which will be ableto reincorporate to the State to which they formed part or to constitute themselvesinto Federal Entities, fulfilling in one or the other case the formalities required bythe Law, referred to by Article 4 of this Constitution;10. To reserve to the Federal Power every legislative and executive jurisdiction inwhat concerns maritime, coastal and fluvial navigation, the docks and the nationalroads, taking as such those that exceed the limits of the State, of the FederalDistrict or of a Federal Territory. The Federal Power may not restrict with anyclass of taxes, privileges or preferences, the navigations of the rivers, lakes andother navigable waters which have required or that should require channelopenings [canalización];11. To not impose contributions concerning the national products allocated forexport;12. To not establish taxes concerning foreign products encumbered []with national rights or exempt from encumbrance by the law, neither concerninglivestock, products, effects or any class of merchandise, whether going in transit ornot to another State, or that are transported through its territory, before offering thesame for consumption in it;13. To not prohibit the consumption of livestock [], articles and otherproductions of other States, nor to encumber [] their consumption withgreater or lesser taxes than those paid by their similar ones of the locality;14. To not establish Customs [offices] for the collection of import taxes, becausethere will only be national [offices];15. To reserve for each State the right to dispose of their natural products, in themanner established in Basis 28 of this Article;- 5 -16. To respect the parks and castles, buildings and other properties of the Nation;17. To give entire faith to the public acts and [acts] of judicial procedure of theother States and of the Federal District, and to have them complied with andexecuted;18. To organize their Tribunals and Courts for the most fulfilled []Administration of Justice, and for all to have one same substantive and civil,commercial and penal legislation, and the same laws of civil, penal and mercantileprocedure;19. To concur to the formation of the Federal Courts and Courts of Cassation, inthe manner prescribed by this Constitution;20. To submit to the decisions of the Court of Cassation. The Federal District andthe [Federal] Territories also remain subject to such decisions;21. To adopt for the appointment of the Members of the Municipal Councils,Legislative Assemblies and Chamber of Deputies, the direct vote, and for the restof their functionaries of popular election, the direct vote or [vote] by delegation;having to be secret in both cases and to have as [a] basis the Electoral Census, inaccordance to the Federal law concerning the matter;22. To reserve for the Nation the faculty of legislating concerning Superior PublicInstruction. Both the Nation as well as the States must establish primary gratuitousand obligatory instruction, and secondary [instruction] and [instruction] in the artsand trades [], gratuitous;23. To give the contingent, disarmed, which proportionally corresponds to them tocompose the national public force, in accordance to what is determined by aFederal law concerning the matter;24. To not permit in the States enlistments [] or levies [] that haveas their objective to attack the liberty or independence or [to] disturb the publicorder of the Nation, or of other States, or of another Nation;25. To neither declare nor make war, in any case, one State to another, and to keepstrict neutrality within all of the struggles [] that could arise amongother States;26. To defer to and be subject to the decision of the Federal Court in all of thecontroversies which arise among two or more States, when they cannot on theirown of through peaceful means reach an agreement []. If for anycause, in the case of opting for arbitration, they would not designate an arbitratorto whose decision they would subject themselves, it remains of fact to the FederalCourt;27. To recognize the competence of the Court of Cassation to take cognizance ofthe causes that due to treason to the Country, or for infraction of the Constitutionand of the laws of the Union[,] are tried against those that exercise the firstexecutive authority in the States, having to provide these principles in theirConstitutions. The procedures [] established by the general laws will befollowed in them, and will be decided with agreement [arreglo] to them;28. To have as their sole own revenue:a) 1. What is produced in all of the Customs [offices] of the Republic [by] thecontribution collected with the name of territorial tax [impuesta territorial], whichhereinafter will be denominated as transit tax [impuesta de tránsito];2. The total of what is produced [by] the mines, the vacant lands and the salt lakes;This revenue [] will be distributed half-monthly [] by theFederal Executive among all of the States, proportionally to the number of theirinhabitants; but, to such effect, for the State whose population does not reachseventy thousand inhabitants, this fraction [] is established on [the] basis ofpopulation for the proportional distribution of the Revenue;b) The product of the sealed paper in accordance to their respective laws, and thetaxes concerning natural products not deriving from vacant lands;If any or some of the taxes cited in this Basis should be suppressed or reduced bythe Law, the Congress must establish the manner of returning to the States the partof the revenue that is suppressed or is reduced;29. To empower the Congress of the Union to create and organize the revenueestablished in Numerals 1 and 2 of the prior Basis. To this effect the States cede tothe Federal Executive the administration of the salt lakes, mines and vacant lands,being able to be awarded the latter two of them in accordance with the law;30. To keep the individuals who [have] asylum in a State distant from thefrontiers, as long as the interested State solicits it.Article 7Neither the National Congress, nor the States, in their laws, can alter in anymanner the Bases stipulated in the prior Article, with the pretext of clarifying orinterpreting them, except through the procedure established to reform thisConstitution.Title IIISection IOf VenezuelansArticle 8Venezuelans are those by birth or by naturalization.a) Venezuelans by birth are:1. All persons who were born or [who] should be born in the territory ofVenezuela, whatever the nationality of their parents may be;2. The children of a Venezuelan mother or father by birth who were born abroad,as long as when coming to the country they domicile in it and declare before thecompetent authority the will to be so;3. The legitimate children who were born abroad or at sea, of a Venezuelan fatherwho is found residing or travelling in exercise of a diplomatic mission, or who isassigned [] to a Legation of the Republic.b) Venezuelans by naturalization are:1. The children of a father and a mother Venezuelan by naturalization, if comingto be domiciled in the country and having manifested their will to be Venezuelans;2. Those born or that should be born in the Hispano-American Republics, as longas they have acquired domicile in the Republic, and would have manifested theirwill to be Venezuelan;3. The foreigners who should have obtained a letter of naturalization orcitizenship, in accordance to the laws.Article 9The manifestations of will to be a Venezuelan must be made before the PrincipalRegistrar of the State in which the [person] manifesting establishes his domicile,and the same, when receiving it, will extend the respective protocol and will senda copy of it to the Federal Executive for its publication in the Gaceta Oficial[Official Gazette].Article 10Venezuelans greater than twenty-one years [of age] are electors and eligible forthe public offices with only the conditions expressed in this Constitution and in thelaws.Article 11All Venezuelans have the duty to serve the Nation, in accordance to what the lawsprovide.Article 12The Venezuelans will enjoy, in all of the territory of the Republic, equal rights andwill have equal duties, without further conditions than those established in thisConstitution.Article 13Foreigners will enjoy all of the civil rights enjoyed by nationals. As such, theNation neither has nor does it recognize in favor of foreigners any otherobligations or responsibilities than those established in the Constitution and in thelaws in favor of the nationals for equal cases.Article 14Foreigners, who take part in the political contests [] will remain subjectto the same responsibilities as Venezuelans and to what is set provided inAttribution 20 of Article 89.Sole Paragraph. In no case can either nationals or foreigners assert [] thatthe Nation or the States or the Municipalities should indemnify them for damages,losses or expropriations, which have not being executed by legitimate authorities,working in their public character.Article 15The Government of Venezuela will not celebrate treaties with other Nations whichdiminish the principles established in the three prior articles.Article 16The Law will determine the rights of foreigners not domiciled.Section IIRights of VenezuelansArticle 17The Nation guarantees Venezuelans the effectiveness of the following rights:1. The inviolability of life, with capital punishment being abolished;2. Property, which will only be subject to the contributions decreed by theLegislative Authority, in accordance to this Constitution, and [for the same] to betaken for works of public utility, [with] prior indemnification and [an] adversarialtrial [];3. The inviolability of correspondence and other particular papers, which can onlybe taken [] by disposition of the competent Judicial Authority, and withthe formalities established by the Laws; but always keeping the respective secrecyof domestic and private [matters];4. The inviolability of the domestic home, which may not be entered []except to impede the commission of an offence; and this shall be executed inaccordance to the law;5. Personal liberty and by it:1. The forced recruitment for service in arms is abolished; service shall berendered in accordance to what is provided for by the Law;2. Slavery is prohibited forever;3. Slaves who set foot on the territory of Venezuela are free;4. All have right to do or [to] execute that which does not damage others; and,5. No one is obligated to do what the law does not mandate, or to be hindered fromexecuting what it does not prohibit.6. The free expression of thought, of word or by medium of the press. In cases ofslander or libel, their actions to resolve them before the competent tribunals ofjustice remain expedited for the aggrieved [persons], in accordance to the commonlaws; but the accused [] may not by imprisoned or detained in any case,except only after sentence has been dictated by the competent Tribunal [in theform] of an executory sentence of conviction;7. The freedom to transit without [a] passport, to move one’s domicile, observingthe legal formalities for it, and to leave the Republic and to return to it, taking andbringing their assets;8. The freedom of industry; however the law may assign a temporary privilege tothe authors of discoveries and productions and to those who establish []an industry unexploited in the country;9. The freedom of meeting or [of] association, without arms, publicly or privately,without the authorities being able to exercise any act of duress [];10. The freedom of petition; this can be conducted before any functionary,authority or corporation, which are obligated to give a prompt response. If thepetition should correspond to several [persons], the first five respond for theauthenticity of the signatures, and all of them for the truth of the facts;11. The right to suffrage, which can only be exercised by male Venezuelans,greater than twenty-one years [of age], with the exception of those subject todeclared interdiction by an executory sentence.12. The freedom of teaching, which will be protected in all of its extension;13. Religious freedom;14. Individual security, and by it:1. No Venezuelan can be imprisoned or arrested for debts not derived from fraudor crime;2. Nor be obligated to receive military [personnel] in their homes [under] thecondition of accommodating [] or quartering [] them;3. Nor be tried by special Tribunals or commissions, except by their natural judgesand by virtue of preexistent Law;4. Nor be detained without prior summary information of having committed [a]crime that merits corporal punishment, and a written order of the functionarydecreeing the imprisonment; unless being caught in flagrante delicto, not beingable outside of this case, to order imprisonment except by judicial authority, nor[can] arrests made by the police last more than three days, after which the arrested[person] must be placed at liberty or be delivered to the competent Judge;5. Nor be [held] incommunicado for any reason or pretext;6. Nor be obligated to render oath nor to suffer interrogation in a criminal causeagainst themselves, or against their relations, within the fourth degree ifconsanguinity or second of affinity, or against the spouse;7. Nor be condemned to suffer any penalty in criminal matters, except only afterbeing legally heard;8. Nor continue to be imprisoned, if the foundations which motivated [theimprisonment] are destroyed;9. Nor be deprived of liberty, for political causes, without immediate summaryinformation by which he is compromised in conspiracies against public order. Inany case, those detained may not be intermingled [] in the same prisonwith those accused or imprisoned for common crimes, nor be chained down[], or be deprived of liberty once order has been re-established;10. Nor be tried a second time for the same act, nor be subjected to suffer any kindof torment;11. Nor be convicted to corporal punishment for more than fifteen years.15. Equality, by virtue of which:1. All [persons] must be tried by the same laws and be subjected to the sameduties, services and contributions;2. Titles of nobility will not be granted, nor honors or distinctions [based on]descent [], or employment or office of which salaries or emolumentslast for more time than the service; and3. No honorific will be given to employees or magistrates other than that of“citizen” and of “your” [usted].Article 18The prior enumeration does not restrict [] the States from the faculty toagree on other rights for their inhabitants.Article 19Those that issue, outside of the case of Article 89, sign, execute or order theexecution of decrees, orders or resolutions which violate any of the rightsguaranteed to Venezuelans, are culpable, and must be castigated in accordance towhat is determined by the Law. Any citizen is enabled [] to accuse them, andthe right of accusation against them will last for a year after the end of theconstitutional period.Article 20The rights recognized and consecrated in the prior Articles, will not be diminishedor damaged by the laws that regulate their exercise, and those that do will bedeclared, in conformity with Attribution 10 of Article 105 as unconstitutional.Title IVNational Sovereignty and Public OrderArticle 21Sovereignty resides essentially in the people, who exercise it by means of thePublic Powers to guarantee liberty and order.Article 22The people do not govern except through their mandatories [] orauthorities established by the Constitution and the Laws.Article 23The definition of attributions and faculties specifies the limits of the Public Power;everything that oversteps such definition, constitutes an usurpation of attributions.Article 24Any usurped authority is without efficacy and its acts are null.Article 25Every decision accorded by direct or indirect requisition of force or of a gatheringof people with subversive attitude, is null of right and lacks efficacy.Article 26The Government of the Union is and will always be republican, democratic,elective, federal, representative, alternative and responsible.Article 27The Exercise of Sovereignty is conferred by the vote of the citizens or of thecorporations that have the faculty to elect the Public Powers in the tenor of thisConstitution; without it being facultative [] to any of these powers toarrogate the Plenitude of Sovereignty.Article 28The exercise of any public power carries individual responsibility, foroverstepping [] of the faculties granted by the Constitution, or forbreaking of the law which organizes its functions, in the terms established by thisConstitution and the Laws.Article 29The Public Power is distributed between the Federal Power and the Power of theStates, in the limits established in this Constitution.Article 30The Federal Power is divided into the Legislative, Executive and [the] Judicial.Title VSection ILegislative PowerArticle 31The Legislative Power is exercised by an Assembly which will be denominatedthe “Congress of the United States of Venezuela”, composed of two Chambers,one of Senators and another of Deputies.Section IIOf the Chamber of DeputiesArticle 32To form the Chamber of Deputies, each State will elect one per each fortythousand inhabitants, and one more in excess of twenty thousand. The State whosepopulation does not reach forty thousand [inhabitants] will elect one Deputy. Itwill also elect Substitutes in an equal number to that of the Principal Deputies, tosubstitute them in [the] order of their election.Sole Paragraph. The Deputies will remain in their functions for the entireConstitutional period.Article 33To be a Deputy it is required:To be Venezuelan, natural of the State that elects him or domiciled in it and tohave completed twenty-five years [of age].Article 34The Federal District and the Territories which would have or would reach the basepopulation established in Article 32, will also elect their Deputies in the formdetermined by Basis 21 of Article 6.Sole Paragraph. The indigenous [people] who live in a savage state will not becalculated in the basis of the population.Article 35Attributions of the Chamber of Deputies are:1. To give the vote of censorship to the Ministers of the Office; and for this facttheir offices will remain vacant;2. To elect within the first fifteen months of its installation, in the first year of thecorresponding period, the Procurator General of the Nation and two Substitutes insuccessive votes and by absolute majority. These employees will give the legaloath before the Federal Court, to enter into the exercise of their functions, whichwill be determined by the Law.Section IIIOf the Chamber of the SenateArticle 36To form this Chamber the Legislative Assemblies of each State will elect, fromoutside of them [], two Principal Senators and two Substitutes to fill thevacancies of those by the order of their election.Sole Paragraph. The Senators will remain in their functions six years and will berenewed every three years by half.Article 37To be a Senator it is required to have completed (30) thirty years of age, to havebeen born in the State that elects him and to be Venezuelan [and] domiciled in it.Article 38Attributions of the Chamber of the Senate are:1. To grant the military ranks up to Colonel inclusive, thereafter, on proposal ofthe Federal Executive;2. To accord to various [] illustrious Venezuelans, eight years after theirdeath, the honor to be deposited within the National Pantheon. Those to whom thishas already being accorded or for whom this honor has been requested, are exemptfrom this restriction;3. To exercise the other attributions granted by this Constitution and the laws.Section IVProvisions Common to Both ChambersArticle 39The Legislative Chambers will meet each year in the Capital of the Union [on] theday of 20 of February or the most immediate possible, without the necessity ofbeing previously convoked. The session will last for eighty non-extendable days.Article 40The Chambers will open their sessions with the two-thirds part of their members,at the least; and with the lack of this number, those participating []will meet in Preparatory Commission and will dictate the provisions that areappropriate for the participation of those absent.Article 41Once the sessions have been opened they can be continued with the attendance ofthe absolute majority of the totality of the members.Article 42The Chambers will function separately and will meet in Congress whendetermined by the Constitution and the laws, or when one of the two deems itnecessary. If convened[,] it falls to the invited [Chamber] to set the day and hourof the meeting.Article 43The sessions will be public, but they can also be secret when so agreed by theChamber.Article 44The Chambers have the right:1. To dictate their respective internal regulations and [regulation] of debates and toaccord to the correction of those who violate it;2. To establish the policy in the building in which they celebrate their sessions;3. To correct or punish the spectators who fail in the established order;4. To remove the obstacles which oppose the free exercise of their functions;5. To mandate to execution their privative resolutions;6. To qualify their members and to hear their resignations.Article 45The Chambers will function as one same population [], they will openand close their sessions on one same day; and neither of the two can suspend orchange their residence without the consent of the other. In case of divergence, theywill meet in Congress and what the majority resolves will be executed.Article 46The exercise of any public or national function or [that] of the States, isincompatible with those of Senator or Deputy, during the sessions. The acceptanceof a national posting [destino] that is not within military [matters], will hinder theSenator or Deputy from rendering the functions of such in the sessions immediateto the time in which the posting is being performed.Article 47The Law will designate the emoluments the Senators and the Deputies will receivefor their services, which may not be increased except for the period following theone in which the increase was decreed.Article 48The Senators and the Deputies from January 20 until 30 days after the end of thesessions, will enjoy immunity; and this consists in the suspension of any civil orcriminal procedure, whatever its origin or nature may be.When any [of them] commits an act which merits corporal punishment, discovery[] will continue until the termination of the summary, remaining inthis state while the immunity lasts.Article 49The Chambers may not, in any case, interfere with [] any of their members[so as] to violate the immunity within him that is established by the prior Article.The Magistrates, authorities or corporations and their agents, who deprive anySenator or Deputy of his liberty, during the enjoyment of his immunity, will besubject to trial before the competent juridical authority, being able to be accusedby any citizen to such end, and will remain removed from their employments forthe same act, without prejudice to the penalties established for the offenders of theConstitution.Article 50The Congress will be presided over by the President of the Senate; and he of theChamber of Deputies will be Vice President.Article 51The members of the Chambers are not responsible for the vote, or for the opinionsthat they emit in them.Article 52The Senators and Deputies may not celebrate with the Federal Executive their owncontracts or with others; nor process before it the claims of others.Article 53When due to death, or for another cause that produces absolute vacancy, thesubstitutes of one State within the Senate have been reduced, to a number that isless than the corresponding one, its Legislative Assembly will fill the vacancieswhich have occurred, for the time lacking for the substitute or substitutes. Withregards to the absences which would occur in the Chamber of Deputies, therespective Constitution of the States will determine the manner to substitute them.Section VAttributions of the CongressArticle 54The Congress of the United States of Venezuela has the following attributions:1. To dictate the constitutive law of the Federal District and of the [Federal]Territories and their respective electoral laws. The Federal District will have anautonomic Municipal Council with regards to its administration. The Law willdetermine the manner in which the attributions of the Municipality do not halt[] the freedom of political action that the Executive and other HighFederal Powers resident in it must provide;2. To decree the national taxes, create the customs [offices] and organize all ofwhat is referent to them;3. To resolve all of what is relative to the ability and security of the ports andmaritime and fluvial costs;4. To sanction the national Codes with agreement to paragraph 18 of Article 6 ofthis Constitution, and to the code of Federal Public Instruction.5. To establish the type, value, law, weight and minting of the national currency ofgold and silver, the gold standard [] being the monetary standard; toresolve concerning the admission and circulation of foreign gold, of whichimportation into Venezuela is and will be free;6. To legislate concerning the Banks and concerning any other institutions ofcredit;7. To designate the national coat-of-arms and flag, which will be one and the samefor the Nation and all of the States;8. To create, suppress and grant national employments;9. To determine exclusively, concerning all that relative to the national debt and itsinterest;10. To decree public debt [] concerning the credit of the Nation;11. To provide for all of what is relative to the formation of the Geographical Map[Carta] and of the National Statistics and Census. This must be conducted everyten years;12. To dictate the Military Code and Marine [Code] and the laws conducive to theorganization of the National Militia; having to provide in it for the creation andorganization of the professional Institutes for the improvement of the citizens whodedicate themselves to a career in arms, the conferring of ranks by a rigorous scale[] being mandatory [];13. To annually establish the number of land and sea forces;14. To dictate the rules for the formation and replacement of the forces expressedin the prior number;15. To decree war and require the Federal Executive to negotiate peace;16. To approve or deny the diplomatic Treaties and Conventions, those thatwithout the requirement of their approval will neither be valid nor can be ratifiedor exchanged []. The Law of approval dictated by the Congress will notreceive the [order of] Execution, nor will the treaty be ratified[,] except when it isaccepted by the other party. The treaties will not be published except when theyhave been ratified and exchanged;17. To approve or deny the contracts of national interest celebrated by the FederalExecutive, which may not be brought into effect without its approval;18. To discuss and sanction the public General Budget of Incomes and Expenses,which in no case will be left [without] voting each year;19. To promote all of what is conducive to Immigration and Colonization;20. To establish and [make] uniform the national weights and measurements;21. To grant amnesties;22. To permit, or not, the admission of foreigners into the service of the Republic;23. To dictate the general laws regarding military removals and gratuities, andretirement and pensions [];24. To legislate with regards to the National Mail and Telegraph;25. To hear the resignation of the President and Vice Presidents of the Republic;26. To dictate the laws relative to the diplomatic and consular services, and toregulate both careers;27. To issue the law that will establish the rules to be followed in the cases ofcapture []; those of marque [], and that of policing on theborders with neighboring [] countries;28. To establish the law concerning the responsibility of all of the nationalemployees and [employees] of the States, for infraction of this Constitution andthe general laws of the Union in the respective Code;29. To dictate the law regarding the Electoral Census for the effects of Basis 21 ofArticle 6.30. To prescribe the procedure to be observed to make effective the union orseparation proposed by the States, as soon as the file [] is received thatconcerns this particular being remitted by the respective Assemblies; and to makeeffective the reintegration of the Territories to their respective States, or theirelevation [] into Federal Entities;31. To dictate the laws relative to the naturalization of foreigners; to the mines, saltlakes and vacant lands; to the Public Registry; to the organization of thepenitentiaries and quarantine stations []; to expropriation for publiccause; to intellectual property and to the privileges of invention, discovery andestablishment of new industries, and of industrial marks []; to theorganization of the Federal Court, [the] Court of Cassation and other FederalTribunals; and concerning epidemics and epizootic diseases [];32. To issue all of the laws relative to the exercise of the attributions that thisConstitution grants to the Federal Power.Article 55The acts sanctioned by the Legislative Chambers of Venezuela, functioningseparately as co-legislating bodies, will be denominated “Laws” []; and thosesanctioned when meeting in Congress, or separately, for the privative matters ofeach one, will be called “Agreements” [].Section VIOf the Formation of the LawsArticle 56The initiative of the laws will have its place in any of the Chambers, and [is of the]competence of their respective members.Article 57After a bill has been presented, it will be read and considered to be admitted, andif it should be [admitted], will be given three discussions with an interval of atleast a day, one from the other, observing the rules that have been established forthe debates.Article 58The bills adopted in the Chamber in which they were initiated will be passed to theother for the effects of the prior Article, and if not denied, will be returned to theChamber of its origin with the alterations that it should have suffered.Article 59If the Chamber of origin does not admit the alterations, it can insist and send itswritten reasons to the other. The same can also be invited to meet in Congress andresolve it in general Commission to search for the manner of agreement, but if thiscannot be achieved, the bill will be left without effect, unless [] the Chamberof the origin resolves, separately, on the ratification of its insistence.Article 60When passing the bills from one Chamber to the other, the days of its discussionwill be expressed.Article 61The Law which reforms another will be drafted entirely, and will abrogate[] the prior one in all of its parts.Article 62This formula will be used in the Laws: “The Congress of the United States ofVenezuela, decrees”.Article 63The bills rejected in the sessions of one year, may not be presented again except inthose of another year.Article 64The bills remaining pending in one Chamber at the end of the sessions, will sufferin them the same three discussions in the subsequent sessions.Article 65The Laws are abrogated with the same formalities established to sanction them.Article 66The legislative acts once sanctioned will be communicated by duplicate to thePresident of the Republic, and will be published in the Diario de Debates [Gazetteof Debates] of the Chamber of the Senate, signed by the Presidents and [the]Secretaries of both Chambers; and will be in observance, fulfilling the formalitiesestablished in Attribution 1 of the Federal Executive. It will return one of the twocopies to the Congress with the mandate for its fulfillment.Sole Paragraph. In the publication made in the Diario de Debates, the date onwhich the laws or the decrees have been presented to the President of the Republicwill be expressed, so that, the fifteen days referred to by Attribution 1 of Article 89elapsing, they have in all manners all their force and effect [vigor].Article 67The faculty that the Congress holds as legislator is not delegable. Neither can itexempt or dispense to any person from the fulfillment of the proceduresestablished in the Laws in matters that are not of its competence, due to theirnature, due to being attributed to any of the other Public Powers.Article 68No legislative provision will have retroactive effect, except in matters of judicialprocedure, and those which impose a lesser penalty.Article 69When the Ministers of the Office have sustained the unconstitutionality of a bill inthe Chamber, and notwithstanding it being sanctioned as a Law, the ProcuratorGeneral will denounce the conflict [] so that the point is resolved inaccordance to Article 106.Title VIFederal Executive PowerSection IGeneral Administration of the UnionArticle 70All of what is relative to the General Administration of the Nation, which is notattributed to another authority by this Constitution, is [of the] competence of theFederal Executive; this is exercised by a Magistrate who will be appointed [as]President of the United States of Venezuela, in union with the Ministers of theOffice, which are its organs.Article 71The functions of the National Executive may not be exercised outside of theFederal District, except in the case provided for in Numeral 5, Attribution 20 ofArticle 89 of this Constitution.Section IIOf the President of the UnionArticle 72To be the President of the Republic it is required to be Venezuelan by birth and tohave completed thirty years of age.Article 73The President of the Republic will remain six years and may not be reelected forthe immediate constitutional period [following that] where he presides. Neithercan be [President] whoever has performed the Presidency during the last year ofthe prior constitutional period; nor the parents of one or the other until the thirddegree of consanguinity and second of affinity.Article 74The President of the Union must enter into the exercise of his functions after hiselection has been declared. If due to being absent from the capital or for any othercause he cannot do so in an opportune manner, the Presidency will be performedtemporarily [] in accordance to what is provided for in Articles 75,76 and 77 of this. The legal oath must be presented before theCongress of the Republic and in [the] recess of it, before the Federal Court.Article 75The temporary or absolute absences [] of the President of the Republic, willbe substituted by a First Vice President and those of this one by a Second VicePresident, who will have equal duration as the first.Article 76The temporary absences of the two Vice Presidents of the Republic will besubstituted by the President of the Federal Court or by the [person] exercising thePresidency; and the absolute [absences] by this same functionary, while thevacancy is filled in accordance to the following Article.Article 77In case the President of the Federal Court is exercising the Presidency of theRepublic due to the absolute absence of the President and the Vice Presidents of it,[he] will convoke elections to substitute those functionaries for the rest of theconstitutional period, as long as such vacancy should have occurred during thefirst four years of the period; also, if the vacancy should take place during the lasttwo years, the body in charge of [] perfecting the presidential electionreferred to by Article 85, will freely elect, by a process conducted in it, those whomust perform such offices for the rest of the period.Article 78In the cases of absolute or temporary absence of the President of the Republic,whoever has entered to replace him will be communicated []immediately to the States.Article 79Privative attributions of the President of the Republic are:1. To appoint and remove the Ministers of the Office;2. To receive and complement the Public Ministers of other Nations;3. To sign the official letters directed to the Sovereigns or first Magistrates of othercountries;4. To exercise in accordance to the Law, the superior civil and political authorityof the Federal District, through one Governor of its free election and removal, whowill countersign [] his acts;5. To direct War and to command the Army in person, or appoint [the person] whowill do so;6. To temporarily leave [] the capital of the Republic, when matters ofpublic interest or his health require it;7. To address [] to the Congress of the Union in the opportunity and form,established in Article 96 a concise [] message, with regards to the politicaland administrative progress [] of the country and of whatever has beendone in the use of his privative attributions.Article 80The Law will specify the wages that will be received by the President and the VicePresidents of the Republic. The law which modifies them will not govern until thefollowing constitutional period.Article 81The President of the Republic is responsible for treason to the Country and forcommon offences.Section IIIElection of the President of the UnionArticle 82On the day [of] 28 of October of the last year of the Constitutional period, theMunicipal Councils of each State will meet and will vote for President, first VicePresident and second Vice President of the Republic, declaring as the vote of theDistrict that of the absolute majority of their members. The result of the vote willbe sent to the Legislative Assembly of the State.Article 83The Legislative Assembly of the State within the first day of its meeting, willmake the count [] of the votes of the Municipal Councils of the State andwill declare as Candidates of it the citizens who will have obtained the majority ofthe votes of the Districts. From the result a document [] will be derived [] of which three copies will be issued which will be sent: one to theSenate of the Republic, another to the Principal Registry of the State and anotherto the Federal Court. In case of a tie in the vote referred to by this Article, chancewill decide.Article 84The general count will be made by the Senate of the Republic, and in case none ofthe Candidates have obtained the absolute majority of the votes, and in [case of] atie, the Legislative Chambers will constitute themselves in an Electoral Body andthe election will be perfected for the Candidates who will have obtained thegreatest number of votes. The group of the Senators, and Deputies of each Statewill represent one vote, which will be that of the majority of the group.Article 85The count referred to by the prior Article, as well as its perfecting by the ElectoralBody will be made in one sole session to which end[,] in neither one nor the othercase[,] no member can depart from the place without the consent of the Body.Article 86The general count referred to by Article 84 must be practiced by the Senate withinthe first eight days of its ordinary sessions. If until then all of the registries havenot been received, the Chamber will dictate all of the measures conducive toobtain them, having to defer the act up to forty days if necessary. After theexpiration of this term, the count can be effected with the Registries that werereceived, as long as they do not go below the two-thirds part; and if not havingreached this number, the case will be considered, as of an absolute vacancy of thePresidency, and it will proceed as provided for by Articles 76 and 77 of thisConstitution.Article 87The election of the President and Vice President of the Republic, in the States,must remain practiced [] in one sole session of the ElectoralBody, and to this end no member may depart from the place without the consentof the Body during the session.Article 88The Law will regulate the provisions contained in this Section.Section IVAttributions of the Federal ExecutiveArticle 89Attributions of the Federal Executive are:1. To order and have complied with the Laws and Decrees of the NationalCongress, and have them published in the Diario Oficial within the first fifteendays from having received them, except for what is provided for in Attribution 16of Article 54;2. To issue [the] patent of navigation to national ships [];3. To issue the documents [cartas] of nationality in accordance to the law;4. To appoint the national employees of which [the] appointment is not attributedto another functionary;5. To remove the national employees of his free election, and order them[] to suspension or to trial if there is motive for it;6. To defend the Federal District when there are serious fears that the same can beinvaded by foreign [] forces;7. To dictate the measures necessary to conduct the census of the population of theRepublic, every ten years;8. To negotiate the business [] decreed by the Congress, in entireconformity with its provisions;9. To see to and supervise [] the collection of the national revenues;10. To issue the Decrees or regulations for the better execution of the laws, as longas the Law requires or establishes it in its text, taking care to not alter the spirit andthe reason of the Law;11. To see to compliance with this Constitution and with all of the laws of theRepublic;12. To organize the National Army and Militia in accordance to the Law;13. To regulate the Federal service of the Mail, Telegraph and Telephone, inaccordance to the Law; being able to create or suppress stations or offices whichurgently require [] these measures, giving account to the NationalLegislature in its next meeting;14. To preserve the Nation against all external attacks;15. To give account to the Congress, in the form and time established []by Article 96 of all of the acts executed in use of his attributions;16. To extraordinarily convoke the Congress when the graveness of any matterrequires it;17. To direct the diplomatic negotiations and celebrate all kinds of treaties withother Nations, through the Diplomatic Agents of the Republic, submitting suchTreaties to the National Congress, for the effects of Attribution 16 of Article 54;18. To declare war in name of the Republic when so declared by the Congress;19. To administer the vacant lands, the mines and the salt lakes of the States; andto grant civil and military pensions and retirements in accordance to the Law;20. In cases of foreign War he can:1. Request of the States the necessary aid for the national defense;2. Require the contributions anticipated;3. Arrest or expel individuals of the Nation with whom it is at war and who arecontrary to the defense of the Country;4. Issue letters of marque [] and authorize retaliations;5. Specify the place where the Executive and the other Federal Powers musttransitorily move, when there are grave motives for it;6. Provide for the prosecution for treason to the country, of the Venezuelans whoin some [way] are hostile to the national defense;7. Suspend the rights of which [the] exercise is incompatible with the defense ofthe Republic, except that of life, [with] prior declaration of those that aresuspended and with the limitation to the locality or the localities in which it isnecessary;21. To make use of the public force and of the faculties expressed in Numerals 1,2, 5 and 7 of the prior paragraph [] and in the form indicated in it, with theobjective of reestablishing the constitutional order, in the cases of armed uprising[] against the Public Powers and political institutions which have beengiven to the Nation;22. To deploy [] the public force in the case that the interposition of hisgood offices is insufficient, to put an end to the armed conflict between two ormore States, and require them to put down arms and submit their disputes to thejudges who must take cognizance of them, in accordance to what is provided for inNumeral 26 of Article 6 of this Constitution.;He will also exercise this Attribution in case of armed rebellion in any of theStates of the Union, after having exhausted the pacific and conciliating measures,to reestablish the peace and public order, having to this respect, to take intoaccount what is provided for in Article 140 of this Constitution;23. To celebrate the contracts of national interest, with agreement to the laws andto submit them to Congress for the effects of Attribution 17 of Article 54, withoutwhich requisite they will not be able to be executed;24. To prohibit entrance into the national territory, or to expel from it, theforeigners who do not have domicile in the country and who are notoriouslyprejudicial to the public order;25. To perform the other functions that the laws attribute to him.Section VMinisters of the OfficeArticle 90The President of the United States of Venezuela will have for his office theMinisters specified by the law. It will determine their functions and duties, andwill organize their Secretariats.Article 91To be Minister of the Office it is required to have completed twenty-five years ofage and to be Venezuelan by birth.Article 92When the appointment of a Senator or Deputy falls on an individual who has been[a] Minister of the Office in the year of his election, he may not occupy this postwithin Congress until a year after the one in which the account of the acts in whichhe has intervened has been received.Article 93The Ministers are the legal, sole and precise organs of the President of the UnitedStates of Venezuela. All of his acts will be countersigned by that or thoseMinisters to whose branches such acts correspond; and without this requisite theylack efficacy and will neither be complied with nor executed by the authorities,employees or individuals [].Article 94All of the acts of the Ministers must be in agreement with this Constitution and theLaws; their personal responsibility is not safeguarded by the order of the President,even if received in written [form].Article 95All matters must be resolved within the Council of Ministers; but theresponsibility of these acts corresponds to the Ministers who countersign them.Article 96The Ministers will give account to the Chambers every year, within the first tendays of their ordinary sessions in reasoned and documented reports [] ofwhat they have done or intend to do in their respective branches. On the dayspecified to such effect, the Cabinet will present the message referred to byNumeral 7 of Article 79 of this Constitution which will be read by one of theMinisters and all of them will consign their respective reports. They will also givethe written and verbal reports [] requested of them and will likewisepresent, within the first ten days of the 2nd month of the sessions of the Chambers,the general budget of incomes and expenses and the general account of the prioryear.Article 97The Ministers have the right to speak in the Chambers and will be obligated toparticipate in them when they are called to report.Article 98The Ministers are responsible:1. For treason to the Country;2. For infraction of this Constitution and of the laws;3. For incurring [] expenses that are greater than those budgeted;4. For bribery or corruption [] in the dispatch of the business of theircharge or in appointments for public employees; and5. For misappropriation of the public funds and for common offences.Title VIISection IOf the Judicial PowerArticle 99The Judicial Power of the Republic resides in the Federal Court and the Court ofCassation and in the other Courts and Tribunals established by the Laws.Article 100The employees of the Judicial Power and the Procurator General of the Nation areresponsible in the cases determined by the Law, for treason to the Country; forbribery and corruption in the performance of their functions; for infraction of theConstitution and the laws, and for common offences.Article 101To form the Federal Court and the Court of Cassation, the Legislative Assemblyof each State, will elect, from outside of it, two candidates, for each one of them,who are Venezuelans by birth and greater than thirty years [of age]. The twocandidates for the Court of Cassation must be attorneys of the Republic; and forthose of the Federal Court, at least one will have the same condition. The FederalDistrict will elect, through its Municipal Councils for the Court of Cassation, twocandidates who are attorneys of the Republic, Venezuelan by birth and greaterthan thirty years [of age]; and will have the due participation of the Senate.Article 102To conduct the election the States will be considered divided in ten groups, in thismanner: Miranda and Aragua, Carabobo and Guárico. Sucre and Nueva Esparta,Barcelona and Maturín, Bolívar and Apure, Portuguesa and Zamora, Cojedes andYaracuy, Lara and Falcón, Trujillo and Zulia and Mérida and Táchira; and carewill be taken for each group to be represented in both Courts; and that the Statesforming it also have their own representation in one or the other Court, [and] toobtain that, a principal and a substitute for the Court in which the representationmust be held will be elected [from] among its candidates.Paragraph 1. If the Senate finds that one or several of the candidates do not fulfillthe formalities of the law, it will elect [those] who must replace them temporarily[]. In every case it will refer it [] to the LegislativeAssembly and [to] the Municipal Council of the Federal District, respectively, forthese to perfect the election, which they will do, the Assembly in its next ordinarymeeting, and the Municipal Council in the first ordinary session to be held afterbeing notified. Such corporations will refer [it] to the Senate [in] the perfectingand it will conduct the new election.Paragraph 2. The respective substitutes of both Courts will fill the absolutevacancies that occur. The Organic Law will determine the procedure to substitutethe temporary absences.Paragraph 3. In the case of alteration of the number of Entities which participate inthe forming of both Courts, the law will rectify the groups expressed in this Articleso as to not alter the number of Members [Vocales] of each Court.Paragraph 4. In case of absolute absence of the Principal and the Substitute for aState or for the Federal District, the respective Court will refer it to those who haveproposed to the Senate to elect new candidates for the remaining time of theperiod, in accordance to Paragraph 1 of this Article.Article 103The members of the Courts will remain six years and they can be reelected.Section IIFederal CourtArticle 104The Federal Court will be composed of the number of Members which result fromwhat is provided in Article 101 and 102.Article 105The Law will regulate the functions of the Members and other employees of theFederal Court.Article 106Attributions of the Federal Court, as well as those specified by this Constitutionand attributed by the National Codes and the laws of the States in matters ofelections, are:1. To take cognizance of the accusations against the President of the Republic orhe who has his place, against the Ministers of the Office, the Procurator General ofthe Nation, [the] Governor of the Federal District and against its own Members,for reasons in which such functionaries are responsible in accordance to thisConstitution. In such case, it will meet with the Court of Cassation, both Bodiesconstituted as [a] Supreme Federal Tribunal;Paragraph 1. In these trials this Supreme Tribunal will declare if the formation ofthe cause can proceed [] or not; if declaring the former, the functionaryaccused will remain of fact suspended; if declaring the latter, all of the process willcease. When the nature of the offence is common, the matter will pass to theordinary Tribunals; when it is of political nature, it will continue takingcognizance of the matter until its end [] by definitive sentence.Paragraph 2. If the legislative chambers should be functioning, the declaration asto whether there is or is not formation of [a] cause corresponds to them, meeting inCongress;2. To substantiate and to decide the causes to which the prior paragraph []refers;3. To take cognizance of the civil or criminal causes formed against theDiplomatic employees in the cases permitted by the Public Law of Nations;4. To take cognizance of the causes of responsibility that, for poor performance oftheir functions, are formed against the Diplomatic Agents of the Republic, closelyaccredited to other countries;5. To take cognizance of the civil trials when the Nation is the defendant and thelaw determines it;6. To take cognizance of the causes of inmates [];7. To settle the disputes [] arising among the employees of thediverse States, in the political order, in matters of jurisdiction or competence;8. To declare in the briefest possible time, the provision which will prevail in thespecific [especial] case to which it is subject, when the authority called to applythe law, within the legal timeframe [] specified for its decision, on its owninitiative [], or at the instance of [an] interested [person] attends inconsultation to this Tribunal with copy of that conducive, due to considering thatthere is conflict [] between the Federal Laws or [between those] of theStates with the Constitution of the Republic. However, the course of the cause willnot be delayed for this motive and when the opportunity arrives to dictate sentencewithout having received the declaration that this faculty deals with, it will conformto what the Code of Civil Procedure establishes in that particular. In the case thedecision arrives [and] the cause is found in appeal, the higher Tribunal will applywhat is provided for by the Federal Court.9. To declare which is the law in effect when the national [laws] are found inconflict among them, or these with those of the States;10. To declare the nullity of all of the acts of the Legislative Chambers or of theFederal Executive, which violate the rights guaranteed to the States or thoseattacking their autonomy, on petition of any of the Powers of a State;11. To declare the nullity of all of the acts referred to by Articles 24 and 25 of thisConstitution, as long as they emanate from a national authority or [authority] ofthe Federal District;12. To take cognizance of the disputes resulting from the contracts or negotiationscelebrated by the President of the Union;13. To declare, except for what is provided by the public treaties, the executoryforce of the sentences of the foreign authorities with subjection to the conditionsthat the law establishes;Paragraph 1. The decision relative to Attributions 3 and 4, will be dictated by theFederal Court, meeting with [the Court of] Cassation;Paragraph 2. The decisions referent to Attributions 5, 8, 9, 12 and 13, will bedictated by a Chamber composed of the Vice President and four Members of theFederal Court; and in case of appeal, it will meet with the Court of Cassation andthe question will be decided by the vote of the absolute majority of the totality ofboth bodies. The Members who would have decided previously will be replaced inaccordance to the respective Organic Law. He who is [President] of the FederalCourt will function as President.Article 107The Members who would have entered [into] the exercise of their functions, maynot be admitted during the period for which they were elected, [to] anyemployment of the Federal Executive.Section IIICourt of CassationArticle 108The Court of Cassation will be composed of the number of Members which resultfrom what is provided in Article 101 and 102.Article 109The Members who would have entered [into] the exercise of their functions, willbe subject to what is set forth in Article 107 concerning the Members of theFederal Court.Article 110The Court of Cassation has the following attributions:1. To take cognizance of the criminal causes or [causes] of responsibility whichare formed: against its own members meeting with the Federal Court, against thePresidents of the States and against the other high functionaries that laws[concerning] them determine, applying, in matters of responsibility, the laws of thesame States; and in case of the lack of these the general [law] of the Nation will beapplied to the case;2. To declare the nullity of all of the acts referred to by Articles 24 and 25 of thisConstitution, as long as they emanate from a national authority exercised by thehigh functionaries of the States;3. To take cognizance of the recourse of cassation, in the form and termsdetermined by the Law;4. To annually report to [] the National Congress concerning the obstacles[] which oppose themselves to uniformity in matters of civil orcriminal legislation;5. To settle the [questions of] competence that arise between the employees orfunctionaries of the judicial order of different States; and in those of one same[State], as long as an authority called to settle them does not exist in them;6. To qualify its members in accordance with Article 101 of this Constitution.Section IVProcurator General of the NationArticle 111The Public Ministry is the charge of the Procurator General of the Nation, inaccordance to what is determined by [the] Law.Article 112To be the Procurator it is required: to be Venezuelan by birth, [an] attorney of theRepublic, with six years of practice and greater than thirty years [of age].Article 113The Procurator General will remain in his functions [for] two years, being able tobe reelected, and his absolute or temporary absences will be filled by twoSubstitutes, in order of their election.Article 114Functions of the Procurator General are:1. To promote the execution of the laws and of the administrative provisions;2. To provide [] all of the juridical reports required by the Executive andthe Federal Court;3. To see that all of the Federal employees truthfully fulfill their duties;4. To initiate [] accusation before the competent authority against thefederal functionaries for bad performance in the exercise of their officialattributions, requiring of them the consequent responsibility;5. To exercise the Ministerio Fiscal [Prosecuting Ministry] in the trials referred toby Attribution 1 of the Federal Court, and in the criminal causes included inFaculties 1, 3 and 4 of this same Article;6. To give account to the President of the Republic of proceedings [] inthe cases 1, 3 and 4 of this same Article;7. To promote and sustain trials in which the Nation is interested and to defend therights of it in the actions or claims initiated [] against it, having in one orthe other case to fulfill the instructions communicated to it by the FederalExecutive;8. To fulfill the other duties specified by the Constitution and the Laws.Title VIIIGeneral ProvisionsArticle 115All that is not expressly attributed to the general Administration of the Nation inthis Constitution is of [the] competence of the States. These will determine in their respective Constitutions the duration and [the] conditions that their highfunctionaries must have.Article 116The exercise of any function which is not expressly attributed by the Constitutionand the Laws is prohibited to all Magistrates, authorities or corporations.Article 117The Tribunals of Justice in the States are independent; the causes initiated in themwill terminate in those same States, without further examination than that of theCourt of Cassation, in the cases permitted by the law.Article 118Neither the National Congress, nor the Legislative Assemblies of the States, can inany case, for any motive, or under any pretext whatever, confer extraordinaryfaculties or give votes of confidence to the President of the Republic, or to aperson or corporation of those that compose the Federal Executive.Article 119All acts of the Legislative Chambers or [of] the Federal Executive, which violatesthe rights guaranteed to the States or [that] attack their autonomy, must bedeclared null by the Federal Court, in accordance to Attribution 10, even if thesolicitation should have been made by only one of the Legislative Assemblies ofthe States.Article 120The national public force is divided into naval and land [forces], and will becomposed of citizen militias which will organize themselves in accordance to theLaw.Article 121The national public force [as a] charge [cargo] of the National Power, will beformed by a contingent proportionate to its population, which will be given byevery State, calling the citizens to service which must be rendered in accordance tothe Law.Article 122In case of war the contingent can be augmented with the corps of citizen militiasup to the number of men necessary to fill the request of the National Government.Article 123The military authority and the civil [authority] will never be exercisedsimultaneously by one same person or corporation.Article 124With the Nation being in possession of the right Ecclesiastical Patronage, it willexercise it in accordance to what is determined by the Law of 28 of July of 1824.Article 125The National Government will not have in the States other employees, [or]residents, with jurisdiction or authority, except the employees of the same States.Those of the Treasury [Hacienda] are excepted; those which are necessary for theperformance of the Administration ceded by the States in accordance to Paragraph[] 23 of Article 6 of this Constitution; the forces posted [] for thesafeguarding of the borders which have garrisoned fortresses, parks, stations[] and ports, who will only have jurisdiction in what concerns theirrespective postings, and within the confines of the fortress and quarters that theycommand; without this [meaning] that they are not subject to the general laws ofthe State in which they reside, and subject to be immediately removed or replacedby the Federal Executive or whoever corresponds, when required by theGovernment of the respective State for any legal motive.Article 126All of the elements of war extant in the territory of the Republic, from thepromulgation of this Constitution, belong to the National Government.Article 127The States have the right to acquire armaments and other elements of war that arenecessary for their internal security, being able to introduce them [from] abroad,free of all right of import, and fulfilling [] for their introduction in eachcase, the formalities established in the corresponding Military Code and thecorresponding Law of the Treasury [].Article 128Any citizen can accuse the national employees and [employees] of the States,before the Tribunals or superiors appointed by the laws.The judicial employees may not be suspended from the exercise of their functionswithout a prior decision so decreeing, nor be removed from them except by virtueof an executed judicial sentence.Article 129Any expense on the National Treasury will not be made for which an amount hasnot been applied, expressly, by the Congress in the general budget of publicexpenses, and those who infringe this provision, will be civilly responsible to theNational Treasury for the quantities that it would have paid. In all allocations[] ordinary expenses will be preferred to those extraordinary.Article 130Neither the Legislative Power, nor the Executive Power, nor any authority of theRepublic may issue in any case or for any reason paper money, nor declare theforced circulation of any class of Bank Bills, nor any other paper value, nor allowthe importation into Venezuela of foreign or national currency, which is not ofgold.Sole Paragraph. Neither may the minting and import on the account of theNational Government of silver or nickel currency be accorded without the priorauthorization of the National Congress, given by the same procedure established tosanction the laws. The Congress will not give authorization in any case or for anymotive whatever for the minting and importing of quantities that would exceed thecoins already in circulation of eight Bolívares, the silver ones[,] and of oneBolívar, the nickel ones[,] for each inhabitant that the Nation has, for which thecensus that is legally in effect will serve as [the] basis in each case.Article 131The offices of collection of the national contributions and those of payment, willbe always maintained separately, the first not being able to make other paymentthan the wages of its respective employees.Article 132In the election periods, the national public force, or that of the States, will remainquartered [] during the time period [] of the popular elections.Article 133The clause that “all the differences between the contracting parties will be decided,without recourse to war, by arbitration of power or of friendly powers” will beplaced in the international treatiesArticle 134No individual can perform at the same time more than one lucrative posting[] of appointment of the Congress or of the Federal Executive. Theacceptance of any second posting, equals resignation of the first.Sole Paragraph. The employees of public teaching are excepted from thisprovision.Article 135The law will create and will designate the other federal Tribunals that arenecessary.Article 136The national employees may not accept gifts [], charges [cargos], honorsand rewards from foreign Nations, without the consent of the Senate.Article 137The armed force may not deliberate; it is passive and obedient. No armed corpsmay make requisitions or demand aid of any type [], except to the civilauthorities, and in the mode and form determined by the Law. The heads [jefes] ofthe force who infringe this provision, will be tried and castigated in accordance tothe Laws.Article 138A law will regulate the manner in which the national employees, when takingpossession of their postings, will render the oath to perform their duties.Article 139No contract of public interest celebrated by the Federal Government or by that ofthe States, by [the] Municipalities or by any other Public Power, can betransferred, in all or in part, to [a] foreign government; and in all of them thefollowing clause will be considered incorporated, even if not expressly [no loesté]:“The questions [] and disputes of any nature that could arise concerning thiscontract and which cannot be resolved amicably by the contracting parties, will bedecided by the competent Tribunals of Venezuela in accordance with its Laws,without being for any motive or for cause the origin of foreign claims”. TheCompanies [] which are formed in exercise of such contracts, mustestablish their legal domicile in the country, for all of their effects, without thishindering [obste] them from having one abroad as well.Article 140The Law of Man [Derecho de Gentes] is [a] supplement to the national legislation;but it may never be invoked against what is established in this Constitution and theindividual rights that it guarantees. Its provisions will govern specially in case ofcivil war; and in consequence, an end can be put to it through treaties between thecontenders, who must respect the humanitarian practices of the civilized Nations,and to this effect the National Legislature will dictate a law that contains thenecessary instructions for the Army of the United States of Venezuela.Article 141This Constitution is susceptible to amendments or additions; but neither one or theother will be decreed by the National Congress except in ordinary sessions, andwhen they are solicited by the three-fourths part of the Legislative Assemblies ofthe States, in ordinary sessions, nor may they be put into force except after therenewal of the Public Powers of the Nation which solicited or sanctioned them.Article 142The constitutional amendments and additions will be made by the same procedureestablished to sanction the Laws.Article 143The amendment or addition accorded by the National Legislature, the President ofthe Congress will submit it to the Legislative Assemblies of the States for itsdefinitive ratification.Article 144The Congress can also take initiative for amendments or additions and accordthem by the procedure indicated in the prior Article; but in this case [they] will notbe considered sanctioned without the ratification of the three-fourths part of theLegislative Assemblies of the States. In this case as well amendments will governin the following period.Article 145Whether it is the Legislative Assemblies of the States, or the Legislative Chambersinitiating the amendments or additions, the definitive vote of the States will alwaysreturn to the National Congress, as the count corresponds to it[,] and to order theenactment of the amendment or additions that are to be sanctioned [alsocorresponds to it].Article 146The Constitutional period will last six years and the first of them will begin to runon 20 of February of the year 1902.Article 147At the end of every period, and precisely on 20 of February, the President of theRepublic will cease in the exercise of his functions, and the President of theFederal Court or he who has his place will enter into the exercise the Presidency ofthe Republic, for the effects of the transmission of Power.Article 148To exercise the right to elect[,] the citizen must be inscribed in the ElectoralRegistry of the Parish or Municipality of his domicile and [must] present to therespective authority [a] bill or card on which the inscription is evidenced; that ithas been verified with forty days of anticipation at least, and that he is in fullfaculty for suffrage in the election that will be practiced in accordance to [the] lawin such Parish or Municipality.Article 149For all of the acts of civil and political life of the States the basis of the populationwill be that determined by the last Census of the Republic approved by theCongress.Article 150In all the public acts and official documents of the Nation and of the States, thedate of Independence, from 5 of July of 1811, and of the Federation, from 20 ofFebruary of 1859, will be cited.Article 151This Constitution is signed by all of the members of the National ConstituentAssembly which are found in this capital and To Be Complied With []by the Federal Executive [it] will be promulgated immediately in the FederalDistrict and [promulgated] as soon as received in the States of the Union.Article 152The dates of the election acts will be established in a corresponding law, in amanner so that on the first of January the public functionaries in the States areinstalled, and so [that on] 20 of February the election has been made for Presidentand Vice President of the Republic, even when such acts and functionaries havesuffered disturbances [resulting in] the nullity of some which are necessary torepeat or for any other cause.Article 153The Constitution of 21 of June of 1893 is abrogated [].