1180

VENEZUELA.

•(;) Such of the present municipal employees as are irremovable shall retain their posts whilst such posts exist or until similar posts are created, and may not be removed except in the cases prescribed in article 138.

CONSTITUTION •
CHAPTER

of the United States of Caracas, June 24, 1925.(J)

Venezuela.—

I.— The Venezuelan nation and its organisation. division.

Section. I.— Territory and political

ART. 1. The Venezuelan nation is the union of all Venezuelans in a. political federation under the name of the United States of Venezuela. I t is for ever and irrevocably free and independent of. all domination or protection by any foreign Power. 2. The territory of the United State's of Venezuela is. that which, prior to the political transformation of 1810,: pertained to the Captaincy-General of Venezuela, with the modifications which result from the treaties concluded by the republic. This territory can never be ceded, transferred, leased or alienated in any manner to a foreign Power, even for a limited time. 3. The national territory is divided, for the purposes of the internal political organisation of the republic, into that of the States, the federal district, the federal territories and the federal dependencies. 4. The States are : — Anzodtegui, Apure, Aragua, Bolivar, Carabobo/Cojedes, Falc6n, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas, Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zamora and Zulia. 5. The general limits of each one of the States are those which they have at present, and are determined by those which the law of the 28th April, 1850, ascribed to the former provinces, with the modifications ensuing from the creation of the federal district and the federal territories and dependencies, together with those effected by the national constitution of the 5th August, 1909, (2) and those arranged in 1(J17 between the States of Aragua and Cernbobo. Co-terminous States may, by agreements approved by their respective legislatures, modify their common frontier,
making reciprocally: such compensations or cessions of territory as they may see fit. • • ' j 6. The federal district shall be organised by special laws and shall consist of the Libertador and Vargas departments: The former Consists of the city of Caracas with its outlying parishes: El Eecreo, El Valle, La Vega, Aritimano, Macarno and Macuto. •:•••. ' The law shall determine the functions of the municipality of the federal district in such manner that it shall not conflict with the political action of the federal authority. 7. The city of Caracas is the capital of the United States of Venezuela' and the seat of the Federal Government, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph (b) of clause 24 of article 100 and of clause 25 of the same article. 8. The federal territories are those of Amazonas and Delta Amacuro. They shall be organised by special laws, and their limits are-those. which they respectively have at present. • The- boundaries of the said territories and those of the federal district with neighbouring States may be modified by agreements ' which ' the federal executive authority may '•conclude with their Governments and which the National Congress and the legislatures of the respective States may approve.' • 9. The federal territories of Amazonas and Delta Amacuro and such others as may be Created in conformity with the following article may elect to become States', provided that they fulfil the following conditions:— (1) Possess at least the basis of population requisite for the election of a deputy, in conformity with this constitution. (2) Provide to the Congress that they are competent to attend to the public service in all its branches and to meet the expenses necessary therefor. 10. The federal dependencies are the Venezuelan islands in : the Caribbean Sea, with the exception of Margarita, which constitutes the State of Nueva Espnrta. The government and administration of the said dependencies appertains directly to the federal executive until the law shall raise them to the rank of federal territories. 11. All controversies existing between States by reason of their boundaries, and such as may hereafter arise from the like cause, shall be decided' by the Federal Court and Court of Cassation in accordance with such procedure as the law shall direct. Section II.— Bases of the Union. 12. The States enumerated in article 4 form the Venezuelan Union. They reciprocally recognise their autonomy; are declared politically equal; they reserve in its entirety the sovereignty not delegated by this constitution;


and they declare that their primary obligation and that of the federation is the preservation of the independence and integrity of the nation. In consequence, the States can never break the national unity, ally themselves with foreign Powers, solicit their protection or cede any portion of their territory to such,, but they shall defend, and be defended by, the federation against any violence which may be attempted to imperil the national sovereignty. In like manner they undertake to maintain the status and government of the Union and that of the States themselves upon the fundamental bases expressed in the following articles. 13. The form of government of the United States of Venezuela and that of the States of the Union is, and shall ever be, republican, federal, : democratic, elective, representative, responsible and alternative. 14. The States shall be divided into districts, which shall enjoy municipal autonomy and be independent of the political authority of the State in matters which relate to their administrative regulation, with such restrictions as are prescribed by this constitution, but in case of foreign or civil war the executive authority of the State shall also assume the administration of the districts in conformity with the provisions of the State constitution. 15. The States agree in reserving for federal jurisdiction— (1) All matters relating to international affairs of the United States of Venezuela as a sovereign nation. Neither the States nor the municipalities may establish or cultivate political or diplomatic relations with other nations. (2) All matters relative to the flag, the coat of arms, the national anthem and national holidays, and also the decorations and honorary medals which the republic may grant. (3) The supreme care of the general interests of the Venezuelan nation and the preservation of the public peace throughout the entire national territory. (4) The legislation which shall prevail throughout the republic in civil, mercantile and penal affairs and in legal procedure concerning banks, institutions of credit, social provision, health, conservation and improvement of forests, waters and other natural riches of the country, labour, trade marks, literary, artistic and industrial property, public registry, expropriation for the public use, immigration, naturalisation, expulsion and admission of foreigners and the legislation regulative of the guarantees which this constitution sanctions. (f>) Legislation relating to the weights and measures which shall be used throughout the republic.

VENEZUELA.

1J 83

(6) The supreme charge of the due administration of the national laws in the whole of the national territory. (7) The administration of justice by the Federal Court and Court of Cassation in matters within its jurisdiction according to the present constitution; of the ordinary tribunals in the federal district and the federal territories and dependencies; and of the federal tribunals which may function even within the States, in accordance with the provisions of law, in proceedings in which the nation maybe a party, in military causes, in such as relate to common lands, mines and salt deposits and in fiscal processes relative to the federal taxes. The law may invest the tribunals of the States with the functions of federal tribunals in cases not specified. (8) All matters relating to the army and navy and military aviation. Neither States nor municipalities shall maintain other forces than those of their police and prison guards, except such as they may organise by order of the Federal Government. The army shall be formed with the contingent which, in proportion to its population, may be called to service in each of the States, the federal district and the federal territories and dependencies. The law shall regulate the formation of citizen militia, without prejudice to its power to organise also the system of enlistment by contracts. All war material which may be found within the country or be introduced from abroad belongs to the nation. (9) Legislation concerning public instruction. Elementary primary instruction is obligatory, and that given in official institutions shall be free. (10) All matters relative to taking the census and national statistics, in which the States and municipalities shall co-operate in accordance with the provisions of the law. In all matters in which it may be necessary to take the population as basis, either of the nation or of the States, the last census of the republic approved by the Congress shall be taken as the standard. The national census shall be taken at the periods which the law shall provide. (11) All matters relating to the organisation and regulation of the federal district and the federal territories and dependencies. (12) All matters relating to Venezuelan money, whoso character, value, law. weight and coining shall be fixed by the national laws alone and also the circulation of foreign money.


(13) All matters relating to aerial, maritime and river navigation, wharves and structures for disembarkation in
ports. . . ' • ' • • • ' • •

The navigation of rivers and other navigable waterways, which:may not have required special works therefor, shall not be burdened with taxes or imposts. (14) All matters concerning the operation of custom houses for the collection of import taxes, which the national Treasury shall.alone collect, as also those for the transit of merchandise destined to, or coming from, abroad. I n the custom houses there shall continue to be collected^ in addition and until changed by law, the contribution now designated -territorial tax which the national Treasury shall receive. •'••••' .'•'•' Exportation i3 free and no tax shall be established to burden it. (15) All matters relating to mails, telegraphs, telephones and wireless communication. (16) All matters relating to the opening and maintenance .of the national highways, that is, those which traverse a State or the federal district or a federal territory and go beyond its boundaries, cables for aerial traction and railways, although these may lie within the limits of a State, excepting, however, the case of tramways or cable lines for city traction; whose concession and regulation appertain to the respective municipalities. (17) All matters relating to the organisation, collection and use of postage or" fiscal stamps, cigarettes, tobacco, registry, inheritances, matches, spirits- and liquors and such other matters with respect to which the law may establish national imposts. (18) All matters relating to the salt deposits, common lands and their products, pearl fisheries and mines. Each State retains the ownership of such of the said resources as may be found within its jurisdiction, but the administration of all of them pertains to the federal executive, who shall, exercise it in accordance with the provisions of the relative laws. These shall prescribe that the salt deposits are inalienable, that mining, concessions shall not be in perpetuity, and that the common lands may be sold, leased or granted gratuitously by the federal executive as the low may prescribe and subject to the reservations therein made, among which there shall be necessarily included the provision that common lands in the maritime, river, or lake islands shall not be alienated and their use shall only be granted subject' to the condition that transfer of ownership of the land is not involved either directly or indirectly. The income from salt deposits, pearls, mines and


common lands, together with the proceeds of sale, pertains to the national Treasury. (19) All matters throughout the nation relative to public works which may be necessary, without restriction upon the right of the States and municipalities to undertake such for their own account when they may deem it desirable. (20) I n general, all matters enumerated by the present constitution as pertaining to the several authorities which constitute the Federal Government. 16. The States shall conform to, and cause to be carried into effect, the constitution and laws of the Union and the decrees, orders and resolutions which the federal authorities may issue in exercise of the attributes and legal powers within the federal competence enumerated in the preceding article. 17. I t is within the power of the States— (1) To enact their constitutions and the organic laws of their public authorities, in accordance with the fundamental principles of this compact; they are under obligation to adopt the direct and secret ballot for the choice of municipal councils, legislative assemblies and deputies to the Congress, taking as basis the electoral census, pursuant to the federal law on the subject. I t is within the power of the States either to retain their present names or to change them. (2) To elect their public officers in accordance with their constitutions and laws, without prejudice to the condition that by the constitutions of the States which so decide specified powers may be delegated to the President of the republic. (3) To administer justice pursuant to the law through their tribunals, in their respective territories, in all civil and criminal proceedings which may arise in them, excepting those whose consideration should be reserved to federal judges in accordance with this constitution. The decisions of courts of the States shall be subject to no other review than that of the Federal Court and Court of Cassation by virtue of the appeals which the law may authorise and for the purposes which it provides. (4) To organise their revenues, which shall be— (i) The constitutional allowance which shall be, for each State, in proportion to its population the part which appertains to it of the sum of ten million bolivars annually which shall be appropriated from the national Treasury for the use of the States and as compensation for the revenue arising from their common lands and from other sources formerly included within that allowance. After this constitution has been in force for 3 years the allowance' to the States shall consist of an amount which shall be included in the general budget of public expenses of
the nation, equivalent to 12 per cent, of the total revenue income, taking as a basis for each economic year the total amount of such income for the civil year immediately preceding. The sum thus fixed shall be distributed among all States in proportion to their population. (ii) The tax on stamped paper, but without requiring its use in documents relative to the liquidation and payment of national taxes or for the purpose of validating by its use the imposts which this constitution prohibits them from imposing. (iii) The consumption tax and such other contributions as the legislative assemblies may establish, subject to the following restrictions:— (a) The States may not establish custom houses, since these shall only be national, nor may they collect import or export taxes or a transit tax upon foreign merchandise destined for a foreign territory, or upon such other sources of revenue as produce federal revenue, or upon such as are subject to municipal levy, according to article 18. (b) They may not tax cattle in transit, the manufactures or products of other States, or articles, whatever their origin, destined for another State. (c) They may not tax the cattle, produce, manufactures, products or other kind of national or foreign merchandise prior to its being put into consumption, or forbid the consumption of articles which are produced outside the State, or impose thereon (axes different from those which arc paid upon the same articles when produced locally. (d) They shall not require for (he collection of their (axes the intervention of the federal fiscal administration. (c) They shall not create taxes payable in personal labour or its equivalent in money. (/>) The exercise of all other rights appertaining to their status as autonomous entities, which have been reserved in conformity with article 12 of this constitution. 18. The municipalities have power— (!) To organise their services of police, supplies, cemeteries, municipal ornamentation, civil architecture, public lighting, aqueducts, city tramways and other works of a municipal character. Tim service of hygiene they shall administer subject, to the federal laws and regulations concerning health and under the superior inspection of the federal sanitary service. (21 To administer their public and private lands, but without hereafter alienating these except, for buildings. ('•') To organise their revenues, subject to the restrictions enumerated in paragraph (iii) of section ft) of article 17, in addition to which they may not establish licences for agriculture, breeding of animals or fisheries of edible fish. These
industries shall not be burdened either with national or State tastes. "•' ' • 19. States and municipalities shall give full credence to the public acts and judicial proceedings originating from the federal authorities or those of other States, and shall require them to be obeyed and executed. 20. Without prejudice to the right to require the services of the State authorities in all cases in which they should lend their co-operation to the Federal Government, the latter may maintain within their territory federal judges, representatives or agents of the federal Department of Justice, employees of the Treasury, Public Instruction, Posts, Telegraphs and Telephones, Sanitation, Customs, Mines, Common Lands, the fiscal officers necessary for the collection of federal taxes and the forces requisite for guarding the frontiers, the maintenance of the public peace, garrisons of naval stations and forts, the custody of ordnance and protection of the coast"? and ports. The commandants of these forces and the other federal employees within States shall only possess authority in matters relative to their respective functions, without any power or privilege which may differentiate them from other citizens resident in the respective States, but these may not impose duties upon them which might be incompatible with the federal service which is entrusted to them. 2 i . The Federal Government may erect in the territory of the- States the forts, wharves, store-houses, dock-yards, penitentiaries, quarantine stations and other establishments necessary for federal administration. 22. Tho States shall not permit within their territory enlistments or levies whose object may be to assail the pence, liberty or independence of other nations or disturb the internal pence of (lie republic. 23. Neither shall the States declare or make war in any case, maintaining always a strict neutrality in the dissension which may arise between other Slates so long as they are nor required by the Federal Government to take action, which they are bound to do, in the measures which it may direct for the re-establishment of peace. 21. Neither the States nor the municipalities shall negotiate loans abroad. and in the contracts which they they conclude the provision specified in article  of this constitution shall govern. 2;">. The States enumerated in article I may unite, two or more, to form a single State, but reserving always the right to resume the character of States, In either case notice shall be given to the federal executive, the Congress and the other States. 20. In all public acts and official documents of the nation and of the States there shall he stated, in addition to the calendar date, that of the independence, counting from the 19th April, 1810, and that of the federation, counting from the 20th February, 1859.
CHAPTER

II.—Of Venezuelans

and their duties and rights.

27. Venezuelan nationality is derived from birth and may be acquired by naturalisation. 28. Venezuelans by birth are— (1) All those born within the territory of the republic. (2) The children of Venezuelan fathers, whatever may be the place of birth. 29. Venezuelans by naturalisation are— (1) The children of legal age of Venezuelan fathers or mothers by naturalisation, born outside the territory of the republic, who come to live in the country and express their wish to become Venezuelans. (2) Those born, or who may be born, in Spanish-American republics, provided that they have fixed their residence in the territory of the republic and expressed their wish to become Venezuelans. (3) Those foreigners who may have obtained, or who may obtain, letters of naturalisation according to law. (4) The foreign wife of a Venezuelan, during the continuance of the marriage or when, the marriage having been dissolved, she shall, within 1 year following, manifest her wish to remain Venezuelan. 30. The declarations of option to which the preceding article refer? should be made before the Chief Registrar of the respective jurisdiction in which the person in question may have established his or her resilience, and the Registrar receiving these should enter them in the appropriate protocol and forward ;i copy thereof to (lie federal executive for publication in the " Gaceta Oficial." Nationality shall not be deemed to he acquired so long as such publication has not been effected. .'fl. Venezuelans are under obligation to defend the fatherland and to comply with and obey the constitution and laws of the republic as well as the decrees, orders and resolutions which the public authorities, in conformity with their powers, may promulgate for their execution. They shall not undertake service against Venezuela mid. should they do so. they shall be punished as traitors to the fatherland, in accordance with law. 'V2. The nation iMinranl'-es to Venezuelans — (1) The inviolability of life, nnd tio law or mat.dale if any authority may either establish or apply the death penalty. (2) The right of property, which shall only be subject to

the legal contributions and to be taken for works of public utility subject to a judgment given in the presence of the interested party and to compensation as provided by law. Owners shall be obliged also to observe the provisions concerning public hygiene, preservation of forests and water courses and such other similar matters as the law may establish for the benefit of the community. (3) The inviolability of postal and telegraphic correspondence and of other private papers, which shall only be taken possession of by order of competent judicial authority and with the formalities established by law, but preserving always secrecy with respect to domestic and private matters not related to the procedure in hand. (4) The inviolability of the domestic hearth, which may not be invaded except to prevent the commission or consummation of a crime or to enforce the decisions which, in accordance with law, the courts of justice may give in proceedings within their cognisance. The home shall also be subject to sanitary visitation according to law. (5) Personal liberty, and to secure this— (a) Forcible recruiting for service in the army is abolished ; such must be effected in conformity with the provisions of law. (b) Slavery is for ever proscribed and slaves who place foot upon the territory of the republic shall be free. (c) All have the right to do whatsoever shall not injure others, and no one is obliged to do that which should not be legally required, or forbidden to do whatsoever the law docs not prohibit. (m Liberty of thought expressed by speech, in writing or by means of the preps, without prejudice to the responsibilities incurred by those who commit the crimes of injury, calumny, defamation or outrage, (is provided by law. (?) Liberty of transit without passport, of claiming domicile in accordance with the legal formalities, of absenting oneself from the republic and returning thereto, carrying away or bringing back one's property. (H) Libertv of labour and of industries, subject to the prohibitions and limitations which public order and morality may require, hut no monopolies may be granted for the exclusive exercise of any industry. There may only be granted, according to law, the temporary privileges relative to intellectual property, patents of invention and trade marks, and such as are likewise granted in conformity with law and for n definite period, for the establishment and exploitation of railways, undertakings connected with aerial navigation, canalisations, tramways, telephone or telegraph lines, and systems of wireless communication, where such works are carried out or installed at the expense of (he (•onc'ssionnaire. [exxr] L »g 3

1190

VENEZUELA.

and without either the nation or the States guaranteeing to them either revenue or subvention. (9) Liberty of assembly without arms, either publicly or in private, without restraint exercised by the authorities, and that of association subject to the restrictions and prohibitions which the laws may establish. (10) Liberty of petition before any public functionary or official body, with the right to obtain timely response to the respective petition or representation. (11) The right of accusing before competent tribunals those officials who fail in discharge of their duties. • (12) The right of suffrage, in consequence of which all Venezuelans above the age of 21 years, who are not under prohibition or subject to penal restraint involving political disability, are electors and eligible for ail public offices, without other restriction than those established by this constitution and those which arise from the special conditions of competence or capability which the law may require for theexercise of particular offices. (18) Liberty of education. (14) Religious liberty, subject to the supreme supervision of all sects by the federal executive pursuant to law, and always reserving the right of ecclesiastical patronage referred to in article 52. (15) Individual security, for which no citizen shall— (a) Be arrested or imprisoned for debts which do not nrise from crimes. (b) Be judged by special tribunals or commissions, but by the regular judges and in accordance with pro-existing law. (c) Bo imprisoned or detained except after summary" information of having committed a punishable act which deserves corporal penally and written order of the official who ordered the detention, with a statement of the occasion therefor, unless token in jlat/rantc drlirio. The indictment shall not, in any case, be delayed more than J30 days affer the detention. (</) Me held in solitary confinement. (r) Me obliged to take oath or be interrogated in a criminal proceeding against himself or persons from whom he is descended, his relatives within the fourth grade of eo lsanguinity or the second of affinity or a spouse. if) Remain under restraint, if. by a definite judicial derision, the reasons which led thereto are set aside, or after having furnished sufficient, bond in those eases in which, pending proceedings, the law allows liberty under bond in accordance with its due provision.-*. (a) He (•".ldemned to suffer punishment in a criminal matter except after being personally no.died of the charges and heaiil in the form which the law prescribes.

VENEZUELA.

1101

(h) Be condemned to bodily restraint for more than 20 years or to opprobrious penalties. Nor shall there be perpetual punishment, albeit not corporal. (i) Be tried a second time for the same punishable act. (16) Equality, in virtue of which— (a) All shall be judged by the same laws; they shall •enjoy equal protection of these throughout the territory of the nation and shall be subject to equal duties, services and contributions, without exoneration from the same except in the cases which the law permits. (b) There shall not be granted titles of nobility or hereditary distinctions, or employments or offices whose salaries or emoluments last beyond the period of service. (c) There shall be given no other official title than that of " citizen " and " you," excepting diplomatic forms. 33. The foregoing enumeration of rights shall not be understood as a denial of such others as may appertain to citizens and may not be included therein. 34. No federal law or the constitutions or laws of the States, or municipal ordinances, shall diminish or impair the rights guaranteed to citizens; these which may do so shall 1x3 null and void and the Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall so declare. 35. Whosoever shall issue, sign, execute or direct execution of decrees, ordinances or resolutions which may violate any of the rights guaranteed to citizens, are culpable and shall be punished according to law, excepting in the case of measures directed to the defence of the republic or to the preservation or re-establishment of peace, ordered by the proper public officials in their official character, in the cases covered by the following article. '.}<>. Whenever the republic may become involved iii international war, or when civil war may break out within it, or imminent danger of one or the other may exist, the President of the republic, in Council of Ministers, shall so declare and shall suspend the enjoyment of the constitutional guarantees throughout the territory of the nation or in such portion as the decree itself may determine; but this suspension shall have no effect except until peace is reestablished, and if shall he subject (o the following restrictions: — (1) in no case shall any one he deprived of life, which shall be always inviolable, nor may opprobrious punishment be either decreed or applied. (2) There shall neither be decreed nor effected confiscations of property, excepting only as a measure of reprisal in international war against nationals of the country against which the war is being waged, and in case such

should also have decreed confiscation of the property of Venezuelans. (3) Persons, either nationals or foreigners, who are inimical to the re-establishment or preservation of peace shall be arrested, confined or expelled from the territory of the republic, but such measures shall cease on termination of the circumstances which gave rise to them, with the exception of expulsion of foreigners, which the Federal Executive shall not revoke should it not deem that course expedient. CHAPTER III.— Of foreigners.

37. The rights and duties of foreigners shall be fixed by law, but in no case shall they exceed those of Venezuelans. 38. Domiciled and sojourning foreigners who take part in Venezuelan political contests shall be subject to the same responsibilities as Venezuelans and to the provisions, of section (3) of article 36. 39. In no case shall either nationals or foreigners assume that the nation, States or municipalities will indemnify them for injuries, damages or expropriations which shall not have been effected by legitimate authorities, acting in their public capacity. CHAPTER IV.— Of sovereignty and the public authority.

•10. Sovereignty is vested in the people, who exercise it through the public authorities. •II. This specification of attributes and faculties defines the limitations of the public authorities ; all which exceeds such specification constitutes a usurpation of authority . •12. The law shall determine all matters relating to the nullity of nets executed beyond the limitation of authority). livery decision arrived at by direct or indirect use of force or by subversive popular assembly is null. •If. Except as provided in article 10'2. the exercise of public authority imposes upon all officials, federal, State and municipal, individual responsibility with the sanctions which the law lays down for exceeding the authority which the constitution grants them or- for infraction of the Jaw which prescribes the functions of the respective office. All public officials remain, moreover, subject to penalty according to the law for whatsoever other crime which they may commit. Military and civil authority shall never be exercised simultaneously by the same official, excepting the President of the republic or, in case of war, when a civil employee is invested with military functions according to the law.

46. No person shall hold at the same time more than one salaried public office. The acceptance of a second post of this character is equivalent to renunciation of the first, except in the case of public school teachers, employees of academies or hospitals and temporary judges. 47. The armed force must not hold discussions; it is passive and obedient. No armed force may make requisitions or demand the aid of any class except from the civil authorities and in the manner and form which the law specifies. During election times the troops shall remain in barracks. Chiefs of forces which infringe these provisions shall be tried and punished in conformity with the law. 48. No tax shall be collected which is not authorised by law, neither shall any disbursement be made by the national Treasury for which there has not been an appropriation by Congress in the general budget of public expenses, unless, prior to the disbursement, there has been granted an additional credit by executive decree. Whoever infringes this provision shall be responsible civilly to the national Treasury for the amount disbursed. 49. No public employee while he remains such shall accept gifts, offices, honours or rewards from foreign Governments without appropriate prior authorisation of the •Senate. Those who infringe this provision shall be punished according to the law. 

50. No contract of public interest concluded with the Federal Government, the States, the municipalities or with any other public authority shall be transferred, in whole or in part, to foreign Governments, and in all such there shall be deemed to be incorporated, even though it should not be expressed, the following clause: " The doubts and controversies of whatsoever nature which may arise concerning this contract and which may not be determined amicably by the contracting parties, shall be decided by the competent tribunals of Venezuela, in conformity with its laws, without for any reason or cause giving rise to foreign claims." Neither shall such contracts be made with associations not legally domiciled in Venezuela, nor shall the transfer of those concluded be permitted to third persons. 

51. The public authority is divided between the federal, State and municipal powers, within the limits established by this constitution. The federal powers are divided among the legislative, executive and judicial. 

52. As the nation possesses the right of ecclesiastical patronage, it shall exercise this in conformity with the provisions of the law of the 28th July,


53. The law shall, regulate all matters relative to the oath of office which national employees must take on assuming charge of their appointments. *" 54. Federal constitutional terms shall be counted from the 19th April, .922, and shall last for 7 years; within these the legislative authority shall be renewed in the manner provided by this constitution. V.—Of the Legislative Authority. Section I.—Of the Congress. 55. The legislative power is exercised by an Assembly, entitled " The Congress of the United States of Venezuela," which is composed of two Chambers, one of Deputies and the other of Senators. •
CHAPTER

• Section II.—'Of the Chamber of Deputies. 56. In order to constitute the Chamber of Deputies each State shall elect by direct vote and in accordance with its election law one deputy for each 35,000 inhabitants and one more for every excess over 15,000. Any State whose population doss not amount to 35,000 inhabitants shall elect one deputy. In like manner there shall be elected substitutes equal in number to the principals, to take the place of the latter in the vacancies which may occur, in the order of their election. The deputies shall hold office for 3 years, when the entire body shall be renewed. 57. To be eligible for election as deputy it is requisite to be a Venezuelan by birth and to have attained the age of 21 years. 58. The federal district and the federal territories which may possess or may attain the basis of population laid down by article 5(5 shall also elect their deputies by direct vote and with the formalities which the law may fix. Uncivilised Indians shall not be counted in the basis of population. 5!>. The Chamber of Deputies has the special functions— (1) To pass a vote of censure upon Ministers of State when, in the judgment of the Chamber, their acts so deserve, but the President of the republic shall not he obliged to remove them so long as the Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall n ot declare that legal cause exists to subject them to judgment. ('2) Such others as the law may provide. Section I l r . ~ ~ 0 / fits Chamber of the Senate. fit). For the constitution of this Chamber the Legislative Assembly of each State shall elect, from outside of its own


membership, two principal senators and two substitutes, to fill the vacancies of the former in the order of election; The senators shall hold office for 3 years, when the entire body shall be renewed. 61. In order to be a senator it is essential to be Venezuelan by birth and to have attained the age of 30 years. 62. The Senate Chamber has power— (1) To grant to illustrious Venezuelans, 25 years after death, the honour of having their remains interred in the national Pantheon; (2) To accord or withhold consent to the acceptance by national employees of gifts, offices, honours or rewards from foreign Governments, without which these shall not be accepted; (3) To give or refuse consent for promotion of military officers above the rank of colonel and of naval officers above that of captain of a ship; and (4) Such others as the law may provide. Section IV.— Provisions common to both Chambers.

63. The Legislative Chambers shall be convened each year at the capital of the Union, on the 19th April or as soon thereafter as possible, without the requirement of being •previously convoked. The sessions shall last for 90 days, without prorogation; within the term all days and hours shall be deemed legal, and whatever business shall be transacted in them shall be deemed done in regular session. The Legislative Chambers may also be convened in extraordinary session whenever the Congress shall be convoked therefor by the federal executive, but in such ease; (here shall not be dealt with during swell sessions matters distinct from those which have been specified in the summons, except where, in legislating upon these, it may be necessary also to amend prior legislation in respect of related matters. 04. The Chambers shall open their sessions with not less than two-thirds of their members, and, failing this number, those present shall declare themselves in preparatory committee, and shall decide on the measures which they deem necessary to secure the attendance of the absentee. After the opening session, subsequent sessions may he held with the attendance of an absolute majority of the members of the respective Chamber. <)">. Sessions shall be public, but may be held in secrecy when the Chamber so resolves. 00. The Chambers have the right—• (1) To decide their respective internal regulations and rules of debate and to provide for the punishment of those who disobey the same.

(2) To provide police. for the building in which their sessions are held. (3) To correct or punish spectators who fail to keep order. (4) To remove whatever obstacles interfere with the legaL exercise of their functions. (5) To direct execution of their particular resolutions. (6) To validate the elections of their members and to accept their resignations. 67. The Chambers shall act in the same city, shall open and close their sessions on the same day and at the same hour, arid neither of the two shall suspend these or move their location without the consent of the other. In ease of difference they shall convene in Congress, and shall decide as the body resolves. " 68. The holding of any other public office is incompatible, during sessions, with the position of senator or deputy. 69. The law shall fix the emoluments which members of Congress may receive for their services, which emoluments may not be increased excepting for the ensuing term. 70. Senators and deputies, for 30 days prior to the 19th April and until 30 days after the close of the sessions, shall enjoy immunity, and by virtue thereof may not— (1) Be imprisoned, confined, detained or in any manner restrained in the exercise of their duties, not even when during this period they become liable for a criminal act. If the punishable act with which they are charged entails bodily punishment, the process shall remain suspended during the period of imprisonment, notwithstanding the provision contained in letter (r) of guarantee (lo) of article 32 of this constitution, but all steps shall be taken in connexion with the investigation of the net. (2) Be required to contest suits, or he put under oath or answer to interrogatories during the same period, which shall not be taken into account in the judicial periods of the respective proceedings. The Chambers shall not, in any case, expel any of their members in order that their immunity may he violated. 71. Members of the Chambers are not answerable for opinions which they express within them. 72. Legislators and deputies shall not conclude contracts with the federal executive, either for themselves or for others, or make representations to it in record in claims of others. 73. Whenever by death or other cause which should result in absolute vacancy, (he substitutes of a State in the Senate should have been exhausted, or reduced to a number less than appertains to it, the respective Legislative .Assembly shall (ill the vacancy or vacancies which may
have occurred for the term remaining of the person or persons substituted. With respect to such vacancies as may occur in the Chamber of Deputies, the constitutions of the States and the organic law of the federal district shall decide the manner of filling them. Section V.—Of the Chambers assembled in Congress. 74. The Chambers shall act separately, but they shall unite in Congress when this constitution or the laws so provide and when one of the Chambers may deem it necessary. If the Chamber so invited concurs, it becomes its duty to fix the day and hour for the assembly. 75. The acts which are adopted by the Legislative Chambers sitting separately as co-legislative bodies shall be termed laws and those which they adopt in joint session in Congress, or separately in matters exclusive to either one, shall be designated resolutions. 76. The Congress shall be presided over by the President of the Senate, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall act as Vice-President. 77. The Chambers united in Congress have the following powers: — (1) To hold the elections which are committed to them by this constitution and the laws. (2) To take cognisance of the resignation of the President of the United States of Venezuela. (3) To examine the annual message which the President of the republic has to present. (4) To examine and approve or disapprove Hie reports and statements of account which the Ministers of State must submit, in conformity with article MO of the constitution. (!)) To raise federal territories which so request to the rank of States of the nation, provided that they fulfil the conditions set forth in article 0 of this constitution. (T>) To examine the supplementary credits d c reed by the federal executive and to approve them if they shall be in accord with the procedure specified in section of article. 

Sixth Section. Of the powers common to both chambers as co-legislative bodies. 
78. The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate-. acting as co-legislative bodies, have the following function;:—• (I) To decree all national taxes. ('2) To decree loans on the national credit and to determine all matters relative (o the national debt. Section VI.—(If


(3) To establish and to abolish national offices and, in general, to legislate concerning the operation of the federal authority. ..•'••. (4) To legislate with respect to the national money, fixing its nature, value, standard, weight and coinage, and concerning the admission and circulation of foreign money, but in no case nor under any pretext shall it decree or authorise forced circulation of bank-notes, or of any value represented by paper, always maintaining the gold standard. (5) To approve or reject diplomatic treaties and agreements which, without such requisite approval, shall not become valid and may neither be ratified nor exchanged. The Act of approval which the Congress may enact shall not receive executive approval until it has been certified that the treaty is accepted by the other party. Treaties shall not be officially published until after having been ratified and exchanged. (6) To approve or reject contracts for the construction of railways, aerial traction-cable systems, establishment of telegraphic or wireless communications, immigration and other matters of national interest authorised by this constitution or the laws which the federal executive may conclude. Mining concessions and titles to public lands which may be granted in accordance with the respective laws are not subject to the approval of Congress. (~) To authorise the executive authority to dispose of real property belonging to the nation. '8) To fix and secure uniformity in the national weights and measures in conformity with the decimal metric system. ('.') To adopt the genera! budget of public income and expenditure, in which shall be fixed the salaries of the federal employees and all matters relative to the expenses which may have to be met in the respective economic year. The Congress shall not. either by special laws or by resolutions, authorise the expenditure of any other definite amount in excess of the expenditure included in the Jaw of the budget.
(10) To examine and approve, if it shall be found properly done, the national census, whenever the same shall be taken: for this purpose the federal executive shall submit it to the Congress. (11) To establish the special method of administration applicable to the federal territories. (12^ To fix such increase as may be necessarv in the basis of population for the election of deputies in accordance with the latest approved census. Cl.'ii To enact laws of general character with regard to civil pensions and retiring pay, pay of retired officers of
the army and awards to widows and descendants of deceased military employees payable by the national Treasury. In the general budget of public income and expenditure the Congress shall fix the item or items in total which are appropriated to cover that expenditure, and the federal executive will make due distribution thereof, granting the respective warrants in each individual case through the appropriate Ministry, in accordance with the provisions of the law. - • • (14) To declare war and to require the executive to negotiate peace. (15) To enact the law for the organisation and replacement of military and naval forces. (16) To grant amnesties. (17) To legislate on all matters relative to the security of ports and coasts. (18) To legislate respecting the electoral census, public instruction, organisation of the national finances, aerial, maritime and river navigation, wharves, mails, telegraphs, wireless communication, railways, national highways and operation of vehicles of mechanical traction thereon, public lands, salt deposits, pearl fisheries and mines. (19) To legislate concerning the other subjects enumerated in section (4) of article 15 and, in general, with respect to all matters under federal supervision. Section VII.—Of the enactment of laws.

79. Laws may be initiated in either Chamber whenever at least 3 of its members submit the bill. Initiative pertains also to the executive authority through the Minister whose department the matter concerns. 80. As soon as a bill is presented it shall be rend ami considered as to its admissibility and, if granted, three discussions shall be given to it with an interval of 1 day at least between each and in conformity with the rules of debate which may have been adopted. 81. Pills approved in the Chamber in which they were introduced shall pass to the other for its consideration in the same form prescribed in the preceding article. If not rejected they shall he returned to the Chamber of origin with the amendments which may hive been made. 8'2. If the originating Chamber shall not agree to the amendments, it shall insist on the bill a* originated, sending its reasons therefor in writing to the other Clmmlx»r, and if the latter accept the same the law shall be approved. If not, the Chambers shall convene in Congress in which the articles as to which disagreement, existed and their related matter shall be submitted to other

1200

VENEZUELA.

discussion and be decided by a majority vote, and if agreed upon they may be redrafted in form different from that proposed in either of the Chambers. 83. Bills rejected in the sessions of a given year shall not be introduced anew until the following or a later year. 84. Bills pending in either Chamber at the end of the sessions shall not be reconsidered unless introduced anew in the sessions of the following or a later year, and they shall then follow the some course as if they were original bills. 85. In all laws this formula shall be followed: — " The Congress of the United States of Venezuela decrees " : 86. Any law which amends another shall be redrafted in its entirety and the former law shall be wholly repealed. 87. Laws are repealed with the same formalities established for their enactment. 88. Legislative acts finally approved shall be engrossed in duplicate in the form in which they were adopted, without any change or modification being made. Both copies shall be signed by the President, Vice-President and Secretaries of the Congress, with the date of their final approval; one of these copies shall be sent to the President of the republic for his authentication, together with that of the Minister or Ministers interested, and shall be published in the " Gaceta 0ficial." 89. In case of obvious mistake in printing the law, it shall be republished in the " Gaceta Oficial," or there shall be published therein the appropriate notification of errata certified by the Minister or Ministers who authenticated the law. 90. The law shall take effect from the date specified therein, and if such should not be indicated it shall have effect from the date of publication in the " Gaceta Oficial." 91. The power of legislation which appertains to the Congress cannot be delegated. 92. No legislative act shall have effect retroactively except when it reduces a penalty. Laws relating to legal procedure shall be applied from the date when they have effect, even in the case of pending proceedings, but in such case the evidence presented shall be considered in the light most favourable to the defendant, penal judgment being rendered in accordance with the law in force when it was presented. VI.—Of the executive authority. . • Section I.—-Of administration. 93. All matters relating to federal administration which may not be assigned to other authority by this constitution are within the power of the federal executive authority, which is exercised by a magistrate who is termed President of the
CHAPTER

VENEZUELA.

1201

United States of Venezuela, in conjunction with the Ministers of the executive departments. 94. The executive authority shall carry out its resolutions and exercise the general administration entrusted to it by means of the federal agents and employees specified by the law, without prejudice to its right to require the aid of the State Governments in the cases authorised by this constitution. Section II.—Of the President and Vice-President United States of Venezuela. of the

95. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall be Venezuelan by birth, above the age of 30 years, of secular status and in possession of all his civil and political rights. There shall also be a Vice-President of the republic, subject to the same qualifications as required for the President. 90. Within the first 15 days of assembling, the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall convene in Congress to elect the President and Vice-President of the United States of Venezuela. 97. The session of Congress in which the election indicated in the preceding article is to be held shall be fixed at least 5 days in advance and notice thereof shall be published in the " Gaceta Oficial." 98. Temporary and permanent absence of the President of the republic shall be filled by the Vice-President of the republic and, failing him, the President of the Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall assume the authority, and he shall proceed immediately to convoke the Congress to elect a new President and Vice-President for the remainder of the term. For the purposes of this article it shall not be understood that the President of the republic is obliged to relinquish the exercise of his office by reason of mere absence from the capital, provided that he do not leave the territory of the republic, as in addition to the cases expressly provided for in clauses (24), paragraph (?>), and (25) of article 100, he may act in any part of the country in which he may be, in the sense that he is able to communicate thence his instructions to the Ministers of departments respecting the matters which the latter may have to discharge in Caracas with relation to the affairs requiring such instructions, in conformity with this constitution and the laws. 99. Beth the President and Vice-President of the republic shall take oath before Congress to discharge their duties faithfully and loyally. In case, for any circumstance,

1202

VENEZUELA.

they cannot do so before the Congress, they shall take such oath before the Federal Court and Court of Cassation. Section III.—Of the powers of the President of the United States of Venezuela. 100. The President of the United States of'Venezuela has authority— (1) To appoint and remove the Cabinet Ministers and his Secretary-General. (2) To receive the public Ministers of other nations, in accordance with the customs of international law. (3) To sign official letters addressed to chiefs of States. (4) To administer the federal district in accordance with the law. (5) To administer the federal territories in conformity with their organic laws. . (6) To summon the Vice-President to the exercise of the presidency of the republic when he deems it convenient, and to re-assume charge of his office whenever he may wish, within the constitutional term. (7) To direct execution and to secure obedience and execution of this constitution and the laws, and to cause them to be published in the " Gaceta Oficial " as soon as possible after receiving them, excepting as provided in clause 5 of article 78. (8) To promulgate, in Council of Ministers, decrees and regulations for the better enforcement of the laws, being careful not to alter their spirit, purpose or reason. (9) To negotiate, through the appropriate Minister, and with the approval of the Cabinet, the loans which the Congress may decree, in entire conformity with its provisions. (10) To regulate, in Council of Ministers, the services of public health, mails and public or private telegraphs and telephones. (11) To decree, in Council of Ministers, the necessary measures for taking the census of the republic at the periods which the law may provide, and to submit the same for the approval of the Congress. (12) To issue, through the appropriate Minister, shipping documents to national ships, in accordance with the law, (13) To issue, through the proper Minister, letters of nationality, according to the law. (14) To appoint, through the appropriate Minister, national employees whose election may not be attributed to other officials, and to remove them at convenience. •' (15) To decree, in Council of Ministers, the creation and •payment of such new public services as may be necessary . during the recess of the Legislative Chambers.

VENEZUELA.'

1203

(16) To direct, through the proper Minister and with the approval of the Cabinet, that the Federal Attorney-General institute impeachment proceedings against employees who may give occasion for such procedure. (17) To convoke the Congress in extraordinary session with the approval of the Council of Ministers, whenever the gravity of any matter may so require. (18) To declare war in the name of the republic, when the Congress may have decreed it. (19) To administer, through the respective Ministers, the public revenues of the nation in accordance with this constitution and the laws. (20) To conduct personally, or through the appropriate Minister, diplomatic negotiations, and to conclude, through the plenipotentiaries whom he may designate, and with the approval of the Council of Ministers, all classes of treaties with other nations, submitting these to the legislative Chambers for the purposes of clause (5) of article 78. In no case shall international treaties be concluded which infringe the provisions of articles 87, 38 and 39, and in those which may be made the following clause shall be included: " All differences between the parties hereto, relative to the interpretation or execution of this treaty, shall be decided by arbitration." (21) To conclude, with the approval of the Council of Ministers and through the appropriate Minister or Ministers, the contracts of national interest authorised by this constitution and the laws, and to submit the same to the Congress. (22) To prohibit, whenever he deems it desirable, the admission of foreigners to the national territory, and to expel them in the cases authorised by international law or provided by the laws of the republic. (23) To direct war and to command the army and navy in person or to appoint such commander, and to organise the army and the national militia according to the law, fixing the number of both land and sea forces. (24) To decree the suspension of guarantees in the cases provided in article 36. Should civil or international war break out, he shall also— (a) Require from the States the assistance necessary for the defence of the nation or its institutions. (b) Designate the place to which it may be necessary temporarily to remove some or all of the authorities of the federation, whenever serious cause therefor may require. (c) To direct the prosecution for treason to the fatherland of Venezuelans who in any manner are hostile to the national defence or who should voluntarily cause injury to the interests of the Union. •(d) To re-organise States which might be overcome by

rebel forces or whose own Governments might take part in the rebellion. (e) To issue letters of marque and to authorise reprisals. (25) To declare himself on official visit, together with all or any of the Ministers of State and the Secretary-General, to specified States of the Union and federal territories. During the official visit the seat of the federal executive power shall be the place at which the President may be. By the same decree which fixes the visit there shall be regulated all, matters relative to the dispatch of current administrative affairs at Caracas. (26) To make use of the public forces to suppress armed conflict between two or more States whenever the interposition of his good offices may not suffice. (27) To exercise, with respect to the States,. such functions as they may delegate to him by their respective constitutions. (28) To grant pardons. (29) To authorise the issue by the appropriate Minister of titles granting or leasing public lands and mining concessions, in accordance with the laws. (30) To decree, in Council of Ministers, additional credits to the budget of public expenditure, when such may be necessary by reason of the insufficiency of the amount, granted for the respective purpose in the said budget or when the expense may not have been foreseen, and provided that funds exist in the national Treasury to cover the additional credit, without prejudice to the ordinary expenses, which shall be preferred to the extraordinary. 101. It is the duty of the President of the Union to present to the Congress, personally or through one of his Ministers, within the first 10 days of regular session, a message, in which he shall give account of his administrative and political acts, report concerning the state of the republic and point out the measures which, in his judgment, it may be desirable to adopt to improve the existing legislation. 102. The President of the republic or whoever holds his office is only responsible for treason to the fatherland and for common crimes. 103. The President and the Vice-President of the republic shall cease to exercise their offices on the 19th April of the year in which the presidential term ends, and on the same day the President of the Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall be invested with the executive authority until such time as the new President elected shall assume office. Section TV.—Of the Ministers of State. 104. The President of the United States of Venezuela, shall exercise the powers which this constitution accords him

VENEZUELA.

1205

through the Ministers of State whom the law authorises. This shall prescribe their powers and duties and organise their departments. The Ministers are the only and requisite legal agencies of tho President of the United States of Venezuela. All his acts shall be authenticated by the Minister or Ministers to whose department the said acts relate, and they shall issue the resolutions and orders which the President directs pursuant to his lawful powers. The acts of the President shall not be valid without this requisite. I n matters relative to the administration of the federal district the legal agent of the President shall be a Governor, subject to his appointment and removal. 105. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall also have a Secretary-General, who shall authenticate the appointments of the Ministers and of the Governor of the federal district and through him the President of the republic may communicate his instructions, without limiting his authority to do so in person whenever he may deem it desirable. The appointment of the Secretary-General is not subject to ministerial ratification. 106. In order to be a Minister of State or Secretary-General it is requisite to be Venezuelan by birth, above the age of 30 years and to be in possession of civil and political

rights.
107. The decisions of the President of the United States of Venezuela in the exercise of his legal powers shall be agreed upon in the Cabinet, that is, in conference or Council of all the Ministers of State, when such meeting shall be required by this constitution or the laws, or whenever the President may deem it desirable to convoke the Cabinet according to the seriousness or importance of the matters to be considered; but when the matter relates only to one of the departments and no express legal requirement exists calling for its consideration in the Cabinet, it will be sufficient for the Minister or Ministers interested to authenticate or direct execution of the decision of the President. The Vice-President of the republic and the SecretaryGeneral of the President may attend the sessions of the Cabinet. 108. All acts of the Ministers must be in accord with this constitution and the laws; they are not relieved from personal responsibility by the order of the President, even though received in writing. Such responsibility is joint for all the Ministers with respect to the acts of the President decided on in the Cabinet. 109. The Ministers shall render account to the Congress annually, within the first 10 days of its session, in detailed

1206

VENEZUELA;

and documented reports, of what they shall have done and what they deem desirable to be done in their respective departments. They shall present also an account of the funds which they have administered. • The Minister to whose department appertains the general administration of the national revenues shall in particular submit at the proper time to the Congress in each year the draft of the law of the budget of public revenue and expenditure which he shall prepare in consultation with the other Ministers of State. 110. The Ministers have the right of speech in the Chambers and they shall be under obligation to appear before these whenever they may be called upon for information.
CHAPTER

VII.—Of the Federal Law Department.

111. The Federal Law Department is the agency of the federal executive before the federal judicial authority arid that of the States, whenever it may be necessary to appear before them pursuant to this constitution and the laws. 112. The Federal Law Department shall be administered by an official called the Attorney-General of the nation and by the employees appointed by him. 113. The Attorney-General of the nation is subject to the sole appointment and removal of the President of the United States of Venezuela. The law shall determine the manner of appointment of the employees subordinate to him. 114. The Attorney-General ha® authority— (1) To watch, personally or by means of his subordinates, in the cases and in the form which the law prescribes, that in all federal, State and municipal courts the laws are properly enforced in criminal proceedings and in those in which the national Treasury may be interested or which the public order and morality may require. (2) To render the judicial reports which the federal executive or the Federal Court and Court of Cassation may request. (3) To institute personally or through his subordinates, at the instance of the federal executive and before the proper authority, prosecution of the federal officials who may give occasion for such action. (4) To act before the Federal Court and Court of Cassation as prosecuting officer in the proceedings referred to in clauses (1), (2) and (3) of article 120. (5) To represent and sustain, personally or through the officials subordinate to him whom the law indicates, and who in nil cases shall act under his direction, the rights of the nation in all legal proceedings to which it may be a party.

VENEZUELA.

1207

(6) To discharge such other duties as the law may ascribe to him.. 115. The Attorney-General of the nation shall exercise his authority with due regard to the instructions which, in accordance with law, the federal executive may communicate to him through the Ministry whose department the matter may concern.
CHAPTER

VIII.— Of the Judicial

Authority.

Section I.— Fundamental

provisions.

116. The judicial authority of the republic is vested in the Federal Court and Court of Cassation and in the other courts and judicatures which the law may establish. 117. All federal judges shall be appointed for a definite term during which they shall not be removed from office except in the cases provided by the law. Section II.—Of the Federal Court and Court of Cassation. 118. The Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall be composed of 7 members, who must be Venezuelans by birth, above the age of 30 years and lawyers of the republic, and whose term of office shall be 7 years. 119. Election of the members of the Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall be made by the Congress within the first 30 day3 of their session in the year in which the respective constitutional term commences, separate votes being taken for each of the members, those being elected who obtain an absolute majority. In like manner and at the same session there shall be elected successively 7 substitute members, who, in the same order, shall fill the absolute or temporary vacancies of the principals. Casual absences shall be provided for as the law may direct. 120. The Federal Court and Court of Cassation has power:— (1) To take cognisance of charges against the President of the republic or whoever may act in his place; of those against Ministers of State, the Attorney-General of the nation, the Governor of the federal district and against its own members in the cases in which the said officials incur criminal responsibility under this constitution and the laws. (2) To take cognisance of charges against the Presidents of the States and of such other high officials thereof as by their laws shall be provided, applying according to the nature ' of the case the laws of the respective State or the general ' laws of the nation. (3) To take cognisance of civil or criminal causes which

may arise in regard to diplomatic employees in the cases permitted by public international law. (4) To take cognisance of penal proceedings which may arise against diplomatic representatives of the republic accredited to other Governments for improper discharge of

duty.
(5) To take cognisance of appeals and of such other matters subject to its jurisdiction as the law may provide, and in the manner and form which the law designates. (6) To take cognisance of prize causes. (7) To adjust controversies of whatsoever nature which may arise between officials of the political organisation of different States, between one or more States and those of the Union and the federal district and between the tribunals and national officials in the matter of jurisdiction of the court. (8) To adjust contentions which may arise between employees or officials of judicial character of different S t a t e s ; between those of States and federal judicial employees and between those of a single State or of the federal district, provided that there shall not be therein a designated authority to settle the matters. (9) To declare null national laws or laws of the States which conflict with the constitution of the republic. The annulment shall be limited to the paragraph, article or articles in which the conflict occurs, except where these may possess such importance, by their connexion with the context, that in the judgment of the court they involve annulment of the entire law. (10) To declare which law shall prevail when national laws may be found in conflict with one another or with those of the States, and also to declare which article or articles of a law should rule when a conflict may exist between provisions of the same law. (11) To declare null and void acts of the legislative Chambers or of the federal executive which violate the rights guaranteed to the States or which attack their autonomy, and also acts of the legislative assemblies or of municipal councils' which violate the restrictions set forth in paragraph (iii) of section (4) of article 17 and in section (3) of article 18. (12) To annul decrees or regulations which the executive authority may issue for the enforcement of laws when such may alter the spirit, reason or purpose thereof; and in general, when deemed advisable, to declare the nullity of all ,, acts .to which articles 42 and 43 of this constitution have reference, provided that such emanate from national authority or that of the federal district or from superior officials of the States.

VENEZUELA.

1209

If the act alleged to be null and void should be a ministerial resolution relative to the execution, interpretation or lapse of any contract concluded by the federal executive, the court shall not decide the question except in accordance with the procedure directed in the following clause. (13) To take cognisance in disputes at law of all questions concerning the nullity, lapse, termination, extent, interpretation, fulfilment and whatsoever other matters which may arise between the nation and contractors or concessionaries arising from contracts concluded by the federal executive, or of mining concessions or public lands which may have been granted, as also of disputes which may arise from refusal to issue titles to concessions which the plaintiffs allege they have the right to receive, excepting those matters which the law in effect at the time of making the contract, of granting the concession or of the refusal to concede it, according to the circumstances, may leave to the decision of the federal executive without judicial appeal. (14) To declare, excepting as provided by public treaties, the executory force of • judgments of foreign authorities, subject to the conditions which the lawestablishes. (15) To take cognisance in litigious proceedings and in the cases which the law specifies of claims for damages and injuries which may be preferred against the nation, and of all other suits for sums of money which may be instituted against it. (16) To adjust controversies concerning boundaries which may arise between States of the Union, in conformity with article 11. (17) Such other matters as are specified by this constitution and the laws in matters of federal jurisdiction. 121. In the cases specified in clauses (1) and (2) of the preceding article the court shall declare summarily whether or not grounds exist on which to base the proceedings in view of the proofs produced or of those which the court may elicit. If it shall declare the former the official accused shall be ipro facto suspended from office while the proceedings continue. If the latter, the proceedings shall wholly cease. Whenever the cause is that of a common crime the proceedings shall be referred to the proper ordinary tribunal; and when it is political in character the court shall continue to retain cognisance thereof until final judgment. 122. The Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall submit annually to the National Congress a detailed report of its labours, in which it shall indicate also the legal reforms which, in its judgment, it is desirable to effect.

1210
CHAPTER

VENEZUELA.

IX.—Of constitutional amendments. 123. This constitution may be amended in whole or in part, but neither the one nor the other shall be determined except by the National Congress, in its regular sessions, and when these may be requested by three-fourths of the Legislative Assemblies of the States convened in regular session, and the amendments or additions shall not be made except on those matters as to which a majority of the States are agreed. 124. Constitutional amendments and additions shall be made in the same manner as established for the enactment of laws. 125. The amendment or addition having been agreed upon by the National Congress, its President shall submit the same to the Legislative Assemblies for final ratification. 126. The Congress may also take the initiative in making amendments or additions and decide them by the procedure indicated in the foregoing article, but in this case they shall not be considered as adopted without the ratification of two-thirds of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. 127. Whether it be the Legislative Assemblies of the States or the Legislative Chambers which initiate the amendments, the final vote of the States shall be remitted to the Congress, which is alone authorised to examine it. Temporary Provisions. 128. The national constitutional term which commenced on the 19th April, 1922, shall continue its course. I n consequence, the present President and Vice-President of the republic and the members of the Federal Court and Court of Cassation shall continue in their offices for the remainder of the said term, the substitutes of the said court remaining in office in the order of the groups which elected them. The deputies and senators in Congress shall hold their offices for the remainder of the 3-year term for which they were elected. As regards the Attorney-General of the nation, the President of the United States of Venezuela shall fill the office in virtue of the provisions of article 113. 129. The President of the republic shall organise provisionally the States of the Union until these adopt their new constitutions, securing the convening of the Constituent Assemblies o£ all of the States as speedily as possible after the promulgation of the present national constitution. 130. The States renounce in favour of the nation whatever right may pertain to them in respect of balances

VENEZUELA.

1211

of their allowances under the constitution until the economic year of 1924-25 inclusive. Reciprocally the nation renounces in favour of the States whatever claim appertains to it against them up to the said economic year. Final Provisions.

131. The present constitution shall be promulgated and shall enter in force as soon as the National Congress has examined the votes of the Legislative Assemblies of the States and it is found to have been ratified by them. 132. The constitution adopted on the 19th June,. 1922, (3) and promulgated on the 24th of the same month and year is hereby repealed. Done at the Federal Legislative Palace in Caracas, on the 24th day of the month of June, in the year 1925— the 116th of independence and the 67th of the federation. (3) See Vol. CXVI, page 1038.

