
CONSTITUTION of the State of Venezuela, established by the Deputies of the Provinces of Cumana, Barcelona, Margarita, Caracas, Carabobo, Coro, Maracaibo, Merida, Barinas, Apure, and Guayana.- Valencia, 22nd September, 1830. (Translation.)

In the name of Almighty God, the Author and Supreme Legislator of the Universe. WE the Representatives of the People of Venezuela, in Congress assembled, for the purpose of forming the most perfect union, establishing justice, insuring domestic tranquillity, providing for the common defence, promoting the general weal, and securing the inestimable gift of liberty, for ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish the present Constitutiom
TITLE

I.-Of the Nation and Territory of Venezuela.

Art. I. The Venezuelan Nation is the union of all the Venezuelans, under one common Compact of Political Association for their common benefit. II. The Venezuelan Nation is forever and irrevocably free, and independent of all Foreign Power or Dominion, and neither is nor ever shall be the patrimony of any Family or Person whatsoever. III. The Sovereignty resides essentially in the Nation, and can be exercised only by the Political Powers established by this Constitution. IV. The Magistrates, Judges, and other Functionaries invested with whatever kind of authority, are the Agents of the Nation, and, as such, are responsible for their public conduct. V. The Territory of Venezuela comprises all that which, previously to the political changes of 1810, was denominated the CaptainGeneralship of Venezuela. For its better administration it shall be divided into Provinces, Districts, an! Parishes, whose boundaries shall be fixed by Law.
TITLE

I1.-Of the Government of Venezuela.

VI. The Government of Venezuela is, and shall always be, republican, popular, representative, responsible, and alternate. VII. The People shall not, of themselves, exercise any other attributes of Sovereignty than that of the primary Elections; neither shall they commit the exercise thereof to one single Individual. ViII. The Supreme Power shall be divided, for its administration, into the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial. Each Power shall exercise the functions prescribed for it by this Constitution, without exceeding its respective limits.

1119 

TITLE III.-Of the People of Venezuela.

IX. The Venezuelans are such, by birth, and by naturalization. X. The Venezuelans by birth are: 1. The Free Population, born within the Territories of Venezuela. 2. The Children of a Venezuelan Father or Mother, born within any part of the Territory which formed the Republic of  3. Children born in Foreign Countries of Venezuelan Parents, who are absent, either in the service or on account of the Republic, or with the express permission of the competent Authority. XI. The Venezuelans by naturalization are: 1. Persons who, although not born within the Territory of Venezuela, were domiciled in any part of it on the 19th of April, 1810, and who have continued faithful to the cause of Independence. 2. The Children of a Venezuelan Father, or Mother, born out of the Territory of Venezuela, although their Parents be not absent in the service or on account of the Republic, shall become Citizens so soon as they arrive in Venezuela, and declare, in the manner determined by Law, their wish to be domiciled. 3. Foreigners who obtain Letters of Naturalization, conformably to the Law. 4. Those Individuals born in either of the other two Sections, which formed the Republic of Colombia, who may now be, or who may hereafter become, domiciliated in Venezuela. 5. Foreigners who have performed important services to the cause of Independence, the requisite declaration for that purpose being previously issued.
TITLE

IV.-Of the Duties of Venezuelans.

XII. The duties of every Venezuelan are, to live in submission to the Constitution and the Laws, to respect and obey the Authorities who are their organs, to contribute towards the public burthens, and to be ready at all times to serve and defend the Country, sacrificing, in its cause, not only property, but even life itself, if necessary.
TITLE

V.-Of the Political Rights of Venezuelans.

XIII. Every Venezuelan is competent to elect and to be elected for Public Employments, provided he is in the enjoyment of the rights of Citizenship, and possesses the necessary ability, as well as the other qualifications prescribed by the Constitution and the Laws. XIV. In order to enjoy the rights of Citizenship it is necessary .1. To be a Venezuelan. 2. To be married, or to have attained the age of 21 Years.

1120 




(VENEMJELA.)

1121

3. To be able to read and write; but 'this condition shall not be required until the period to be fixed by Law. 4. To be the OwYner of landed Property, producing an annual income of 50 dollars; or to be in the exercise of a profession, employment, or trade, yielding 100 dollars per annum, without being dependent upon any other Person, in the capacity of a domestic servant; or to be in the receipt of an annual salary of 150 dollars. XV. The rights of Citizenship are lost: 1. By naturalization in a Foreign Country. 2. By accepting, without permission of Congress, employment under a Foreign Government, whilst holding an honorary or confidential one in the service of the Republic. 3. By engaging to serve against Venezuela. 4. By condemnation to a corporal or ignominious punishment, so long as the restoration of rights is withheld. XVI. The rights of Citizenship are suspended: 1. By mental derangement. 2. By being in the condition of a domestic Servant. 3. By being an insolvent debtor. 4, By neglecting to pay the sums due to the Public Revenue. 5. By being a reputed Vagabond. 6. By being an habitual Drunkard. 7. By being under a Criminal Prosecution. 8. By a Judicial Interdict.
TITLE VI.-Of Elections in general. XVII. The Citizens should always bear in mind that the general interest taken in the Elections elicits that national spirit which, by suppressing party feelings, secures the declaration of the national will; and that the duration, preservation, and welfare, of the Republic, principally depend upon the discretion exercised in the Elections in the Primary and Electoral Assemblies. XVIII. The chief Civil Authority of each Parish, associated with 2 respectable Inhabitants, to be appointed by the Municipal Council of the District, shall, 2 months previously to the period of each Election, form 2 Lists,-one containing the names of those Individuals who, within the limits of their Parish, are entitled to Parochial Votes, which List must be placarded in some public place; and the other, of such Individuals as possess the qualifications requisite for Electors, which latter List shall be sent to the chief Civil Authority of the District. The latter Authority, in conjunction with the Municipal Council, shall form, out of the Parochial Lists, a general one, including the names of all the Citizens qualified to act as Electors, within the limits of their District, which List shall be placarded in every Parish, one month previously to each period of Election. The Authority neglecting to 
form and to placard the Lists, shall be held responsible, in the manner to be determined by Law ; but the Elections shall take place notwithr standing. The Authorities mentioned in this Article shall, respectively, form 2 Registers, one of the Parochial Voters, which shall be kept in the .Parish, and another of those qualified to act as Electors, which shall bekept in the chief Place of the District. XIX. These Lists shall serve to regulate the admission of the Venezuelans in the next Parochial and Electoral Assemblies. Should disputes arise, from the name of any Individual duly qualified to vote being omitted in the- Lists, or from the insertion of any Individual's name not so qualified, information of the fact shall be given to the respective Civil Authority ; in order that the error may be rectified, should any omission or mistake have occurred, or that, in the event of the complaint or dispute appearing ill founded, a report thereon may be made to the Parochial or Electoral Juntas, respectively, so soon as they may be assembled, that they may decide thereupon, conformably to Article XLVII. TITLE VII.-Of the ParochialAssemblies. XX. In every Parish, whatever may be the amount of its population, a Parochial Assembly shall meet every 2nd year, on the 1st of August. XXI. The Parochial Assembly shall be composed of the Parochial Voters, in the exercise of the rights of Citizenship, who must be Inhabitants of the Parish ; and it shall be presided over by the Chief Judge of the Parish, assisted by 4 other Judges, nominated according to Law, and possessing the qualifications of Parochial Voters. XXII. The Judges, without being obliged to wait for any Order, are bound to convoke the Assembly, at the stated period and day appointed by the Constitution. XXIII. The duty of the Parochial Assemblies is to vote for the Elector or Electors of the respective Districts. XXIV. For a Province, which has to return only I Representative, there shall be named 10 Electors, to be chosen from amongst the Districts, in proportion to their respective population. XXV. The Province which has to return 2 or more Representatives, shall have as many Electors as may be proportionate to the population of the Districts of which it is composed, each District returning 1 Elector for every 4,000 souls, and one more for a residue of 2,000. Each District, although not containing 4,000 souls, shall always return I Elector. XXVI. Each Parochial Voter shall vote for the Elector or Electors of the District, by nominating pitblicly some Citizen or Citizens, Inhabitants of the same District, whose names shall be, without fail, :nscribed, in the presence of the Voter, in a Register destined for that purpose.

XXVII. In order to be an Elector it is necessary: 10. To be a Parochial Voter, in the exercise of the rights of Citizenship. 2'. To have completed 21 years of age, and to be able to read and write. 30. To have been resident in one of the Parishes of thje District,. for at least I year prior to the Election. 40. To be the Proprietor of landed property, producing an an*nual income of 200 dollars; in the exercise of a profession, employment, or trade, yielding 300 dollars per annum ; or in the receipt of a yearly. salary of 400 dollars. XXVIII. When the Parochial Elections are ended, the Judge, who has presided at the Assembly, shall transmit, under a sealed cover, to the Civil Authority of the District to be appointed by Law, the Register of the Elections made in his Parish. XXIX. The Authority mentioned in the preceding Article, in presence of the Municipal Council, shall publicly open the Registers of the Parochial Assemblies, as soon as they are complete, and shall proceed to scrutinize all the Votes entered in them. XXX. Those who possess the majority of votes shall be declared to be duly appointed as Electors. In the event of an equality of votes in favour of 2 or more Individuals, the choice shall be decided by lot. XXXI. The Authority who shall have made this scrutiny, shalI transmit the result to the Municipal Council of the Capital of the Province, and shall immediately send information thereof to the Parties elected, in order that they may assemble in the said Capital, on the day appointed by this Constitution.
TITLE VIII.- Of the Assemblies, or Electoral Colleges. XXXII. The Assemblies or Electoral Colleges shall be composed of the Electors appointed by the Districts. XXXIII. On the Ist day of October, in every 2nd year, the Electoral Colleges shall assemble in the Capital of the Province, presided over by the Municipal Council of the same, upon which occasion the Assembly shall elect from amongst its Members a President, to be named by an absolute majority of votes. XXXIV. The Electoral Colleges shall not deliberate, if there be less than two thirds of all the Electors present. XXXV. The functions of the Electors shall continue for 2 years. The Vacancies that may arise shall be filled up, when necessary, by those who have obtained the next greatest number of votes in the Parochial Assemblies. XXXVI. The Electoral Colleges being assembled, with 'the formalities prescribed by this Constitution,- they shall proceed to elect, in their proper order, the following Authorities ; viz. 10. The President of the State. 

2.. The Vice President. 36. The Senators of the Province, and their Substitutes. . 40 The Representative or Representatives of the Province, and the Substitutes to act in their absence. 5'. The Members for the Provincial Juntas, and an equal number of Individuals to act as their Substitutes. XXXVIl. The votes of these Elections shall be inscribed in different Registers for each Election. The Registers of the Elections of President and Vice President of the Republic shall be sent to the Chamber of the Senate; and the Electoral College shall make the scrutiny ofthe 3 last Classes of Elections. XXXVIII. The Elections of Senators and Representatives may fall indifferently upon Citizens, whether they be Inhabitants of the Province which elects them or not; but the Members of the Provincial Juntas must be Inhabitants of the Province which elects them. XXXIX. To become a Senator, a Representative, or a Member of the Provincial Junta, an abso!ute majority of the votes of the Elec. 4ors present at the Elections must have been obtained. XL. All the Functionaries shall be nominated separately, in a continued sitting. in order that no interruption may take place during the act ofthe Election of Senators and their Substitutes, of Representatives, and Members of the Provincial Juntas, and their respective Substitutes; the Elections of every Class, or that of the Substitutes, being made in a continued sitting. XLL In order to render these Elections constitutional, an absolute majority of votes is necessary. Should no Candidate, however, have obtained this majority, the Election shall be confined to the 2 individuals who have obtained the greatest number of votes, and a second scrutiny shall be made which shall decide the majority. Should the number of votes be equal, the Election shall be decided by lot. XLII. Should any Individual be returned as a Senator or Representative, by 2 Provinces, he shall serve for that in which lie resides: the other shall be represented by the proper Substitute. XLIII. The Elections of Senators, Representatives, and Members of the Provincial Juntas, being ended, the President of the Electoral College shall communicate, without delay, to all the parties nominated, their respective appointments, in order that the Senators and Representatives may repair to the next Meeting of Congress, and the Members of the Provincial Juntas to the Capitals of the Provinces, on the day appointed.
TITLE IX.-Rules to be observed both in thw Parochial Assemblies

and the Electoral Colleges.

XLIV. The Elections in the Assemblies shall be public, and no armed person shall be present at them.


: XLV.- The Parochial Assemblies and Electoral Colleges shall continue assembled for the term of 8 successive days, at the expiration of which they shall be dissolved; but, should the Electoral Colleges conclude their labours before the expiration of the said term, they -may' dissolve themselves, with the previous consent of the Members composing them. Any act of these Assemblies, after the expiration of the term specified, or having any other object than that of the Elections for which they are convoked, is not only null, but an offence against -the public safety. XLVI. Any Individual who may have sold his vote, or have influenced or bought that of another, whether for himself or for a third party, loses the right of electing, or of being elected, for 4 years, in addition to the other penalties adjudged by the Laws. XLVII. The doubts and disputes which may arise, as to the qualifications of the Voters, the forms and nullities of the Elections, as also the complaints preferred of bribery or subornation, shall be decided, immediately, by the President and Co-J udges of the Parochial Assembly, or by the Electoral Colleges, as the case may occur, in either of these Assemblies. It also belongs to the Electoral Colleges to decide upon the doubts and disputes which may arise, as to any deficiency of the legal qualifications of the Parties on whom the Elections may fall. In all these cases, the decision shall always be carried -into effect, and should any obscurity or ambiguity be observed in any particular relative to this matter, the question shall be submitted to Congress, in order that such a decision may be given as shall serve for a guide in future.
TITLE

X.-Of the Legislative Power.

XLVI II. The Legislative Power shall be exercised by the Congress, 'composed of 2 Chambers, one of Representatives, and the other for the period of Senators. XLIX. The Congress shall meet every year, in the Capital of the Republic, on the 20th day of January, without waiting to be convoked, and its ordinary Session shall last for 90 days. If, by any accident, it should not be able to meet on the day appointed, it shall do so as soon as possible, afterwards, and it may prolong its Session for the period of 30 days, when necessity requires it.
TITLE

Xl.-Of the Chamber of Representatives.

L. The Chamber of Representatives shall be composed of the Deputies elected by all the Provinces, agreeably to this Constitution. LI. Each Province shall return 1 Deputy for every 20,000 souls of its Population, and one more for a residue of 12,000; and each Province, although its Population may not amount to 20,000 souls, shall

1125 


'1126

bOLOMBIA.



return I Deputy. The Congress may augment this basis when the Population shall have increased. LII. In order to be elected a Representative it is necessary, besides possessing the qualifications of an Elector: 1. To be a Native, or an Inhabitant, of the Province in which the Election takes place. 2. To have resided in the Territory of Venezuela for at least '2 Years immediately previous to the Election. This regulation, however, not to exclude those who are absent in the service or on account of the Republic. 3. To be a Proprietor of Landed Property producing an annual 'Income of 400 dollars; in the exercise of a profession, employment, or trade, yielding .500 dollars a year ; or in the receipt of a yearly salary of 600 dollars. LIll. Individuals not born in Venezuela, but in the other Sections, which formerly constituted part of the Republic of Colombia, may become Representatives, provided they have resided in Venezuela 3 Years immediately preceding the Election. LIV. Individuals not born in Venezuela, but who, being domiciled therein at the time of its political change in 1810 embraced the cause of independence and liberty, and have remained faithful thereto, may become Representatives, provided they possess the qualifications of residence, and the other qualifications required of Native Venezuelans. LV. Naturalized Venezuelans, not included in the 2 preceding Articles, require a residence of 6 Years, and must be Proprietors of Landed Property of the yearly value of 2,000 dollars, or exercise a profession, employment, or trade, or enjoy a salary, producing 2,500 dollars a Year, in order to be eligible as Representatives. LVI. The Representatives shall continue for 4 Years in the exercise of their functions. LVII. The attributes of the Chamber of Representatives are; 1. To co-operate with that of the Senate in the formation of Laws and Decrees, and in the other Acts mentioned in this Constitution. 2. To watch over the application of the National Revenue, and to examine the Annual Estimate to be presented by the Executive Power, 3. To take cognizance of all Charges brought against the President, and Vice-President, and the Ministers of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, Councillors, and Secretaries of State, in the cases pointed out in this Constitution. 4. To take cognizance, also, of the Charges brought against the other Public Functionaries, for the mal-administration of their duties. 'This power not to derogate from nor diminish that of other Authorities and Tribunals, to watch over the observance of the Laws, and to judge, 'remove, and punish, according thereto, their respective Subordinates.

1126 






1127

" -LVIII. When a formal accusation is to be preferred against the President or Vice President of the Republic, or against any other Functionary, in the Chamber of Representatives, by any one of its members, seconded by another, or by any Corporate Body or Individual, the Chamber shall appoint a Committee of its Members to institute an enquiry, and the resolutions of this Committee shall be limited to the declaration, with the approval of two-thirds of its Members, whether or not there exist any grounds for accusation; the Party making the accusation not being allowed to assist in this act. LiX. Should it be declared that there exist grounds for accusation, the accused shall be immediately suspended from his Office; the vacancy shall be temporarily supplied by the competent Authority, and the Chamber shall refer the Cause to the Senate.
TITLE XII.-Of the Chamber of Senators.

LX. The Senate of Venezuela shall be composed of'2 Senators for each of the Provinces in the Republic. LXI. The Senators shall continue in Office for 4 Years ; one half
of their number being renewed every 2 Years. LXII. To become a Senator it is necessary, besides possessing the qualifications of an Elector: 1. To have completed 30 years of age. 2. To be a Native or Inhabitant of the Province in which the Election takes place. 3. To have resided in the Territory of Venezuela for 3 Years immediately preceding the Election, with the exceptions mentioned in Article LII, Section 2. 4. To be a Proprietor of landed property of the yearly value of 800 dollars; in the exercise of a profession, employment, or trade, producing 1,000 dollars per annum: or in the receipt of a salary of 1,200 dollars per annum. LXIII. Individuals not born in Venezuela, but in the other Sections of the late Republic of Colombia, may be elected Senators, provided that they have resided for 4 Years in Venezuela. LXIV. Individuals not born in Venezuela, who, being domiciled in it, at the time of its political change in 1810, embraced the cause of independence and liberty, and have remained faithful thereto, may be elected Senators, provided that, in respect to residence and other qualifications, they possess the same requisites as are required of Venezuelans by birth. LXV. The attributes of the Senate are: I. To co-operate with the Chamber of Representatives in the 1 passing of Laws and Decrees. '2. To give or to withhold their consent to the promotion of Military and Naval Officers, from the rank of Colonel in the Army, and Captain

1127 


1128



(YENEZUELA.)

in the Navy, upwards, or in any other matter pointed out by this Constitution. 3. To confirm and decide upon the measures which have originated in the Chamber of Representatives. LXVI. When Articles of Impeachment against any of the Public Authorities are carried to the Senate, it shall direct the proceedings to be continued by its own Body, or by a Committee of its Members. LXVII. Should the Party accused be the President or Vice President of the Republic, in the cases mentioned in Article CXXI, or of the Members of the Council, Secretaries of State, or Members of the Supreme Court of Justice, for State Offences, as provided for in this Constitution ; the Senate shall, in order to judge and pass Sentence, incorporate itself with the Supreme Court of Justice, and may then not only inflict the penalty of dismissal, but any other provided by Law, against the Offender. LXVIII. No Individual accused can be tried except by an absolute majority of the Senators present at the place of trial, nor condemned, except by a majority of two-thirds of the Votes of all those who are to pronounce the definitive Sentence, agreeably to the preceding Article. LXIX. In Charges instituted against the other Public Authorities, for misconduct in the exercise of their functions, the Senate shall take cognizance of the matter, of itself alone, and its decision shall be limited to the acquittal of the Accused, or to his dismissal from his Post, and to the declaring him ineligible to any other Employment of honour or confidence in the Republic ; without its possessing the power to impose a milder punishment. After the dismissal of the Party accused, he shall be delivered up to the ordinary Tribunal, in order to his being tried, and punished, in conformity with the Laws provided for such Offenders. LXX. In the cases contemplated in the preceding Article, should the Senate deem it proper, the President of the Supreme Court of Justice, or some of the Members thereof, shall assist in the deliberations of the Senate, in order to give legal advice, or to explain points of Law. LXXI. When the Senate shall take cognizance of Charges against the President of the Republic, or against the Vice President whilst exercising the functions of President, should the investigation not be concluded within the period of the Session, the Senate shall continue it until the affair be brought to a conclusion. TITLE XI1.-Of the Administrative Functions and Regulations, common to both Chambers. LXXII. Neither of the Chambers shall open its Session until two-thirds of its Members be present; but, in all cases, the number

1128 






11.29

present, whatever it may be, shall meet and compel the attendance of the Absentees. LXXIII. The Session of each Year having been opened, with the number prescribed in the preceding Article, it may be afterwards continued, with the presence of two-thirds of the Members at the Place of meeting, provided that their number be not less than one half of the whole of the Members elected. LXXIV. The 2 Chambers shall meet in the same Town; neither of them can suspend its Sittings for more than 2 days at a time, nor remove them to a different Place, without the consent of the other. In the event of a difference of opinion between the 2 Chambers, with respect to the necessity of removal, or place of such removal, they shall meet together, and, after discussing the subject, the resolution of an absolute majority of the Members shall decide the question. LXXV. Each Chamber has the right of establishing such regulations as are to be observed in its Sittings, debates, and deliberations. Conformably to these regulations, it may impose penalties upon the Members who infringe them, and even expel them from their Body, by a resolution of two-thirds of the Members present. It may also punish Strangers who may be wanting in due respect, or who interrupt its deliberations. The Members, both in and out of their Halls of Session, shall enjoy the exclusive right of personal liberty, in so far as it may be necessary for the free exercise of their functions. LXXVI. The particular regulations of either Chamber do not require the sanction of the President of the Republic, nor the consent of the other. LXXVII. The Chambers shall unite together; in order to scrutinize and confirm the Elections of the President and Vice-President of the Republic ; to decide upon the resignations of those Functionaries, and upon any other matter which they may deem expedient, or which the Constitution and Laws confide to their care. The President of the Senate shall then act as President of the Meeting, and the President of the Chamber of' Representatives as Vice President. LXXVIII. The Sittings of both Chambers shall be public; but they may be held secretly when they deem it expedient. LXXIX. The Chambers shall, at their first meeting, proceed to ballot ;-that of the Senate, one of the two Senators of each Province, and that of the Representatives, one half of its Members, or a majority of them, should their number be odd ;-and the seats of the Members so balloted shall be vacated at the expiration of the first 2 years, and shall be filled up by the Electoral Colleges; the other half of the Members shall continue in the exercise of their functions until the termination of the 4th year, when they shall be replaced. LXXX. The Senators and Representatives are invested with that


character by the Nation at large, and not by the particular Province which they represent: they cannot receive orders or private instructions from the Electoral Assemblies, or from the Provincial Deputations. They may, however, receive petitions in favour of the promotion of any measure in their respective Chamber.

LXXXI. The President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State, the Members of the Council of Government, the Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Governors, and -Military Chiefs, whilst in the exercise of their duties as established by Law, are incapacitated from acting as Senators or Representatives. LXXXII. The exercise of any other public functions during the Session, is incompatible with those of Representative and Senator. . LXXXIII. The Senators and Representatives, from the day of their Election until that on which they return home from the Congress, shall not be subject to Civil Process; neither can they be arrested or detained, during the period of the Session, or on their way to and from the Congress, unless for a crime to which the penalty of death is attached, of which an account must be rendered to the respective Chamber, with summary information relative to the fact. In other cases, in which a Senator or Representative may have committed a crime which merits a corporal or degrading punishment, the Judge, without proceeding to arrest or detain him, shall forthwith make a detailed Report, to the respective Chamber, of the charges against him, to the end that, if it should think fit, the Accused may be suspended from his functions, and placed at the disposal of the competent Judge. LXXXIV. The Senators and Representatives shall not be, at any time, nor before any Authority, responsible for their speeches and opinions delivered in the Chambers. LXXXV. During the period of their Office, the Senators and Representatives cannot receive any appointment from the Executive Power, unless it be by regular promotion in their professional rank. LXXXVI. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a daily allowance during the Session, and their travelling expenses from and to their homes, at the rates to be fixed by Law.
TITLE XI V.-Of the attributes of Congress.

LXXXVII. The attributes of the Congress, are: 1. To propose the necessary Laws and Decrees, in the several branches of the administration of the Government; to interpret, reform, alter, and annul, the Laws already established ; and to frame the National. Codes. 2. To impose taxes, duties, and contributions, to watch over their application, and to receive the Account thereof from the Executive Power and other Functionaries of the Republic.

1130 






1131

3. To determine and render uniform, the alloy, value, type, and denomination, of the coinage. 4. To regulate and render uniform the weights and measures. 5. To establish such Tribunals and Courts of Justice as may be necessary. 6. To decree the establishment and suppression of Public Employments, and to assign, increase, or diminish, the salaries attached to them. 7. To decree every year, the Land and Sea Forces, and to decide upon the amount of them in time of Peace; also to regulate, by particular Laws, the mode of levying and recruiting the regular Army, and that of the National Militia, and the organization thereof. S. To order the embodying of the National Militia, whenever it is deemed necessary. 9. To declare War, after cognizance of the grounds laid before it by the President of the Republic, and to require of him to enter into Negotiations for Peace. 10. To decree the alienation, acquisition, or exchange of the National Territory. I1. To give or withhold its consent and approbation to the Treaties of Peace, Armistice, Amity, offensive and defensive Alliance, Neutrality, and Commerce, which may have been concluded by the Chief of the Republic. 12. To decree the Public Expenditure, upon the Estimates thereof being laid before it by the Executive, through the medium of the respective Secretaries of State; and an extraordinary sum for unforeseen contingencies. 13. To decree the necessary measures for the administration, preservation, and alienation, of National Property. 14. To contract debts on the credit of the State. 1,5. To establish a National Bank. 16. To form Contracts with Individuals, or with National or Foreign Companies, for the Navigation of Rivers, the construction of Roads, and for other objects of general utility. 17. To promote, by Laws, Public Education in the Universities and Colleges; the progress of the Arts and Sciences, and the establishments of public utility; and to grant, for a limited time, exclusive privileges for the stimulation and encouragement of the same. 18. To grant personal rewards and recompenses, to those who have rendered signal services to Venezuela. 19. To establish the regulations of Naturalization. 20. To decree public honours to the memory of distinguished Individuals. 21. To grant amnesties and general pardons, when required by urgent reasons of public advantage.

1131 


1132





. 22. To select the Place of residence of the Government, and to change the same when deemed requisite. 23. To establish new Provinces and Districts, to suppress the same, to form others out of those established, and to fix their limits, as may appear most convenient for the better administration of them ; grounding such measures on the previous representation of the Executive Power, and of the Junta of the Province in whose territory the change is to be effected. 24. To permit or refuse the passage of Foreign Troops through the Territory of the State. 25. To accept or decline the services of Foreigners in the Army or Navy of the Republic. 26. To permit or object to the continuance of a Foreign Naval Force, in the Ports of Venezuela, for more than one month. 27. To conduct the scrutiny, and to confirm the election of President and Vice President of the Republic, and to receive or refuse their resignation of Office.
TITLE

XV.-Of the Formation and Promulgation of the Laws.

LXXXVIII. The Laws and Decrees of Congress may be proposed in either of the 2 Chambers on the motion of their Members; with the exception of those imposing taxes, which must necessarily originate in the Chamber of Representatives. LXXXIX. Every Project of Law, which shall be admitted for discussion, shall be read and considered, in 3 distinct Sittings, with an interval of one day, at least, between them, and conformably to the rules of debate. XC. The Secretaries of State shall assist at the Sittings when summoned by either of the Chambers, in order to afford information upon the subject under discussion. XCI. When a Project of Law or Decree shall not have been admitted for discussion in the Chamber in which it was originally proposed, it cannot again be introduced in either of the 2 Chambers until the next Session; but this shall not prevent some of its provisions from forming part of some other Project that may be presented. XCII. The Projects of Law, or Decrees, which may be admitted for discussion, after being duly debated in the Chamber in which they originated, shall be passed to the other Chamber; which, observing the same formalities, shall give or refuse its assent, or shall propose such amendments, additions, or modifications, as it may deem proper. XCIII. Should the Chamber, in which the Project of Law originated, be of opinion that the amendments, additions, or modifications, proposed by the other Chamber, are not well founded, it is at liberty to offer new reasons and explanations, for the purpose of uniting and reconciling the opinions of both Chambers; but if this cannot be effected, the Project will be null and void. XCIV. Although a Project of Law or Decree receive the approbation of both Chambers, it shall not be put in force, until ordered to be carried into execution by the Executive Power. Should the latter see cause to object to the execution of it, he shall return it, with his objections, to the Chamber in which it originated, within 10 days after the receipt of it. XCV. The Chamber will then re-examine the Project, together with the observations or objections of the Executive ; and, should it find them well founded, it will order the Project to be placed amongst its Archives. XCVI. Should the Chamber, in which the Project originated, according to the opinion of two-thirds of the Members present, not find the said objections well-founded, it will refer them, with the Project, to the consideration of the other Chamber, which shall examine the subject in the same manner; and should the objections made by tile Executive appear to it well founded, the Project shall, in like manner, be placed amongst its Archives; but, should two-thirds of the Members present in the latter Chamber coincide in the opinion of the Chamber in which the Project originated, that the objections of the Executive are not well founded, the Project shall be returned to the Executive, in order that it may be duly executed, without the Executive having the power to offer further opposition. XCVII. If after the expiration of the 10 days, allowed to the Executive to decree the execution of the Law, he should fail to return it with his objections, it shall have the force of Law, and shall be promulgated as such ; unless, during the aforesaid term of 10 days, the Congress shall have suspended its Session, or separated in consequence of the recess ; in which case the objections of the Executive must be presented to it within the 10 first days of the next Session. XCVIII. Upon transmitting the Projects of one Chamber to the other, and to the Executive Power, tie days on which they were respectively debated and passed, shall be inscribed upon them. XCIX. A Law, having for its object the reform of a preceding one, must be drawn up in the fullest terms, and contain in it all those provisions of the former Law which are continued in force, declaring, at the same time, the Law so amended to be annulled. C. Congress, in the enactment of Laws and Decrees, shall make use of this formula: '"The Senate and Chamber of Representatives of the Republic of Venezuela, united in Congress, decree." CI. No Law shall be binding until it be published with due solemnity in the respective Towns. CII Laws are annulled with the same formalities, and by the same means, by which they are established.

1133 


1134





TITLE XVI.-Of the Executive Power.

CIII. The Executive Power shall be entrusted to a Magistrate, with the Title of '" President of the Republic." CIV. To hold the Office of President, it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, and to possess all the other qualifications required for that of a Senator. C V. To render the election of a President constitutional, two-thirds of the votes of the Electors, who have voted in the Electoral Colleges, must be united in favour of one Individual. If the majority of votes be in favour of 2 or more Individuals, the Congress shall then, confining its suffrages to the said Individuals, proceed to the vote, for the purpose of choosing 3 Individuals, from amongst whom the President is to be elected. CVI. Should the votes of the Electoral Colleges not be equally in favour of different Individuals, and should no Individual obtain the majority of two-thirds, as expressed in the preceding Article, the Congress shall select the 3 Individuals who possess the greatest number of votes, and shall proceed to elect one of them by scrutiny, declaring to be constitutionally elected, the one who may have obtained two-thirds of the votes of the Members present. Should neither of the said Individuals have obtained such majority, the act shall be repeated, it being limited to the 2 Individuals who may have obtained the greatest number of votes; in which case, if, after 2 further scrutinies, neither party shall have obtained the majority of two-thirds, the absolute majority shall be sufficient; in the event of an equality in these scrutinies, the act shall be repeated until a majority be obtained. CVII. The election of President shall be made in a continued Sitting, from which no Member, who may have voted in the first scrutiny, shall be permitted to retire without the permission of Congress, nor shall any Member be admitted who was not present at that scrutiny. CVIII. The President shall continue in his functions for 4 years, and cannot be re-elected, until after the expiration of, at least, one constitutional period of 4 years. CIX. The qualifications required for Vice President, the form of his election, and the duration of his functions, shall be the same as those prescribed for the President. CX. The Elections of the President and Vice President of the State shall take place, with an interval of 2 years between each ; in consequence of which the first Vice President will continue iii Office for 2 years only. CXI. The Constitutional period having elapsed, and the day, appointed by this Constitution for the installation of Congress having arrived, without the same taking place, the President shall, on that day, cease to continue in the exercise of his Executive functions,

1134 


COLOM BIA.



.1135

which shall be exercised by the Vice President, until, the Congress being installed, he shall resign them to the Person newly appointed. CXII. The Vice President cannot be elected President for the period immediately ensuing, should he have been in the exercise of the Executive-Power for one-half of the constitutional period. CXII. The President cannot exercise the administration of the State, away from the Capital : his functions shall be exercised by the Vice President, in the event of his absence, illness, or temporary suspension; and, should the Office of President become vacant, by his decease, dismissal, destitution or removal, the Vice President shall assume the exercise of the Executive Power, until the expiration of the constitutional period. CXIV. During the temporary absence of the President and Vice President of the Republic, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the Individual who has been appointed Vice President of the Council of Government by its own Members; and in case of the death, dismissal, removal, or incapacity of the Vice President, whilst charged with the Executive Power, his functions shall be assumed by the said Vice President of the Council of Government, until a new election of the President and Vice President of the Republic, for which purpose Orders shall be immediately issued for the assembling of the Electoral Colleges. CXV. The President and Vice President, elected under such circumstances, shall only continue to act so long as may be necessary to complete the constitutional period. CXVI. The President and Vice President shall receive for their services the annual allowance to be provided by Law, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period that they may continue in the discharge of their functions. CXVII. The President is the Chief of the general administration of the Republic, and, as such, possesses the following attributes: 1. To preserve internal order and tranquility, and to secure the State against all foreign aggression. 2. To order the execution of the Laws, Decrees, and Acts of Congress, and to take care that the same be promulgated and carried into effect. 3. To convoke the Congress at the proper period, and also on extraordinary occasions, with the previous consent, or at the request, of the Council of Government, whenever the urgency of the case requires it. 4. To take the supreme command of the Land and Sea Forces for the defence of the Republic. .5. To call out the Militia, whenever Congress may have decreed to that effect. 6. To declare War, in the name of the Republic, and in pursuance of the previous decision of Congress. 7. To direct diplomatic Negotiations, and to conclude Treaties

of Armistice, Peace, Friendship, offensive and defensive Alliance, Neutrality, and Commerce; the previous approbation of Congress -being necessary for his consent or refusal to ratify them. 8. To appoint, and to remove, the Secretaries of State. 9. To appoint, with the concurrence of the Council of Government, Ministers Plenipotentiary, Envoys, and other Diplomatic Agents, and Consuls, Vice Consuls, and other Commercial Agents. 10. To nominate, with the previous concurrence and consent of the Senate, to all Military Appointments, of and above the rank of Colonel in the Army, and Captain in the Navy ; and, on the recommendation of the respective Chiefs, to all Appointments under those ranks: it being understood that all the latter are to be for active service; Military Appointments not requiring active service being henceforward abolished. 11. To grant, according to Law, leave of retirement and absence, to the Military, and other public Officers. 12. To issue Ships' Licenses, and also Letters of Marque and Reprisal, when Congress shall so determine; or, during its recess, with the consent of the Council of Government. 13. To grant Letters of Naturalization, agreeably to Law. 14. To select, from the nominations made by the Supreme Court of Justice, of 3 individuals for each Office, the Ministers of the Superior Courts. 15. To select the Governors of the Provinces, from the nomination of 3 Individuals for each Office, made by the respective Provincial Juntas. 16. To appoint to all Civil, Military, and Financial Offices, the nomination to which is not reserved to some other Authority, according to the conditions by Law prescribed. 17. To suspend from their functions the Persons employed in the branches dependent on the Executive Power, whenever they transgress the Laws, or its Decrees, or Ordinances; it being understood that the Parties thus suspended are to be placed at the disposal of the competent Authority, within the space of 3 days, with a summary of the charges which have occasioned the suspension, in order that they may be dealt with accordingly. 18. To supersede the said Persons, with the previous assent of the Council of Government, when, from incapacity or neglect, they fail in performing their duties. 19. To watch over the collection of the Taxes and the disbursement of the Public Revenue, agreeably to the Law. 20. To see that justice is administered promptly and effectively, by the Tribunals and Courts of Justice, and that their Sentences are carried into effect. 21. To commute capital punishments, with a view to humanity, after having consulted and obtained the concurrence of the Council

1137

of Government, on the recommendation of the Tribunal which had cognizance of the Cause in the last instance; or at the suggestion of the Executive, founded upon grave and weighty considerations: this attribute cannot, however, be exercised in the cases of Individuals condemned by the Senate. CXVIII. In cases of internal commotion, when the safety of the Republic is menaced by force of arms, or in cases of sudden foreign invasion, the President of the State may apply to the Congress, if assembled, or, if it be in recess, to the Council of Government, to-grant to him, in consequence of the exigency of the moment, which shall be explained to them by the Executive, the following powers: 1'. To call into active service that part of the National Militia which the Congress, or the Council of Government, may consider necessary. 20. To raise by anticipation such contributions as either the Congress or Council of Government may deem requisite ; or to negotiate for the supply of the necessary funds, by way of loan, whenever the Expenditure cannot be provided for by the ordinary Revenue. 3'. To issue written orders, on receiving information of any conspiracy against the public peace, or against the internal or external safety of the State, for compelling the appearance of, or for arresting, the Individuals suspected of that offence; to examine them, or to cause them to be examined ; and to place the Persons so arrested, within the term of 3 days, at the disposal of the competent Judge, to whom must be transmitted a Report of the circumstances which gave rise to the arrest: but this authority is only temporary. 4o. To grant general or particular amnesties or pardons. CXIX. Whenever the Council of Government, in consequence of the recess of Congress, shall authorize the Executive Power to make use of one or more of the powers mentioned in the preceding Article, it shall publish the Act conceding such authority, and transmit the same to the other Functionaries. CXX. The Person entrusted with the Executive Power shall render an account to Congress, at its ensuing Session, of the measures he may have taken in the exercise of those powers. CXXI. The President of the Republic is not permitted; 10. To quit the territory of the Republic, during the period he is in the exercise of the Executive Power, nor for one year after its completion. 20. To command in person the Land and Sea Forces, without the previous concurrence and consent of Congress. 30. To employ the regular Army in the event of internal commotion, without the previous concurrence and consent of the Council of Government. 4o. To admit Foreigners into the Military or Naval Service, as Officers and Chiefs, without the previous consent of Congress. 


To expel from the territory, or to deprive of his liberty, any, Venezuelan, except under the circumstances mentioned in Article CXVIII ;-nor to impose upon him any penalty whatsoever. 60. To obstruct the course of Judicial Proceedings, nor to prevent the prosecution of Causes, in the forms established by the Law. 70. To impede the progress of the Elections according to the Constitution, nor to prevent the Elected from fulfilling the duties confided to them. 80. To dissolve the Chambers, nor to suspend their Sessions. CXXII. The President, or Vice President charged with the Executive Power, is responsible in the following cases: 10. For Treason against the Republic, whether for the purpose of subjecting it to a Foreign Power, or of changing the form of Government recognized and sworn to. 20. For the infraction of this Constitution. 3. For any of those crimes which the Laws visit with capital or infamous punishment.
TITLE XVII.-O' th'e Council of Government.

CXXIII. There shall be a Council of Government, composed of the Vice President of the Republic, who shall preside over it, of 6 Councillors, and of the Secretaries of State. CXXIV. One of the 5 Councillors shall be a Member of the Supreme Court of Justice, and be appointed by it every 2 years. The other 4 shall be named by the 2 Chambers of Congress united, in one of their first Sittings, every 4 years, and they shall be replaced, one half at a time, every 2 years. One half of the 4 first appointed, shall retire, by lot, at the expiration of the first 2 years. CXXV. The Council shall elect, every 2 years, a Vice President from amongst the Members not appointed by the Executive, in order that he may preside in the absence of the Vice President of the State; and in the absence of the party thus acting as Vice President of the Council, his place shall be supplied by the senior Councillor of those appointed by Congress. CXXVI. To be eligible to the Office of Councillor, the same qualifications are required as for that of Senator; but the Councillor who may be elected to act during the absence of the Vice-President of the Republic, must be, by birth, a Venezuelan. *CXXVII. The duties of the Council are: 10. To give its consultive vote, upon the cases mentioned in the 9th paragraph of Article LXXXVII, and in paragraphs 7, 14, 16, and 16 of Article CXVII, and upon all other matters of importance, when required so to do by the Executive. 20. To give or to withhold its consent, in the cases mentioned in paragraphs 3, 9, 12, 18, and 21 of Article CXVII.


30. To grant, during the recess of Congress, the Powers mentioned in Article CXVIII. CXXVIII. The Council shall not hold its Sittings, unless the absolute majority of the whole number of its Members be present. CXXIX. In the absence of the Secretaries of State from the Council, their places shall be supplied by the Persons who execute their other functions, and in that of the Member of the Supreme Court of Justice, by the Individual appointed as his Substitute. The absence of any of the Members appointed by Congress, should it be occasioned by sickness, death, or promotion to the Office of President of the State, shall be supplied by 2 Substitutes, elected every 2 years, simultaneously with the original Members. CXXX. The Council shall hold 3 ordinary Meetings every week, and extraordinary ones when convoked by the President of the Republic. CXXXI. Its Resolutions shall be carried by an absolute majority of votes, except in the cases mentioned in Article CXVIII; for which cases the majority must consist of, at least, two thirds of the votes of the Members composing the Council. CXXXII. The Council shall keep a Register of all its Resolutions, of which it shall, every year, lay before Congress, an authentic Copy; with the exception of' such as necessarily require secrecy. CXXXIII. The Members of the Council of Government are responsible for their Resolutions, which, consequently, must be signed by them ; and also for the neglect of their duties. TITLE XVIII.- Of the Secretaries of State. CXXXIV. Three Secretaries shall be established for the dispatch of the business confided to the Executive Power; viz. : one for the Interior and Justice; one for Finance; and one for War and Marine. The Department of Foreign Affairs may be attached by the Executive to either of them. CXXXV. To be Secretary of State, the same qualifications are -requisite as for a Representative in Congress, together with the necessary abilities for fulfilling the duties attached to the Office. CXXXVI. The Secretaries of State are the necessary and indispensable organs of the Government; and, as such, must authorize all the Decrees, Regulations, Orders, and Resolutions, which it may issue. Such as are not so authorized by the respective Secretary of State, must not be recognized by any Tribunal, nor by any Person, public or private, although bearing the signature of the President of the Republic. CXXXVII. The Secretaries of State shall render an account to -each Chamber, at the commencement of each Session, of the state of affairs in their respective Departments : they shall, also, make such 





Reports as may be required of them, either in writing or verbally, reserving only what it may not be expedient to make public. CXXXVIII. The Secretaries of State are responsible: 10. For treason against the Republic, whether it be for the purpose of subjecting it to a Foreign Power, or of changing the Form of Government recognized and sworn to. 20. For corruption or bribery in their administration, or in the Elections of Public Functionaries. 30. For infractions of the Constitution and Laws. 4o. For misappropriation of the Public Money. CXXXIX. The responsibility of the Secretaries of State cannot be avoided by the verbal or written Order of the President of the Republic. CXL. The Secretaries of State shall meet in Council, in order to discuss the general business of the Government, to assist the President with their advice, and to decide upon the measures to be adopted by them respectively.
TITLE

XIX.-Of the Judicial Power.

CXLI. The administration of justice is entrusted to a Supreme Court, to Superior Courts, Courts of First Instance, and to other Tribunals established by Law. CXLII. In criminal Cases, justice shall be administered by Juries, as the Law shall direct. CXLIII. The Constitutional Congresses shall determine the period and the mode of, progressively introducing the Trial by Jury in other Cases.
TITLE XX,- Of the Supreme Court of Justice.

CXLIV. The Chief Judicial Magistracy of the State shall reside in the Supreme Court of Justice, which shall consist of a President, 3 Judges, and a Fiscal. CXLV. In order to become a Minister of the Supreme Court it is necessary : 10. To be a Venezuelan. 20. To have completed 40 years of age. . 30 To have been a Magistrate in one of the Superior Courts; and, until such Courts be established, to have exercised, with credit, the profession of an Advocate for 10 years. CXLVI. The Ministers of the Supreme Court shall be proposed, by the President of the Republic to the Chamber of Representatives, in triple Lists. That Chamber shall reduce them to double Lists, and shall refer the names to the Senate, which shall select from them those who are to compose the Court. The same form shall be observed in filling up vacancies; but, if Congress should not be assembled, the Executive Power, with the approval of the Council of Government, shall fill up the vacancies, ad interim, until the selections can take place in due form. CXLVII. The functions of the Supreme Court of Justice are: 10. To unite itself with the Senate, in order to try, and to pass sentence upon, all charges brought against the President of the Republic, or Vice President entrusted with the Executive Power, in the cases mentioned in Article CXXII; and also against the Vice President, when not entrusted with the Executive Power, the Members of the Council of Government, the Secretaries of State, and the Members of the Supreme Court itself, for State Offences, agreeably to Article LXVII. 20. To take cognizance, after the decree of suspension by the Executive Power, of the charges of responsibility, brought against the Secretaries of State, for misconduct in the exercise of their functions; and to decree the suspension of, and take cognizance of the charges for ordinary offences against, the Vice President of the Republic, when not invested with the Executive Power, the Members of the Council of Government, the Secretaries of State, and the Members of the Supreme Court itself. 30. To take cognizance of all contentious matters, relating to Foreign Ministers, or Diplomatic Agents, accredited to the Government of the Republic, in the cases recognized by the Public Law of Nations, and conformably to existing Treaties. 4o. To take cognizance of proceedings instituted against the Diplomatic Agents of the Republic, for misconduct in the execution of their duties. 5o. To take cognizance of disputes arising out of Contracts and Arrangements, entered into by the Executive Poner, or through the medium of its Agents. 60. To take cognizance of Appeals against the Superior Courts, for abuse of authority, neglect, denial, or delay in the administration, of Justice ;-and of charges against the Magistrates of the said Superior Courts on account of acts for which they are responsible. 7o. To propose to the Executive Power triple Lists of Persons, from amongst whom are to be selected the Members of the Superior Courts of Justice; the said Persons to be taken from the lists of Lawyers sent in by the Provincial Juntas of the District. So. To settle disputes between the Superior Courts, and between them and the other Judicial Tribunals. 90. To take cognizance of Appeals of nullity against definitive Sentences pronounced by the Superior Courts. 100. To hear the doubts of the other Tribunals relative to the meaning of, any Law, and to consult Congress upon the subject,

through the medium of the Executive Power, should the Court consider the doubts as requiring a formal explanation. !1. To render to Congress all the information necessary to the better administration of justice, and to exercise such other attributes as the Law may direct. CXLVIII. The Members of the Supreme Court of Justice are responsible, and are amenable to trial before the Senate : 10. For the crime of Treason against the Independence, and Form of Government recognized and sworn to: 20. For corrupt conduct. CXLIX. The Charges of responsibility brought against the Members of the Supreme Court, for misconduct in the exercise of their functions, shall originate in the Chamber of Representatives, and terminate in that of the Senate, agreeably to Articles LVII and LXVII.
TITLE XXI.-(f the Superior Courts of Justice.

CL. In order to facilitate the administration of Justice, there shall be, at least, 3 Judicial Districts; and in each of them a Superior Court, whose attributes shall be prescribed by Law. CLI. To become a Magistrate of the Superior Courts, it is necessary; 10. To be a Venezuelan. 20. To be an Advocate, in the enjoyment of the rights of Citizenship. 30. To have completed 30 years of age. 40. To have been a Judge, an Assessor, or Auditor for 3 years, at least; or to have practised as an Advocate, with good repute, for 6 years. CLII. The Law shall direct the organization of the Tribunals of First Instance, and shall fix their duration, and attributes, and the mode of exercising them.
TITLE XXII.- General Rules relative to the Judicial System. CLIII. Magistrates and Judges cannot be suspended from their Offices, except on charges legally admitted, nor can they be removed except by a Sentence founded on established proof. CLIV. The Ministers of the Supreme Court and of the Superior Courts shall continue in Office for the period of 4 years, and shall be renewed, in the proportion of one half, every 2 years, with the eligibility of re-election. CLV. All the Tribunals and Courts of Judicature shall be obliged to record the motives and grounds of their respective Sentences. TITLE XXIII.-Of the Internal Administration of the Provinces.

CLVI. In each Province, there shall be a Junta, composed of


one Member for each District, to be appointed conformably to the XXXVIth and following Articles of this Constitution; and a Province which may contain less than 7 Districts, shall, nevertheless, name 7 Members, to be distributed according to its population. CLVII. In order to become a Member of a Provincial Junta it is' necessary to possess the qualifications of a Representative. The functions of a Member shall last for 4 years; one half of them being replaced by new Members every 2 years. CLV III. He who is not qualified to be returned as a Representative cannot become a Member of a Provincial Junta. CLIX. The Provincial Junta shall meet on the first day of November in each year, in the Capital of the Province. CLX. Each ordinary Meeting shall last 30 days: in case of necessity, and, if so resolved by two thirds of the Members present, it may be prolonged to the extent of 10 days further. CLXl. The functions of the Provincial Juntas are: 1. To acquaint the Chamber of Representatives with any infraction
or abuse of the Constitution and Laws, and to watch over the exact

observance of them. 2. To denounce to the Executive Power, or to the Chamber of Representatives, transmitting the necessary particulars, the abuses of authority or misconduct of the Governor and other Persons employed in the administration of the Province ; and also any abuse, irregularity, or remissness, in the collection, application, and management, of the Revenues of the State. 3. To present to the Supreme Court of Justice a List of as many qualified Individuals, of the profession of the Law, as there may be Situations to fill in the Superior Courts of the Districts of each Province, in order that the Supreme Court may form triple Lists, from which the Members of those Courts are to be selected. 4. To present to the Executive Power, in triple Lists, the names of the Individuals from amongst whom are to be chosen the Governors of Provinces; and to demand the removal of those Functionaries, when they fail in their duties, or when. their continuance in Office would be prejudicial to the welfare of the Province. 5. To require from the Ecclesiastical Authority, on the exhibition of the necessary data, the removal of the Parochial Clergy, whose conduct may be notoriously reprehensible, and prejudicial to the welfare of the parishioners. 6. To present to the Governor, in triple Lists, the names of Individuals, from amongst whom are to be selected the Chiefs of Districts, or Administrative Officers of the Revenues of the Province. 7. To receive from the Corporations and Citizens of the Province, the Petitions, Representations, and Reports, which may be addressed to them, to act upon them, if within their jurisdiction, or to dispose of them as may be proper.


8. To watch over the fulfilment of the Law of Manumission, and to exercise the other attributes which that Law confides to them. 9. To make a proportionate assessment, in the Districts of each Province, of the Taxes decreed by Congress to be collected. 10. To regulate, as the Law directs, the levies for the Army and Navy, which are to be furnished by the Province. 11. To establish provincial or municipal rates, in their respective Provinces, in order to defray the expenses, and to regulate the mode of their collection and application; to determine the number of the Employees in this branch, and of the others under their direction, and fix their respective salaries; and to audit and settle their respective Accounts. 12. To raise Loans, on the provincial or municipal funds, for public works, in their respective Territories. 13. To determine upon the purchase, sale, or exchange, of buildings, lands, or other property belonging to the Provinces or Municipalities. 14. To establish Provincial Banks. 15. To fix and approve, annually, the Estimate of the ordinary and extraordinary Expenses required for the municipal service in each Province. 16. To frame the necessary measures for the regulation and improvement of the Police in the Towns and Country, as the Law directs, and to watch over the execution of them. 17. To promote and establish, by all the means in their power, Primary Schools, and Houses of Education, in all the Towns in the Provinces ; for which purpose, they may adopt such regulations and arrangements as they may think best, for the collection and appropriation of the Funds destined to that object, from whatever source they may be derived. 18. To promote and decree the opening of roads, canals, and inns; and the construction of bridges, causeways, hospitals, and other Establishments of public utility and benevolence, which may be considered necessary for the convenience and improvement of the Province; the Juntas having power, for this object, to accept and definitively to approve of proposals made by Companies or Individuals, provided the same are not in opposition to any Law of the Republic. 19. To establish the most ready and speedy communication between the several Towns of the Province, and between them and the Towns in the adjoining Provinces; to encourage internal navigation, agriculture, and commerce, by all the means within their power, provided they be not contrary to Law. 20. To encourage, by all possible means, Projects of Emigration and Colonization by industrious Foreigners. 2.1. To permit the establishment of new Towns, or the removal of the Inhabitants of old ones to more convenient places; and to regulate the formation, suppression, or union, of Districts, in their respective Provinces. 22. To grant, temporarily, and under special conditions, exclusive privileges in favour of the Inventors of any useful or ingenious discovery, and also to the Contractors for Public Works; provided such privileges be considered indispensable to the execution of them, and not contrary to the interests of the Community. 23. To petition Congress or the Executive Power, according to the nature of the Application, for whatever they may deem conducive to the welfare of the Province, and which it does not fall within tile attributes of the Juntas to grant. CLXII. The Ordinances or Resolutions of the Provincial Juntas shall be passed, in order to their execution, to the respective Governor, who shall have the right of objecting to them, within the term of 5 days; the objections made by the Governor shall be taken into consideration by the Junta, and should the latter persist in their Resolutions, with the approbation of two-thirds of its Members, the Resolution shall be carried into effect. CLXIII. On the termination of their Session, the Juntas shall forward Copies of the Resolutions passed by them, to the Chamber of Representatives, for the approbation of Congress, provided they be not contrary to any express Law of the Republic: this requisite, however, shall be no impediment to the carrying the Resolutions into effect in the respective Province. CLXIV. The doubts and disputes which may arise between different Provincial Juntas shall be settled by Congress; the Resolutions which gave rise thereto being, in the mean time, suspended. CLXV. The Members of the Provincial Juntas shall enjoy immunity in their persons and property during their Session, and whilst travelling to and from their homes; unless accused of treason, or of any other crime to which corporal punishment is attached, in which case the provision contained in Article LXXXIII shall be carried into effect. They are, moreover, not responsible to any Authority, or at any time, for the speeches and opinions delivered by them during their Sittings. CLXVI. The Provincial Juntas shall fix, with the approbation of Congress, the daily allowance during the Session, and the allowances for travelling to and from their homes, which the Members shall receive. CLXVII. They cannot deliberate on any subjects falling under the cognizance of Congress or of the Executive ; neither can they issue Orders or enter into Contracts contrary to the Constitution or Laws. CLXVIII. They can never avail themselves of the voice of the People, in order to assume the exercise of any other functions than

those assigned to them by this Constitution or by the Laws. Every act to the contrary is an attack on public order and security. CLXIX. The Members of the Provincial Juntas shall be responsible for any excesses they may commit in the exercise of the functions assigned to them. XXIV.-Of the Governors of Provinces, and Chiefs of Districts. CLXX. The Superior Political Government of the Provinces shall be entrusted to a Governor, dependent upon the Executive Power, of which he is the natural and immediate Agent; and, through his medium, the Orders relative to the Administration shall be communicated and circulated in the Provinces. CLXXI. In all that is connected with the order and security of the Province, and with its political and administrative government, the Public Functionaries are subordinate to the Governor, of whatever Rank they may be in the Province. CLXXII. In order to hold the Office of Governor, it is necessary to possess the same qualifications as are required for that of Representative; but it is not required that he should have been born or be domiciled in the Province. CLXXIII. The duration of the Office of Governor shall be for 4 Years. CLXXIV. It is the duty of the Governors, to convoke extraordinary Assemblies of the Provincial Juntas, whenever the same may be necessary, according to the tenour of this Constitution. CLXXV. The other functions of the Governors shall be prescribed by Law. CLXXVI. The Districts shall be governed by a Functionary subordinate to the Governor. His title, duration in Office, and functions, shall be determined by Law. CLXXVII. The Military Power shall never be united with the Civil. CLXXVIII. Justices of the Peace shall be established in each Parish, and in all Places where they may be necessary. Their duration in Office, functions, and the mode of appointing them, shall be determined by Law. CLXXIX. Municipal Councils shall be established in the chief Places of the Districts, the functions, duration in Office, and mode of election, of whose Members, shall be determined by Law. The respective Provincial Junta shall determine the number of their Members.
TITLE TITLE

XXV.-Of the Armed Force.

CLXXX. The Armed Force is essentially obedient, and can never deliberate. It shall be divided into the regular Army, the Navy, and the National Militia.

CLXXXI. The regular Army shall be destined to protect the important points of the Republic, and shall always be under the orders of the Military Chiefs. CLXXXII. The Individuals of the Army and Navy, in actual service, shall be subject to Martial Law. CLXXXIII. The Officers of the Army and Navy cannot be removed from their appointments, except by a Sentence pronounced by the competent Authority. CLXXXIV. The National Militia shall be under the orders of the Governor of the Province, who shall call it into service, whenever the Executive Power decrees the same, after having previously obtained the consent of Congress, or, if it be in recess, of the Council of Government, agreeably to Article CXVIII; or, in order to act within the Province in case of sudden commotion; in the manner provided in the organic Law.
TITLE XXVI.- General Regulations. CLXXXV. All Public Functionaries are responsible for their conduct in the exercise of their functions, conformably to what is expressed in this Constitution, and in the Laws. CLXXXVI. No Public Functionary shall issue, obey, or execute, Orders manifestly contrary to the Constitution or the Laws, or which, in any way, interfere with the essential formalities prescribed by them, or are issued by Authorities manifestly incompetent. CLXXXVII. Those individuals who issue, sign, execute, or order to be executed, Decrees, Orders, or Resolutions contrary to the Constitution, and to the Laws which guarantee personal rights, as well as the parties who execute them, are culpable, and shall be punished according as those Laws direct. CLXXXVIII. Civil liberty, individual security, property, and equality in the eye of the Law, are guaranteed to the Citizens of Venezuela. CLXXXIX. The privilege belonging to Venezuelans, to claim their rights from the Depositaries of the Public Authority, provided it be done with due moderation and respect, shall never be impeded or restricted. All, on the contrary, should find by means of the Laws, a prompt and certain remedy, for injuries and damages sustained in their persons or property, their honour, or their reputation. CXC. The Venezuelans have the liberty to settle their disputes by arbitration, although they may have commenced legal proceedings, to change their domicile, to absent themselves from the State, carrying with them their property, and to return to it, provided they observe the legal formalities; and, in short, to do whatever is not prohibited by Law. CXCI. The house of every Venezuelan is an inviolable asylum. It cannot therefore be searched, except in particular cases, and with the formalities prescribed by Law.




CXCII. The secrecy of private Papers and of Correspondence, is also inviolable ; they cannot be opened nor read except by a competent Authority, and in the cases prescribed by Law. CXCIII. Every Venezuelan is at liberty to represent, in writing, to the Congress, to the Executive Power, and to the other constituted Authorities, whatever he may consider as conducive to the general welfare of the State ; but no Individual, or particular Body, can draw up Petitions in the name of the People, nor arrogate to themselves the name of the People. When a number of Individuals join together in a Petition to Congress,. to the Executive Power, or to the other Authorities, they shall all be held responsible for the truth of the facts therein stated, and the first 5 who sign the Document shall be held responsible for the genuineness of all the other signatures. CXCIV. All Venezuelans have the right to express their thoughts and opinions, verbally ; or by means of the Press, without their being obliged to submit them to previous censorship ; but always under the responsibility which the Law directs. CXCV. No Venezuelan can be removed from his natural Judges, nor tried by Special Commissions, or Extraordinary Tribunals. CXCVI. No Venezuelan can be tried, much less punished, except by virtue of a Law, in existence previously to the offence or act for which he is tried, nor until after the same shall have been cited to him, and he have been heard and legally sentenced. CXCVII. No Venezuelan shall be obliged to bear testimony on oath, in a Criminal Cause, against himself, or his Ascendants, or Descendants ; nor against his Relations, within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity, and second of affinity ; nor their husbands or wives. CXCVIII. No Individual shall be arrested or imprisoned, except competent Authority ; unless he be found in the actual commission of crime, in which case any Person may arrest him, in order to take him before the Judge. CXCIX. No Individual shall be arrested or imprisoned, for a criminal offence, unless after summary information of a crime deserving corporal punishment, and on presumptive evidence that the offence was committed by the Individual so taken or arrested ; who shall, however, be released, on bail, if it appear, at any stage of the proceedings that the said punishment cannot be inflicted upon him. CC. Previously to the detention or arrest of an Individual, it is indispensable, that an Order be issued, signed by the competent Authority, in which must be stated, the grounds for the arrest, and with a Copy of which the accused Party shall be furnished. Without this Order, which must be produced at the time, no Jailer shall receive the Person arrested into his custody. The Order for imprisonment shall be issued within 48 hours after the preliminary proceedings described in the preceding Article. CCI. Arbitrary imprisonment shall be punished according to Law.

1148 






1149

The Party offending shall indemnify the aggrieved for the injuries he may have sustained. CClI. When a Venezuelan is arrested, his defence or declaration shall be received, if possible, immediately, but never delayed for a longer period than 3 days. CCIII. The Jailer or Governor cannot prohibit the Accused from holding communication with his friends, unless the Order for imprisonment should contain the injunction of close confinement. This cannot continue beyond 3 days; and no other Prison, or Place of confinement, shall be used than that expressly mentioned in writing by the Judge. CCIV. Persons guilty of arbitrary imprisonment, and subject to the penalties for such offence, are: . Those who, without possessing legal authority so to do, arrest, or cause any Person to be arrested. 2. Those who, having legal authority, abuse the same, by arresting Individuals, or causing them to be arrested. or continued under arrest, except in the cases determined by Law; or who act contrary to the forms prescribed by Law, or confine Persons in places not publicly known as Prisons. 3. Those who, as Governors or Jailers, transgress the rules laid down in Articles CXCVIII, CC, and CCIII. CCV. The infamy attached to certain crimes shall never extend to the family or descendants of the Delinquent. CCVI. Confiscations of property, and cruel punishments, are abolished. The Criminal Code shall limit, as much as possible, the infliction of capital punishment. CCVIl. The torture shall never be employed; and every aggravation of the punishment directed by Law, shall be deemed a crime. CCVIII. No Individual shall be deprived of the least portion of his property, nor shall it be applied to any public use, without the consent of the Owner, or that of Congress. When the public benefit, legally established, requires such a measure, a just compensation shall always be awarded. CCIX. No description of manufacture, cultivation, industry or commerce, shall be prohibited to the Venezuelans, except those of which the monopoly is at present necessary for the support of the Republic, but which shall also be thrown open to the Public by Congress, so soon as it shall deem the same convenient and proper. All occupations which are contrary to morality and the public health are excepted. CCX. No sum of money whatsoever shall be drawn out of the Public Treasury, for other purposes than those determined by the Law, and included in the Estimates approved of by Congress; which Estimates must necessarily be published.

1149 


CCXI. The political change which Venezuela has undergone shall not affect its obligations with respect to the Public Debt, the payment of which shall be regulated, by Conventions and Treaties with the other States which lately formed the Republic of  CCXII. The establishment of hereditary estates, and of every description of entailed property, is prohibited. CCXIII. No titles of nobility, honours, or hereditary distinctions, can be granted; nor shall any Offices or Employments be created, of which the salaries or emoluments can continue longer than the good conduct of the Parties who fill the same. CCXIV. No Individual holding any Post of confidence or honour under the Government of Venezuela, can accept of any present, title, or emolument, from any King, Prince, or Foreign State, without the consent of Congress. CCXV. The Taxes shall be raised proportionally, and shall be collected from those who are liable to the payment of them, without any exemption on account of immunity or privilege. CCXVI. The Military, in time of peace, cannot be quartered or billeted in the Houses of Venezuelans, without the consent of the Occupiers thereof; neither can they be so in time of War, except when on their march, and in pursuance of an order signed by the Civil Authority, conformably to the Laws. Any injury sustained in such case, by the Proprietor of the House, shall be made good by the State, at the expense of the party who may have caused it. CCXVII. Every Inventor shall possess a right of property in his inventions and discoveries. The Law shall assign to him a temporary privilege, or an indemnification for the loss he may sustain in the event of their being made public. CCXVIII. Foreigners, of whatever Nation, shall be admitted into Venezuela. Being subject to the Laws of the State, equally with the Natives, they shall also enjoy, both in their persons and property, equal security with them: the privileges and immunities, however, to which they may be entitled, in consequence of existing Treaties, shall not be invalidated or deteriorated, in consequence of this regulation. CCXIX. Venezuelans shall not be subject to Martial Law, nor undergo any punishment prescribed by it, except those who are in actual service, in the regular Army, Navy, and Militia; that is to say, those who are employed, and in the receipt of pay from the State.
TITLE

XXVII.-Of the Oaths of Public Functionaries.

CCXX. No Functionary shall enter upon the exercise of his Office, without previously taking the oath to maintain and defend the Constitution, and faithfully and punctually to discharge the duties of his Employment.

1151

CCXXI. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take the Oath in the presence of Congress, administered by the President of the Senate. The Presidents of the Chambers of Congress and of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall take the same in presence of their respective Bodies; and it shall be administered to the Members of those Bodies by their respective President. CCXXII. The Members of the Council of Government, the Secretaries of State, Members of the Superior Courts of Justice, Governors of Provinces, Generals of the Army, and Officers commanding the Naval Force, and the other principal Authorities, civil and ecclesiastical, shall take the Oath before the President of the Republic, or before the Individual exercising his functions. TITLE XXVIII.-Of the observance, interpretation, and reform of the Constitution. CCXXIII. This Constitution shall be held to be in full force and effect from the day of its promulgation. CCXXIV. Any doubts which may arise, relative to the meaning of any of the Articles of this Constitution, shall be decided by Congress; the same formalities being observed in the so doing as are prescribed for the passing of the Laws. CCXXV. The reform of any Article of this Constitution may be proposed in either of the Chambers of Congress, and, should it have the support of one fifth part of the Members present, it shall be discussed conformably to the rules of debate: should the reform proposed be declared useful or necessary, by the votes of two-thirds of the Members present, it shall be passed to the other Chamber ; and should the same also be declared in the latter, observing the same formalities, the Project of reform shall be published ; but it shall remain in abeyance until the first meeting of Congress, after the 2 Chambers shall have been entirely renewed. CCXXVI. The Chambers shall then take the Project of reform into consideration, and, if it obtain the approbation of two thirds of the Members present, in each Chamber, it shall be considered as forming a part of the Constitution, and be forwarded to the Executive, in order to its publication and fulfilment. CCXXVII. The future Constitutional Congresses are authorized to adopt the measures necessary for strengthening, in the manner best suited to the People of Venezuela, the bonds of Federation which shall unite, regulate, and maintain, the high relations between Colombians, so soon as the conditions of the Decree on the subject shall have been fulfilled; which measures shall have for their basis the public opinion expressed with respect to such Compacts. CCXXVIII. The authority possessed by Congress to modify the Constitution does not extend to the Form of Government, which shall

always continue to be republican, popular, representative, responsible, and alternate. The Constituent Congress has decreed and sanctioned the present Constitution; the observance of which it recommends and confides to the fidelity of the Chief of the State, to the prudence of subsequent Legislatures, to the zeal of the Magistrates, and the Ministers of Religion, to the constancy of the Patriots who proclaimed the Independence of the Country, to the valour of the Warriors who achieved it with their arms, to the care of the Fathers of Families, and, finally, to the love of liberty possessed by all Venezuelans. Given in the Hall of the Constituent Congress, and signed, with unanimous consent, by all the Deputies present, in the City of Valencia, on the 22d of September, in the Year of our Lord 1830,-the 20th Year of Independence. The Presidentof the Congress, DR. MIGUEL PENA. The Vice President,J. DE Dios PIcON. [Signatures of 43 Deputies.] Let it be fulfilled, published, and circulated. The Presidentof the State, JOSE A. PAEZ.

