CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET-NAM
by GISBERT H. FLANZ and KAREN SHAW KERPEN

Issued May 1981

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY COMPARATIVE NOTES ON THE NEW CONSTITUTION THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1981 by Oceana Publication, Inc.
Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam PREAMBLE Throughout their four-thousand year history, the Vietnamese people have worked hard and fought heroically to build and defend their country. This long and persistent struggle for independence and freedom has fostered the staunch and indomitable tradition of our nation. Since 1930, under the leadership of the Communist Party of Vietnam founded and forged by President Ho Chi Minh, and following the path of the great Russian October Revolution, our people successively defeated the Japanese, French and American imperialists and their henchmen. They have completed the people's national democratic revolution, and have embarked on a socialist revolution and are building socialism. Our country, formerly a colony and a semi-feudal country, has become an independent, reunified, socialist state, a member of the world socialist community. In 1945, following the defeat of fascism by the Soviet Army, our people successfully carried out the August Revolution. On September 2, 1945, President Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the Declaration of Independence. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam, the first worker-peasant state in Southeast Asia, was born. However, the French colonists, with the assistance of U.S. imperialism, invaded our country once again. Our people, who "would rather sacrifice all than lose our country and be enslaved," waged a long struggle against the invaders, and carried out a program of land reform. The great victory at Dien Bien Phu brought a glorious end to the war of resistance against the French colonialists. In 1954, the Geneva agreements were signed on the basis of recognition of Vietnam's independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. The victory of the August revolution and that of the anti-French resistance signalled the beginning of the collapse of colonialism throughout the world. Stepping into the French colonialists shoes, the U.S. imperialists turned South Vietnam into a neo-colony and military base of the United States, in an attempt to permanently partition our country, and to include South Vietnam, Loas and Kampuchea into a counter-revolutionary front. Pursuing this scheme, they conducted an extremely barbarous war of aggression against Vietnam. Imbued with the truth that "nothing is more precious than independence and freedom," our people fought heroically, determined to liberate the South, defend the North and reunify the country. The successive victories of the Vietnamese people, together with the victories of the peoples of Laos and Kampuchea, compelled the U.S. imperialists to sign the 1973 Paris agreement on Vietnam. In the spring of 1975, the Vietnamese people won total victory in a general offensive and uprising which culminated in the historic Ho Chi Minh campaign. After 30 years of hard fighting, South Vietnam--the "iron fort of the homeland"--was completely liberated.

While our entire people were struggling against the U.S. war of aggression, for national salvation, great achievements were recorded in the socialist revolution in the North: institution of socialist relations of production, abolition of the regime of human exploitation, building of the initial material and technical infrastructure of socialism, conduct of an ideological-cultural revolution, execution of the dual tasks of production and fighting, and fulfillment of the obligations of the great rear base towards the heroic South in the war of resistance to U.S. aggression. The victories of the peoples of the three Indochina countries as a whole, and the Vietnamese people in particular, in the war against U.S. aggression, heralded the complete bankruptcy of neo-colonialism, contributed to the consolidation and extension of the world socialist system, encouraged the national liberation movements and the workers' and democratic movements, and accelerated the offensive of the three revolutionary currents of the present era. Following the complete liberation of the South, our people held free general elections throughout the country, and achieved national reunification. In July 1976, our country adopted the name of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. No sooner had they emerged from thirty years of liberation war than our people, who were longing for peace to build their homeland, were confronted with the Chinese hegemonist aggressors and their henchmen in Kampuchea. Promoting our glorious national traditions, our army and people won resounding victories in both wars for national defense against the aggression by Kampuchean reactionaries on the southwestern border and the Chinese hegemonists on the northern border, safeguarding our independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Credit for the great successive victories of the Vietnamese revolution goes to the Communist Party of Vietnam which has creatively applied Marxism-Leninism, charted a correct line to lead the revolution in our country; upheld the two banners of national independence and socialism; consolidated the worker-peasant alliance led by the working class; closely united all social strata within the national united front; built and developed the people's armed forces; constantly strengthened the revolutionary administration; combined patriotism with proletarian internationalism, combined the strength of our people with the world revolutionary movement; and coordinated the struggles on the political, military and diplomatic planes. These are victories of the ardent partriotism, the revolutionary heroism and the sublime spirit of sacrifice of our compatriots and combatants throughout the country who are of one mind in struggline for national liberation, construction and defense. They are victories of the militant solidarity and the relations of cooperation and mutual assistance between the peoples of Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea; of the military solidarity and great and effective aid of the Soviet Union and other fraternal socialist countries to the Vietnamese revolution; and of the forces of national independence, democracy and peace throughout the world which have actively supported the just cause of the Vietnamese people. Our achievements have cost our people untold sacrifices and innumerable hardships. Our future is very bright, but our tasks are very difficult. Let our entire people strengthen unity and act upon the sacred testament of our great President Ho Chi Minh, and advance enthusiastically along the line charted by the Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam: "To firmly enforce the proletarian dictatorship: promote the working people's right to collective mastery of society; to

2

simultaneously implement the three revolutions, namely the revolution in the relations of production, the scientific and technological revolution, and the ideological and cultural revolution, with the scientific and technological revolution as the kingpin; step up socialist industrialisation which is the central task of the period of transition to socialism; establish the system of socialist collective mastery and large-scale socialist production, develop the new culture and foster new, socialist-oriented people; abolish the regime of human exploitation and eliminate poverty and backwardness; maintain constant vigilance and continuously strengthen national defence,; maintain political security and social order; successfully build our homeland, Vietnam, into a peaceful, independent, unified and socialist country; actively contribute to the struggle of the world's peace for peace, national independence, democracy and socialism." The Socialist Republic of Vietnam needs a constitution institutionalizing the current line of the Communist Party of Vietnam in the new stage. It is the constitution of the period of transition to socialism on a national scale. Continuing and developing the constitutions of 1946 and 1959, this constitution sums up and affirms the gains of the revolutionary struggle of the Vietnamese people over the past half century, expre-ses the will and aspirations of the Vietnamese people, and guarantees the successful development of Vietnamese society in the coming period. Being the fundamental law of the state, the present constitution determines our political, economic, cultural and social system, the basic rights and obligations of citizens, the organizational structures and principles guiding the activities of state bodies. It specifies the relationships between the party's leadership, the people's mastery, and state management in Vietnamese society. Let the entire Vietnamese people unite closely under the invincible banner of the Communist Party of Vietnam, and put this constitution into effect in order to attain further great successes in the cause of building socialism and defending our socialist homeland. Chapter 1 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam Political System Article 1 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam is an independent, sovereign and united country comprising its mainland, air space, territorial waters, and off-shore islands. Article 2 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam is a state of proletarian dictatorship. Its historic mission is to establish the collective mastery of the working people; mobilize and organise the people to carry out simultaneously the three revolutions: in the relations of production, in science and technology, and in ideology and culture, with the scientific and technological revolution as the king-pin; abolish human exploitation; crush all acts of opposition by counter-revolutionary elements in the country and all acts of aggression and sabotage by external enemies; build socialism successfully and advance to communism; and contribute to consolidating peace and accelerating the revolutionary cause of the people throughout the world.

3

Article 3 In the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, the collective masters are the working people, with the worker-peasant alliance, led by the working class, as the core. The state ensures the continuous perfection and consolidation of the working people's collective mastery in the political, economic, cultural and social fields; collective mastery in the whole country and in each unit; collective mastery over society, over nature, and over oneself. Article 4 The Communist Party of Vietnam, the vanguard and general staff of the Vietnamese working class, armed with Marxism-Leninism, is the only force leading the state and society, and the main factor determining all successes of the Vietnamese revolution. The party exists and struggles for the interests of the working class and the people of Vietnam as a whole. Its organisations operate within the framework of the constitution. Article 5 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam is a unified state of all the nationalities living on Vietnamese territory, with equality in rights and obligations. The state protects, strengthens and consolidates the great unity of all nationalities; it strictly prohibits any act of racial prejudice and any attempt to sow discord among nationalities. All the nationalities have the right to use their own spoken languages and scripts, and to preserve and promote their fine customs, habits, traditions, and cultures. The state accepts responsibility to take corrective measures to gradually eliminate inequalities in the levels of economic and cultural development between the different nationalities. Article 6 In the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, all power belongs to the people. The peoples exercise state power through the National Assembly and the People's Councils at all levels which are elected by and accountable to the people. The National Assembly and the People's Councils at all levels are the political bases of the system of state organisations. The National Assembly, the People's Councils at all levels and other state bodies are organised and function according to the principle of democratic centralism. Article 7 National Assembly deputies and deputies to People's Councils at all levels are elected by universal suffrage. Voting is equal, direct and secret. Electors have the right to recall National Assembly deputies and deputies to People's Councils at all levels who lose the confidence of the people. 4

Article 8 All state bodies and all state employees must devotedly serve the people, maintain close relations with them, listen to them and accept their supervision, and promote socialist democracy. All manifestations of bureaucratism, arrogance and authoritarianism are strictly prohibited. Article 9 The Vietnam Fatherland Front, which comprises the various political parties, the Vietnam Confederation of Trade Unions, the Vietnam Association of Collective Peasants, the Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union, the Vietnam Women's Union, and other member organisations, is a firm prop of the state. The front promotes the tradition of national unity, strengthens political and moral unity among the people, takes part in building and consolidating the people's power, educates and motivates the people to raise their sense of collective mastery, and to emulate one another in building socialism and defending the country. Article 10 The Vietnam Confederation of Trade Unions is the largest mass organisation of the Vietnamese working class, a school of communism, of economic management, and management of state. Within the limits of their competence, the trade unions take part in state affairs and supervise the work of state bodies, and participate in the management of factories. They educate workers and office employees; organise socialist emulation movements, and, together with state bodies, care for the lives of workers and office employees and protect their interests. Article 11 Collectives of working people at offices, factories, cooperatives, population centres and other basic units participate in state and social affairs including the planning of economic and cultural development, the protection of public property, the maintenance of political and social security and public order, and the organisation of public life at the grassroots levels. Article 12 The state manages society according to law, and constantly strengthens the socialist legal system. All state organs and social organisations, all state employees, all members of social organisations and all citizens must strictly abide by the constitution and law, and must struggle resolutely to prevent and oppose crimes and violations of the constitution and law. Article 13 Our socialist homeland, Vietnam, is sacred and inviolable. All schemes and actions prejudicial to the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the homeland, or the cause of socialist revolution and socialist construction shall be severely punished. 5

Article 14 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam continues to strengthen its fraternal friendship, militant solidarity and cooperation in all fields with the Soviet Union, Laos, Kampuchea and other socialist countries on the basis of Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism; preserves and develops friendly relations with neighbouring countries, unites with peoples struggling for national independence and social progress; pursues a policy of peaceful coexistence with countries of different political and social systems, on the basis of respect for each other's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit; actively supports and contributes to the struggle of the world's people against imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, hegemonism, and apartheid, for peace, national independence, democracy and socialism. Chapter 2 The Economic System Article 15 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam is advancing directly from a society in which small-scale production predominates to socialism, bypassing the stage of capitalist development, to build a society with a modern industrial-agricultural economy, advanced culture, science and technology, a strong defence potential, and a civilized happy life. The economic policies of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam are aimed at progressively satisfying increasing material and cultural needs of the whole society by continuously developing production and raising social labour efficiency, on the basis of socialist collective mastery and modern science and technology. Article 16 The central task throughout the period of transition to socialism is the socialist industrialisation of the country. The state gives priority to a rational development of heavy industry on the basis of the development of agriculture and light industry, and the integration of industry and agriculture on a national scale into an industrial-agricultural structure; it builds the centrally-run economy while developing the local economy, and combines the two into a unified national economic structure; combines the development of the productive forces with the institution and perfection of socialist relations of production; combines economic construction and national defence; and strengthens cooperation and mutual assistance with fraternal countries in the socialist community in the spirit of socialist internationalism and, at the same time, develops economic relations with other countries on the basis of respect for each other's independence and sovereignty, equality, and mutual benefit. Article 17 The state institutes regulations and takes necessary measures to ensure the working people's full exercise of their right to collective mastery of the means of production and the labour force, of production and distribution, of science and technology, in order to make economic development truly become the work of the entire people. 6

Article 18 The state conducts a revolution in the relations of production, guides, utilises and transforms non-socialist sectors of the economy, institutes and consolidates the system of socialist ownership of the means of production, with the aim of building a national economy with two essential components--the state sector under the ownership of the entire people, and the collective economic sector under the collective ownership of the working people. The state sector plays the leading role in the national economy, and is given priority for development. Article 19 The lands, forests, rivers and lakes, mines, natural resources in the ground, in the territorial seas and on the continental shelf; industrial, agricultural, forestry, fishery and state commercial undertakings, banks and insurance organizations; public utilities; the systems of transport by rail, road, river, sea and air; dikes and important irrigation works; defence installation; the systems of information and communications, radio, television and cinema; institutes of scientific and technological research, and cultural and social establishments and other property defined by the law as belonging to the state are under the ownership of the entire people. Article 20 Lands are put under state management according to general laws, to ensure their rational and economic use. Collectives and individuals who have the use of land are allowed to continue to do so and to enjoy the fruits of their labour according to law. Collectives and individuals who use the land have the responsibility to protect, replenish and exploit it in keeping with state policies and plans. Lands reserved for agriculture and forestry may not be used for other purposes unless authorised by competent state organs. Article 21 The state holds a monopoly on foreign trade and all other economic relations with foreign countries. Article 22 State-run economic establishments operate according to the orientations and tasks laid down under the state law; they implement a system of economic accounting and a system of managerial and individual responsibility; ensure the workers' and public employees' participation in management; raise the quality of products and services and economic efficiency; practise thrift; ensure accumulation for the state and the factories; scrupulously protect state property; and concern themselves with improving the working and living conditions of workers and public employees. Article 23 The state guides and assists in the development of the cooperative sector of the economy. 7

The property of cooperatives and other collective organisations of the working people is protected by the state in accordance with law. Cooperatives operate in accordance with national and regional economic plans. They must ensure the constant development of production, increase the income and improve the living standards of their members, and fulfill all obligations to the state while accumulating capital for themselves. The cooperative members' right to collective mastery in the management of cooperatives must be respected and promoted. The family subsidiary small holdings of the cooperative members are recognised and protected by the state, in accordance with law. Article 24 The state encourages, guides and assists individual farmers, handicraft workers and other self-employed workers to advance towards the road of collective production, to form production cooperatives and other forms of mutual aid collectives on the principle of voluntariness. Small tradespeople receive guidance and assistance to gradually switch to production or to other suitable occupations. The law defines the limits for private economic activity in agriculture, small industry, handicrafts, applied arts and services. Article 25 In the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, all economic bases of feudal landlords and comprador capitalists are nationalised without compensation. Article 26 The state conducts the socialist transformation of the private capitalist economy in both urban and rural areas by suitable forms. Article 27 The state protects the citizens' right of ownership of lawfully earned incomes, savings, housing, other personal possessions and the means of engaging in authorized private work. The law protects the citizens' right of inheritance. Article 28 The state may, when it deems really necessary to the public interests, purchase or requisition with or without compensation, the property of individuals or of collectives. The procedures for purchase or requisition are defined by law. Article 29 The state, proceeding from the requirements of economic and cultural development and of the strengthening of national development and of the strengthening of national defence, makes a rational distribution and utilisation of the social labour

force on a national scale as well as for each locality and unit. Article 30 The state educates and motivates the entire people to build socialism with industriousness and thrift; it defines and closely controls the use of the labour force, materials and capital in all economic activities and in the management of the state. Article 31 The state and collective economic organisations apply the principle: "From each according to his ability, to each according to his work," while gradually increasing social benefits on the basis of development of the national economy. Article 32 The state, in coordination with the trade unions and other people's organisations, combines political education and the enhancement of labour discipline with material incentives with the aim of promoting the socialist emulation movement. Article 33 The state guides the national economy according to unified plans; it promotes a sense of responsibility and the spirit of initiative and creativeness at all echelons, branches, basis units and individuals in elaborating and implementing state plan; it mobilises all labour forces, natural resources, and material and technical resources of the country, so as to ensure a comprehensive, balanced and steady development of the national economy at a rapid pace and with a high level of efficiency. Article 34 The state organises social production along the lines of large-scale socialist production; it builds and ceaselessly perfects the system of economic management; correctly applies the economic laws of socialism; applies the principles of democratic centralism and the principles of combining departmental management with regional and local management; combines the interests of the state with those of the collectives and the working people; elaborates and ensures respect for economic laws. Article 35 The law severely punishes all acts of speculation, hoarding, and all other illegal undertakings that upset the market, and undermine state plans, as well as all acts of corruption, theft, bribery, waste, or irresponsible actions that seriously damage the interests of the state and the people. Article 36 All state organs, factories, cooperatives, units of the people's armed forces and citizens have the duty to implement the policy of protecting, transforming and renewing natural resources, and of protecting and improving the environment.

9

Chapter 3 Culture, Education, Science and Technology Article 37 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam promotes the ideological and cultural revolution, develops a new culture with a socialist content and a national, party and people's character; moulds new generations of people motivated by a sense of collective mastery, the love of labour and respect for public property, possessing a certain cultural level, scientific and technical knowledge and good health, and animated by the love for the socialist homeland and proletarian internationalism. Article 38 Marxism-Leninism is the ideological system guiding the development of Vietnamese society. The state broadly disseminates Marxism-Leninism, the line and policies of the Communist Party of Vietnam, and the constitution and laws of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. It preserves and develops the cultural and spiritual values of the nation, absorbs the best of world culture, combats feudal and bourgeois ideologies and the influences of imperialist and colonialist culture; criticizes pettybourgeois ideology; builds a socialist way of life, and combats backward lifestyles and superstitions. Article 39 The state pays attention to strengthening the material infrastructure, institutes regulations and takes necessary measures to ensure the working people's collective mastery over culture and education, and science and technology, and promotes the people's dynamism and creativeness--thereby involving the entire nation in the building of a new culture and a new society and making it possible for the entire people to enjoy the fine achievements of the national and world cultures. Article 40 Vietnam's education must be constantly developed and improved by combining study and practice, and education and production labour and by developing close ties between the school and society, with a view to training qualified socialist workers and fostering revolutionary generations for the future. Article 41 The state has sole responsibility for education. The state is responsible for ensuring a balanced development of the education system: infants' education, general education, vocational and higher education, jobtraining schools, work-study schools, and in-service education. It continues the anti-illiteracy campaign, promotes complementary education and constantly raises the cultural and professional standards of the entire population. The Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union, the family and society, together with the school, have the responsibility to educate youth and children.

10

Article 42 The state promotes the scientific and technological revolution with the aim of developing the productive forces, increasing labour efficiency, speeding up socialist industrialisation, improving living standards and strengthening national defence, and building an advanced science and technology for our country. Article 43 Social sciences, natural sciences, and technology are to be strongly developed. The state concerns itself with the dissemination and teaching of science and technology; combines teaching and research with production, everyday life, and national defence work; rationally develops and employs the contingent of managers, scientists, technicians and workers; encourages research, inventions and discoveries; pays attention to research and innovations; promotes the spirit of self-reliance, initiative and creativeness while applying results of advanced world science and technology; and promotes international cooperation in the fields of science and technology. Article 44 Vietnamese literature and art are developed on the basis of the perspective of Marxism-Leninism, and in keeping with the Communist Party of Vietnam's line with regard to literature and art. Encouragement is given to the development of professional and amateur literary and artistic activities as a means of educating the people in the line and policies of the party and the state, educating them in revolutionary ethics, thinking and sentiments, developing their aesthetic sense and raising and satisfying their cultural needs. Article 45 The work of the mass media, the press, publications, libraries, radio, television, and cinema, will be developed and constantly improved with regard to political, ideological and artistic quality so as to guide public opinion, raise the political, cultural, scientific and technological levels of the entire population and mobilize them to participate in socialist emulation. Article 46 Historical and cultural relics, public works of art and sites of scenic or other significance shall be restored and protected. Importance shall be attached to the work of preservation and to museums. Article 47 The state is responsible for the protection and improvement of the people's health; develops Vietnamese preventive medicine; combines modern and traditional medical and pharmaceutical practices; combines the techniques of prevention and cure with the emphasis on prevention; and combines state-run health services with people's health services at the grass-roots levels. The state and society shall give protection to mothers and children and campaign for family planning.

11

Article 48 Vietnamese sports and physical culture, with a national, scientific and popular character, shall be developed strongly and harmoniously in order to improve the health of the people and increase their physical fitness for socialist construction and national defence. Article 49 Tourism is encouraged and adequately organised. Chapter 4 Defence of the Socialist Homeland Article 50 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam maintains a national, comprehensive and modern defence system based on the integration of national construction and national defence, the combination of the strength of the people's armed forces with that of the entire people, and the combination of the strength of the tradition of struggle against foreign aggression with the strength of the socialist system. Article 51 The people's armed forces of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, absolutely loyal to the homeland and the people, have the duty to be prepared to defend the gains of the revolution, the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the nation, political security and social order and security, and the freedom, happiness and peaceful labour of the people, and to join the entire people in building the country. Article 52 The state stimulates the people's patriotism and revolutionary heroism, enforces compulsory military service, operates the defence industry, and mobilises the human and material resources necessary to build powerful people's armed forces and constantly augment the nation's defence potential. All state bodies, social organisations and citizens must fulfill their obligations with regard to national defence and security as provided by law. Chapter 5 Basic Rights and Obligations of Citizens Article 53 Citizens of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam are persons granted Vietnamese citizenship by law. Article 54 The rights and obligations of citizens reflect the system of collective mastery of the working people, and harmonious combination of the requirements of social life and legitimate individual freedoms, and a guarantee of the identity of interests between the state, the collective and the individual, on the principle: each for all, all for each. 12

The rights of citizens are inseparable from their obligations. The state guarantees the rights of citizens; and citizens must fulfill their obligations towards the state and society. Article 55 All citizens are equal before the law. Article 56 Citizens have the right to take part in managing the affairs of the state and society. Article 57 All citizens, regardless of their ethnic origin, sex, social status, religion, cultural attainment, profession and term of residence, have the right to vote upon reaching the age of eighteen, and to stand for election to the National Assembly and the people's councils at all levels upon attaining the age of twenty-one, with the exception of the insane or people deprived of such rights by law or people's courts. Article 58 Work is the primary right, obligation and privilege of citizens. Citizens have the right to work. People fit for work must work as provided by law. The state creates jobs on the basis of economic development plans, employs people according to both their personal aptitudes and desires, and social requirements. It fosters professional skills, preserves the health of the workforce, and constantly improves working conditions for both mental and physical labour. The state institutes and enforces regulations aimed at preventing industrial accidents and occupational diseases. Article 59 Working people are entitled to rest. The state regulates the conditions relating to work, rest and recreation for workers and office employees. Working people are entitled to social insurance benefits in retirement, old age, sickness, or disability. The state guarantees the working people's right to social insurance and gradually extends the system as the national economy expands. The state guides cooperatives in gradually making social insurance benefits available to their members. Article 60 Education is a right and obligation of citizens.

13

The state gradually enforces compulsory general education, tuition-free, and grants scholarships to create favorable conditions for citizens to pursue-their: studies. Article 61 Citizens have the right to health care. The state provides free medical examinations and treatment. Article 62 Citizens have the right to housing. The state has a responsibility to directly improve the rate of housing construction while encouraging and assisting housing construction by collectives and individuals according to common plans, so as to gradually implement this right. The allotment of state housing space must be fair and equitable. Article 63 Women and men have equal rights in all respects--in political, economic, cultural, social and family life. The state and society are responsible for raising the political, cultural, scientific, technical and professional standards of women, and constantly improving their role in society. The state establishes work conditions suited to women's needs. Women and men receive equal pay for equal work. Women are entitled to pre- and post-natal paid leave if they are workers or office employees, or to maternity allowances if they are cooperative members. The state and society ensure the development of maternity homes, creches, kindergartens, community dining halls and other social amenities to create favourable conditions for women to produce, work, study and rest. Article 64 The family is the cell of society. The state protects marriage and the family. Marriage is based on the principles of voluntariness, progressiveness, monogamy, and equality between husband and wife. Parents have an obligation to bring up and educate their children to become citizens useful to society. Children have an obligation to respect and care for their parents. The state and society do not accept discrimination between children. Article 65 The state and society are responsible for the protection, care and education of children, and assume an increasing share of the responsibility to raise and educate children in order to improve their social life, study and development.

14

Article 66 le state and society shall create conditions for the study, work and recreation of young people, assist them to develop their intellectual faculties, talents and physical fitness; the state and society shall foster the communist ideal and ateyodungplcirvtonayehcs. 'Young people must fulfill their obligations as the shockforce in the emulation movement for socialist construction and national defence, in the three revolutions n the relations of production, science and technology, and ideology and culture. Article 67 Citizens enjoy freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, freelom of association, and freedom to demonstrate in accordance with the interests of socialism and of the people. 'he state shall create the necessary material conditions for the exercise of these rights. To one may misuse democratic freedoms to violate the interests of the state and :he people. Article 68 Citizens enjoy freedom of worship, and may practise or not practise a religion. to one may misuse religions to violate state laws or policies. Article 69 Citizens have the right to legal protection from physical violence. No citizen may be arrested except on the authority of a People's Court, or on the Lecision of the People's Organ of Control, or on a decision subject to ratification by the latter. Arrests and detention of people must be made in accordance with law. All forms of :oercion and torture are strictly prohibited. Article 70 Citizens have the right to protection by law with regard to their lives, property, honour and dignity. Article 71 Citizens have the right to inviolability with regard to their places of residence. No one is allowed to enter another person's home without the owner's consent, uness otherwise authorised by law. House searches may be made only by representatives of competent state bodies, in accordance with law. Privacy of correspondence and telephone and telegraphic communications is guaranteed. reedom of movement and residence is respected, in accordance with law.

15

Article 72 Citizens have the right to undertake scientific and technical research and to pursue literary, artistic and other cultural activities. The state encourages and assists citizens in their scientific and technical, literary and artistic pursuits with a view to raising the quality of life, socialist construction and national defence. It fosters and promotes personal aptitudes and talents. The rights of authors and inventors are guaranteed. Article 73 Citizens have the right to lodge with any state authority a complaint or denunciation regarding transgressions of law by any state body, social organisation, people's armed forces unit or individual employed by those state bodies, organisations or units. Complaints and denunciations must be examined and dealt with promptly. Any violation of the legitimate rights of citizens must be promptly redressed and seriously dealt with. Victims are entitled to compensation. Retaliation against persons who lodge complaints or denunciations is strictly prohibited. Article 74 The state enacts legislation granting privileges to disabled soldiers and families of fallen combatants, and creates conditions for disabled soldiers to recover their working ability, to find employment suited to their health conditions, and to lead a normal life. Persons or families who have rendered meritorious services to the revolution are commended and rewarded, and receive proper care. Old people and disabled persons with no family support receive assistance from the state and society. Orphans are brought up and educated by the state and society. Article 75 The state protects the legitimate rights and interests of Vietnamese living abroad. Article 76 Citizens must be loyal to the homeland. Treason against the homeland is the gravest crime against the nation. Article 77 No defend the socialist homeland is a sacred duty and noble right of citizens. Citizens are obliged to do military service and take part in building a national 16

Defence force of the whole population. rticle 78 Citizens are obliged to abide by the constitution, law and labour discipline, to maintain political and social security and order, protect state secrets, and repect the regulations of the socialist society. rticle 79 Socialist property is sacred and inviolable. Citizens are obliged to respect and rotect it. rticle 80 Citizens are obliged to pay taxes and take part in work on public projects in accordance with law. rticle 81 Foreigners who are persecuted for struggling for freedom and national independence, or socialism, democracy and peace, or for engaging in scientific pursuits, are ranted the right of asylum by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Chapter 6 The National Assembly rticle 82 he National Assembly is the highest representative body of the people, the highest tate authority in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. he National Assembly is the only body vested with constitutional and legislative uthority. he National Assembly decides on fundamental domestic and foreign policies, objecives for economic and cultural development, the main principles governing the organisation and functioning of the state apparatus and the social relations and ctivities of citizens. he National Assembly exercises the right of supreme supervision of all activities f the state. rticle 83 he National Assembly has the following duties and powers: . No draw up, adopt and amend the constitution; . to make and amend laws; . No exercise supreme supervision over the constitution and laws; . No pass state plans and ratify their implementation; . No pass state budgets and ratify their implementation; . No define the organisation of the National Assembly, the Council of State, the ouncil of Ministers, the People's Council and People's Committee, the People's ourt and the People's Organ of Control; . No elect and remove the chairman, vice-chairmen and other members of the Council f State; the chairman, vice-chairmen and other members of the Council of Ministers; 17

the chief justice of the Supreme People's Court; and the procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control; 8, No decide on the institution or dissolution of ministries and state commissions; No examine reports by the Council of State, the Council of Ministers, the Su9. preme People's Court and the procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control; No institute, revise, or repeal taxes; 10. No delineate the boundaries of provinces and municipalities directly under the 11. central authority, and corresponding administrative units; No grant general amnesties; 12. No decide on matters of war and peace; 13. No delegate certain duties of state organs to social organizations for execu14. tion; No ratify or abrogate international treaties at the proposal of the Council of 15. State. The National Assembly may assume other duties and powers, when it deems it necessary. Article 84 The term of office of each legislature of the National Assembly is five years. A new National Assembly must be elected two months before the term of office of the incumbent National Assembly expires. Electoral procedures and the number of deputies are defined by law. Under special circumstances, the National Assembly may decide to prolong its term of office and take necessary measures to ensure its functioning. Article 85 The National Assembly shall meet regularly, twice a year, at the convocation of the Council of State. The Council of State may convene extraordinary sessions of the National Assembly, by its own decision, or at the request of the Council of Ministers or of at least one-third of the deputies. A new legislature of the National Assembly must be convened not later than two months after its election. The first session of each legislature of the National Assembly shall be opened by the chairman of the Council of State. The chairman of the Council of State shall preside over the sessions until the chairman of the new National Assembly is elected. Article 86 The Council of State, the Council of Ministers, the chairman of the National Assembly, the National Defence Council, the Council of Nationalities, the various commissions of the National Assembly, National Assembly deputies, the Supreme People's Court, the procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control, the Vietnam Fatherland Front, the political parties, the Vietnam Confederation of Trade Unions, the Vietnamese Association of Collective Peasants, the Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union, and the Vietnam Women's Union, have the right to submit 18

raft laws to the National Assembly rticle 87 he adoption of bills and resolutions of the National Assembly requires a supporting vote by a majority of all its deputies, except for proposed constitutional amendments, as provided for in Article 147. aws must be promulgated not later than fifteen days after their adoption by the ational Assembly. rticle 88 he National Assembly shall elect a commission to verify the credentials of deputies to the National Assembly and, basing itself on the reports of that commission, ecide whether to accept the credentials of deputies to the National Assembly. rticle 89 he National Assembly shall elect its chairman and vice-chairmen. The number of ice-chairmen shall be decided by the National Assembly. he chairman of the National Assembly shall preside over its meetings; ensure the bservance of the National Assembly internal regulations; keep in touch with the eputies; regulate and coordinate activities of the National Assembly commissions; ertify the laws and resolutions adopted by the National Assembly; and conduct the ational Assembly's external communications. he vice-chairman of the National Assembly is empowered to attend meetings of the ouncil of State. rticle 90 he National Assembly shall elect the National Defence Council. The National efence Council is empowered to mobilise all forces and potentials of the country o defend the homeland. n case of war, the National Assembly or the Council of State may vest the National efence Council with special duties and powers. rticle 91 he National Assembly shall elect the Council of Nationalities. he Council of Nationalities shall study and make proposals on questions of nationlities to the National Assembly and the Council of State. It shall assist the ational Assembly and the Council of State in supervising the implementation of olicies on nationalities. he chairman of the Council of Nationalities may attend meetings of the Council of tate. rticle 92 he National Assembly shall elect its standing committees. he Standing Committees study and examine the draft laws, draft decrees and other 19

bills or reports entrusted to them by the National Assembly and the Council of State. They make proposals to the National Assembly and the Council of State on matters within their respective jurisdictions; and assist the National Assembly and the Council of State in exercising their supervisory power. When necessary, the National Assembly and the Council of State may set up interim committees for specific purposes. Article 93 The National Defence Council, the Council of Nationalities, and National Assembly committees have the right to request members of the Council of Ministers and other concerned officials to present or provide them with information. The persons to whom such requests are made have a responsibility to respond, Article 94 National Assembly deputies must maintain close contacts with voters, accept their supervision, report to them about their activities and those of the National Assembly, answer requests and petitions made by voters, examine and help to resolve complaints and denunciations made by voters. National Assembly deputies shall publicise state laws and policies and motivate the people to take part in managing the state. Article 95 National Assembly deputies have the right to question the Council of Ministers and its members, the chief justice of the Supreme People's Court and the procuratorgeneral of the Supreme People's Organ of Control. The organ or official so questioned must reply to the National Assembly during its meeting. In case an investigation is deemed necessary, the National Assembly may decide to authorise the said organ or official to reply before the Council of State or at the next meeting of the National Assembly. National Assembly deputies have the right to make requests to state bodies. The persons in charge of these bodies shall receive the deputies, and examine and answer their requests. Article 96 National Assembly deputies may not be arrested or prosecuted without the consent of the National Assembly and, when the National Assembly is not in session, without the consent of the Council of State. If a National Assembly deputy is held in custody for a flagrant offence, the authority responsible for the detention must immediately report the matter to the National Assembly or the Council of State for examination and decision. Article 97 State organs are obliged to create favourable conditions for National Assembly deputies to discharge their duties.

20

Chapter 7 The Council of State Article 98 The Council of State is the highest continuously functioning body of the National Assembly, and is the collective presidency of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The Council of State discharges duties assigned and uses powers vested in it by the constitution and the laws and resolutions of the National Assembly; it decides on important matters concerning the buildings of socialism and national defence; supervises the implementation of the laws, decrees and resolutions of the National Assembly and the Council of State; and supervises activities of the state apparatus. The Council of State, through its chairman, acts on behalf of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in domestic and foreign affairs. Article 99 The Council of State, elected from among National Assembly deputies, shall consist of The The The The chairman of the Council of State, vice-chairman of the Council of State, secretary-general of the Council of State, and members of the Council of state.

The numbers of vice-chairmen and members of the Council of State are decided by the National Assembly. Members of the Council of State cannot be concurrently members of the Council of Ministers. Article 100 The Council of State has the following duties and powers: No 1. proclaim and preside over the election of deputies to the National Assembly; No 2. convene meetings of the National Assembly; No 3. promulgate laws; No 4. issue decrees; No 5. interpret the Constitution, laws and decrees; No 6. decide to hold referenda; No 7. supervise the work of the Council of Ministers, the Supreme People's Court and the procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control; No 8. suspend the implementation of, revise or rescind resolutions, decisions or orders of the Council of Ministers which contravene the Constitution, laws or decrees; No 9. supervise and guide the activities of People's Councils at all levels, in order to promote their functions as representative organs of the people; 10.revise or rescind inappropriate resolutions of People's Councils of provinNo ces, municipalities directly under the central authority and corresponding levels and to dissolve those councils where it is considered that they are acting in a manner seriously detrimental to the interests of the people; No 11. decide, when the National Assembly is not in session, on the formation or

21

dissolution of ministries or state committees; 12. No appoint or dismiss the vice-chairmen of the Council of Ministers, ministers and heads of state committees when the National Assembly is not in session; No appoint or dismiss the deputy chief justices, judges and people's assessors 13. of the Supreme People's Court; appoint and remove the deputy procurators-general and members of the Supreme People's Organ of Control; No appoint, remove or recall plenipotentiary diplomatic representatives of the 14. Socialist Republic of Vietnam to foreign countries and international organisations; 15.receive foreign plenipotentiary diplomatic representatives; No 16.ratify or abrogate international treaties, except where it is deemed necessNo ary to refer the matter to the National Assembly; 17.determine military, diplomatic and other grades and ranks; No 18.institute and grant awards, orders, medals and honorific titles; No 19.decide on granting special amnesties; No 20. No declare a state of war when the country is faced with foreign aggression, when the National Assembly is not in session; 21. No order general or local mobilisation or a state of siege in the whole country or parts of it. Decisions of the Council of State as mentioned in points 11, 12 and 20 must be submitted to the next session of the National Assembly for ratification. When necessary, the National Assembly may vest the Council of State with other duties and powers. Article 101 The term of office of the Council of State corresponds to that of the National Assembly. When the term of a National Assembly legislature expires, the Council of State shall continue its functions until the new legislature of the National Assembly elects a new Council of State. Article 102 The adoption of ordinances and resolutions of the Council of State requires a supporting vote by a majority of its membership. Article 103 The chairman of the Council of State commands the people's armed forces of the whole country, and is concurrently the chairman of the National Defence Council. Chapter 8 The Council of Ministers Article 104 The Council of Ministers is the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, the highest executive and administrative state body of the highest body of state authority. The Council of Ministers is entrusted with the unified management of the implementation of all political, economic, cultural, social, security, national defence and external activities of the state; it enhances the efficiency of the state 22

apparatus from the centre down to the grassroots levels; it ensures respect for and observance of law; promote the people's collective mastery; ensure the building of socialism, and the constant improvement of the material and cultural life of the people. The Council of Ministers shall be responsible and accountable to the National Assembly; when the National Assembly is not in session, it shall be responsible and accountable to the Council of State. Article 105 The The The The Council of Ministers consists of: chairman of the Council of Ministers, vice-chairmen of the Council of Ministers, and ministers and the heads of state committees.

Article 106 The President of the Vietnam Confederation of Trade Unions has the right to attend meetings of the Council of Ministers. The president of the Central Committee of the Vietnam Fatherland Front, and leading representatives of mass organizations affiliated to the front, may be invited to attend meetings of the Council of Ministers, when necessary. Article 107 The Council of Ministers has the following duties and powers: 1. ensure observance of the Constitution and law; No 2. submit draft laws, draft decrees and other bills to the National Assembly No and the Council of State; 3. draft the state plans and state budgets and submit them to the National No Assembly, and organise the implementation of the state plans and state budgets; 4. undertake the unified management of the transformation and development of No the national economy, the building and development of culture, education, science and technology; 5. improve the material and cultural life of the people; No 6. protect the legitimate rights of citizens and create conditions for them No to enjoy their rights and fulfill their obligations; 7. organise national defence activities of the entire population, and build the No people's armed forces; No 8. ensure political security, and social order and security; 9. enforce mobilisation, a state of siege and 'other necessary measures to No defend the homeland; 10. take measures to protect socialist property, and protect the interests of No the state and society; 11. undertake unified management of finances, the currency and credits; No 12. compile national inventories and statistics; No 13. organise and administer the economic arbitration work of the state; No 14. organise and administer the insurance work of the state; No 15. organise and administer the inspection and control work of the state; No 16. organise and manage the state's foreign relations; to guide the implementaNo tion of treaties and agreements already signed; 17. build and perfect the state managerial apparatus from the centre to the No grass-roots levels; to train, foster, place and utilise the contingent of state cadres; 23

18. No lead the work of the ministries and other organs under the authority of the Council of Ministers; 19. No ensure that the People's Councils at all levels discharge the tasks and exercise the powers of organs of state authority in the localities. No 20.lead the People's Councils at all levels. No 21.create favourable conditions for the activities of the Vietnam Fatherland Front and its members organizations; No 22.ensure the dissemination of information and the education of the people with regard to the Constitution and law; No 23.suspend the execution of, or revise or rescind inappropriate decisions, instructions and circulars of the ministries and other bodies under the authority of the Council of Ministers; No 24.suspend the execution of inappropriate resolutions of People's Councils of provinces, municipalities directly under the central authority and corresponding units, and request the Council of State to revise or annul such resolutions; No 25.suspend the execution of, or revise or rescind inappropriate decisions and instructions of people's committees at all levels; No 26.delineate the boundaries of administrative units below the level of the provinces and municipalities directly under the central authority and corresponding administrative units. The National Assembly and the Council of State may, when necessary, assign other tasks to the Council of Ministers and vest it with other powers. Article 108 The term of office of the Council of Ministers coincides with that of the National Assembly. At the end of the term of a legislature of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers shall continue until the new legislature of the National Assembly elects a new Council of Ministers to perform its duties. Article 109 Proceeding from the Constitution, laws and ordinances, the Council of Ministers shall issue resolutions, decrees, decisions, instructions and circulars and supervise the implementation of these documents. The adoption of resolutions, decrees and decisions of the council of ministers requires a supporting vote by a majority of its membership. Article 110 The chairman of the Council of Ministers shall lead the work of the Council, and supervise the implementation of decisions by the National Assembly, the Council of State, and the Council of Ministers itself and, on behalf of the Council of Ministers, shall guide the work of ministries and other bodies under the authority of the Council of Ministers and the People's Committees at all levels. The vice-chairmen of.the Council of Ministers shall assist the chairman, and may be empowered to replace him in his absence. Article 111 Under the unified leadership of the Council of Ministers, the ministers and the heads of other bodies under its authority shall organise and guide activities which 24

fall within their respective spheres of responsibility on a national scale. The ministers and heads of other bodies under the authority of the Council of Ministers, proceeding from laws enacted by the National Assembly, ordinances of the Council of State, and resolutions, decrees, decisions, instructions and circulars of the Council of Ministers, shall issue decisions, instructions and circulars and supervise the implementation of these documents. Article 112 Each member of the Council of Ministers shall be personally responsible for his work to the National Assembly, the Council of State and the Council of Ministers and, together with other members, shall bear collective responsibility for the activities of the Council of Ministers to the National Assembly and the Council of State. Chapter 9 People's Councils and People's Committees Article 113 The administrative units of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam are defined as follows: The country is divided into provinces, municipalities directly under the central authority, and corresponding units. Provinces are divided into districts, provincial towns and provincial capitals; municipalities directly under the central authority are divided into precincts or districts, and townships. Districts are divided into villages and townships; provincial towns and provincial capitals are divided into wards and villages; precincts are divided into wards. The above-mentioned administrative units form their own People's Councils and People's Committee. Article 114 The People's Councils are organs of state authority in their respective areas; they shall be elected by the local population, and shall be responsible to it and to the higher authorities. The People's Councils shall decide on, and take measures to build their localities in all fields, ensure the development of the economy and culture, the improvement of living standards of the local people and the fulfillment of the tasks assigned by the higher authorities. In their activities, the People's Councils shall elicit the close cooperation of the Fatherland Front and mass organizations and the broad participation of citizens. Article 115 The People's Councils have the following duties and powers: 1. No ensure respect for and strict observance of the Constitution and law in 25

their localities, and decide on measures to carry out state policies and fulfill the tasks assigned by the higher authorities; 2. decide on local plans and budgets, and approve their execution; No 3. take decisions on problems concerning production, circulation, distribution, No cultural and social activities, and public catering in their localities; 4. ensure the building of national defence units embracing the entire populaNo tion and of the people's armed forces in their localities; 5. ensure political and social security and public order; No 6. protect socialist property; No No 7. ensure equality among ethnic groupings; 8. ensure the citizens' enjoyment of their rights and fulfillment of their obNo ligations; No 9. elect and remove members of People's Committees and members of People's Courts at corresponding levels; 10. revise or annul inappropriate decisions by the People's Committees at corNo responding levels, or of People's Councils at the level immediately below them; 11.dissolve People's Councils at the level immediately below them when the latNo ter do serious harm to the interests of the people, Resolutions concern ing such dissolution must be ratified by the People's Councils at the level above them before they can take effect, The resolutions on dissolution by the People's Councils of provinces, municipalities directly under the central authority and corresponding levels must be ratified by the Council of State prior to their application; No 12. supervise, within the limits of their responsibilities and powers, the observance of law by public offices, factories and other organisations at higher levels in their localities, Article 116 The term of office of the People's Councils of provinces, municipalities directly under the central authorities and corresponding levels shall be four years. The term of office of the People's Council at other levels shall be two years. Article 117 The People's Councils, proceeding from state law and decisions of higher authorities, shall adopt appropriate resolutions and supervise their implementation. The adoption of resolutions by a People's Council requires a supporting vote by a majority of its membership. Article 118 The People's Councils shall set up necessary commissions to assist them in making decisions regarding local undertakings and measures and in supervising the implementation of state laws and policies and resolutions of the councils. Article 119 Deputies to the People's Councils must maintain close relations with the electors, accept their supervision, regularly inform them of their activities and those of the People's Councils, respond to the requests and petitions made by the electors and examine and respond to complaints and denunciations by the people. Deputies to the People's Councils shall publicise state laws and policies and resolutions of the People's Councils and motivate the local population to take part in the management of state affairs. 26

Article 120 Deputies to the People's Councils have the right to question the People's Committees and other state organs in their localities. The organs so questioned must answer before the People's Councils within the time limit set by law. Deputies to the People's Councils have the right to petition state organs in their localities. Leading officials of these organs have the responsibility to receive those deputies, and examine and deal with their petitions. Article 121 The People's Committees are the executive bodies of People's Councils, and are local administrative bodies of the state. The People's Committees shall be responsible and accountable to the People's Councils at the same level, and to People's Committees at the level immediately above them; the People's Committee of provinces, municipalities directly under the central authority and corresponding levels shall be responsible and accountable to the People's Councils at the same level and to the Council of Ministers. Each member of the People's Committee shall be personally responsible for his work to the People's Council and the People's Committee, and, together with other members, shall be collectively responsible for the activities of the People's Committee to the People's Council. Article 122 A People's Committee shall consist of the chairman, one or more vice-chairmen, a secretary and other members. The presidents of local committees of the Vietnam Fatherland Front and the leading officials of other mass organisations affiliated to the front may be invited to attend meetings of People's Committees at the same level, when necessary. Article 123 The People's Committees shall convene meetings of People's Councils at the same levels; carry out their resolutions and decisions and the instruction of higher administrative bodies; man age local administrative work; and guide the organisations at all levels under their jurisdiction to fulfill state plans for economic and cultural development, for strengthening national defence, and for improving the people's living standards; and examine and deal with complaints, denunciations and petitions by the people. Article 124 The People's Committees at all levels, within the powers vested in them by law, shall take decisions and give instructions, and supervise their implementation. The People's Committees have the right to suspend the execution of, or revise or rescind inappropriate decisions of organisations under their jurisdiction, and of People's Committees at lower levels, to suspend the execution of inappropriate decisions of People's Councils at the level below them, and at the same time to request People's Councils at the same level to revise or rescind such decisions.

27

Article 125 The People's Committees shall create favourable conditions for activities of deputies to and committees of the the People's Council. The chairman of the People's Committee shall he responsible for regulating and coordinating the activities of the committees set up by the People's Council. Article 126 The term of office of the People's Committee corresponds to that of the People's Council. When the term of office of the People's Council expires, the People's Committee shall continue to perform its duties until the new People's Council has elected a new People's Committee. In the case of the People's Council being dissolved, the People's Committee at the level above it shall appoint an interim People's Committee to take charge until the new People's Council has elected a new People's Committee. In the case of the dissolution of the People's Council of a province, a municipality directly under the central authority of a corresponding level, the Council of Ministers shall appoint an interim People's Committee. Chapter 10 People's Courts and People's Organs of Control Article 127 The People's Courts and People's Organs of Control in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam are, within their competence, obliged to protect the socialist legal system, the socialist system, the working people's right to collective mastery, and socialist property and to ensure respect for the lives, property, freedom, honour and dignity of citizens. Any act encroaching upon the interests of the state or the collective or the legitimate interests of citizens must be dealt with in accordance with law. People's Courts Article 128 The Supreme People's Court, the local People's Courts, and the military tribunals are juridical bodies of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Under special circumstances, the National Assembly or the Council of State may decide to set up special tribunals. Appropriate people's organisations shall be formed at the grassroots to deal with minor breaches of law or disputes, in accordance with law. Article 129 Judges of the People's Courts at all levels shall be elected. The term of office of the chief justice, deputy chief justice and judges of People's 28

Courts at all levels corresponds to that of the bodies that elect them. Article 130 Trials at the People's Courts shall be held with the participation of people's assessors in keeping with law. In the administration of justice, the people's assessors have the same powers as judges. People's assessors of People's Courts at all levels shall be elected. The term of office of people's assessors at the Supre,e People's Court shall be two and a half years; that of people's assessors at local People's Courts shall be two years. Article 131 During trials, judges and people's assessors are independent and subject only to law. Article 132 The People's Courts shall make judgements and pass sentence collectively by majority decision. Article 133 Proceedings in People's Courts shall be open to the public, unless otherwise stipulated by law. The defendant's right to plead their cases is guaranteed. A jurist organisation may be formed to give legal assistance to the defendants and other persons concerned. Article 134 The People's Courts shall ensure to the citizens of all nationalities in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam the right to use their own spoken languages and scripts before the courts. Article 135 The Supreme People's Court is the highest juridical body of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The Supreme People's Court shall supervise the proceedings of local People's Courts and military courts. The Supreme People's Court shall supervise the proceedings of the special courts, unless the National Assembly or the Council of State decides otherwise when setting up these courts. Article 136 The Supreme People's Court shall be responsible and accountable to the National Assembly; when the National Assembly is not in session, it shall be responsible and accountable to the Council of State. Local People's Courts shall be responsible and accountable to the People's Councils at the same levels. 29

Article 137 The verdicts and decisions of the People's Courts, as soon as they take legal effect, must be respected by state organs, social organisations and all citizens; the persons and units concerned must strictly implement them. The People's Organs of Control Article 138 The Supreme People's Organ of Control of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam shall control the observance of law by the ministries and other bodies under the authority of the Council of Ministers, local organs of power, social organisations, state employees, and all citizens, exercise the right of public prosecution, and ensure the strict and uniform observance of law. The local People's Organs of Control and the military Organs of Control shall control the observance of law and exercise the right of public prosecution within their spheres of responsibility. Article 139 The term of office of the procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control corresponds to that of the National Assembly. Article 140 A People's Organ of Control shall be led by its chief procurator. The chief procurator of a lower People's Organ of Control shall be subordinate to his counterpart in the immediately senior People's Organ of Control; the chiefs of the local People's Organs of Control shall be under the unified leadership of the procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control. The chief and deputy chief procurators and members of People's Organs of Control shall be appointed and removed by the procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control. Article 141 The procurator-general of the Supreme People's Organ of Control shall be responsible and accountable to the National Assembly; when the National Assembly is not in session, he shall be responsible and accountable to the Council of State. Chapter 11 The National Flag, National Emblem, National Anthem, and National Capital Article 142 The National Flag of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam consists of a rectangle of red cloth, with a five-pointed golden star in the middle; the ratio of the width of the flag to its length is 2/3. Article 143 The national emblem of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam is round in form with a 30

red background. In its centre is a five-pointed golden star framed by ears of rice. Its lower half is rimmed by a halved cogwheel with the inscription: The Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Article 144 The National Anthem of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam shall be adopted by the National Assembly. Article 145 The capital of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam is Hanoi. Chapter 12
Legal Force of the Constitution and Procedure for Amending the Constitution

Article 146 The constitution of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam is the fundamental law of the state and has supreme legal force. All other legal documents must be consistent with the constitution. Article 147 Only the National Assembly shall have power to amend the constitution. Amendments to the constitution shall require, for their adoption a majority vote of not less than two thirds of the total number of deputies to the National Assembly. The present constitution was unanimously adopted by the National Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, Sixth Legislature, seventh session, at its meeting on 18th December, 1980, at 15:25 hours. On behalf of the Presidium Signed: Trong Chinh.

31

