Title: Date Adopted: Country: Copyright:

Constitution of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, 15 April 1992 04/15/1992 Vietnam Oceana Publications, Inc.

Constitution of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam Table of Contents Chapter I: The Socialist Republic of Vietnam—Its Political System. Chapter II: The Economic System. Chapter III: Culture, Education, Science and Technology Chapter IV: Defense of the Socialist Vietnamese Fatherland Chapter V: Citizen's Fundamental Rights and Duties. Chapter VI: The National Assembly. Chapter VII: The President of the State Chapter VIII: Government. Chapter IX: People's Councils and People's Committees. Chapter X: People's Courts and People's Organs of Control. Chapter XI: The National Flag, Emblem, Anthem, Capital, and Independence Day. Chapter XII: The Legal Force of the Constitution and Constitutional Amendments.

Adopted 15 April 1992 at the Eleventh Session of the Eighth National Assembly Preamble Through its history spanning several thousand years, the Vietnamese people have worked laboriously and creatively; have struggled courageously to build and defend their country; have forged the traditions of solidarity, decorum, stalwartness, and indomitableness of our nation; and have built the Vietnamese civilization.

Since 1930, under the leadership of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) founded and trained by President Ho Chi Minh, our people have staged the long revolutionary struggle full of hardship and sacrifice leading to the victorious August Revolution. On 2 September 1945 President Ho Chi Minh read a Declaration of Independence, bringing to life the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. Then, throughout several decades, the people of various nationalities in our country, with precious assistance given by friends worldwide, especially by socialist and neighboring countries, won many heroic victories, especially the Dien Bien Phu campaign and the historic Ho Chi Minh campaign; defeated two wars of aggression waged by colonialists and imperialists; and liberated and reunified the country, thus fulfilling the people's national democratic revolution. On 2 July 1976, the National Assembly of unified Vietnam decided to rename the country as the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the entire country embarked on a transition to socialism, trying to build the country and defend with perseverence the fatherland while performing its international obligations. During various stages of resistance wars and national reconstruction, our country adopted three constitutions in 1946, 1959, and 1980. Since 1986, the comprehensive national renovation undertaking initiated by the Sixth Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam has had initial yet very important achievements. The National Assembly decided to amend the 1980 Constitution to meet the requirements arising from the new situation and tasks. This Constitution stipulates the political, economic, cultural, social, national defense, and security systems; the basic rights and duties of citizens; and the structure and the organizational and operational principles of various state agencies. It institutionalizes the system of relations by which the party is the leader, the people the master, and the state the manager. In light of Marxism-Leninism and Ho Chi Minh thought, and in compliance with the platform for national construction in the period of transition to socialism, our people pledge to remain united and singleminded; uphold the spirit of self-reliance in national construction; implement the foreign policy of independence, sovereignty, peace, friendship, and cooperation with all nations; scrupulously abide by the Constitution; and win even greater victories in renovating, building and defending the fatherland. Chapter I: The Socialist Republic of Vietnam—Its Political System. Article 1 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam is an independent, sovereign, and unified country with territorial integrity which is composed of the mainland, offshore islands, territorial seas, and air space.

Article 2 The SRV state is of the people, by the people, and for the people. All state power belongs to the people based on the worker-peasant-intellectual alliance. Article 3 The state warrants and constantly promotes the people's right to comprehensive mastery, severely punishes all encroaching acts on the interests of the country and the people, builds the country prosperous and strong, and achieves social justice for everyone to enjoy a life of plenty, freedom, and happiness, and to have conditions for comprehensive development. Article 4 The Communist Party of Vietnam, the vanguard unit of the Vietnamese working class and the faithful representative of the interests of the working class, of the laboring people, and of the entire nation, pursues Marxism-Leninism and Ho Chi Minh thought and is the leading force of the state and society. All party organizations operate within the framework of the Constitution and the law. Article 5 The SRV state is a unified state of the people of various nationalities who live on Vietnamese territory. It implements the policy of equality, solidarity, and mutual assistance among all nationalities, and strictly forbids all discriminatory and divisive behavior among nationalities. All nationalities are authorized to use their own languages and writing; preserve their own ethnic identities; and develop their fine customs, practices, traditions, and cultures. The state implements the policy of comprehensive development, and step by step raises the material and moral lives of the ethnic minority compatriots. Article 6 The people use state power through the National Assembly and the people's councils which are elected by the people to represent their will and aspirations, and are responsible to the people. The National Assembly, the people's councils and other state agencies are all organized and operating according to the principle of democratic centralism. Article 7 The elections of National Assembly deputies and people's councillors are conducted in accordance with the principle of universal, equal, direct, and secret balloting. National Assembly deputies are to be impeached by voters or by the National Assembly, and

people's councillors are to be impeached by voters or by people's councils if they no longer prove themselves worthy of the people's confidence. Article 8 All state agencies and cadres and state employees must respect the people, wholeheartedly serve them, maintain a close relationship with them, listen to their views, and accept their supervision. They must also resolutely struggle against all manifestations of bureaucracy, arrogance, authoritarianism, and corruption. Article 9 The Vietnam Fatherland Front (VFF) and its member organizations serve as political bases of people's power. It is the front's duty to promote the tradition of all-people solidarity; intensify political and spiritual singlemindedness among the people; participate in building and consolidating the people's administration; join hands with the state in looking after and protecting the legitimate interests of the people and also in motivating them to exercise the right to mastery and scrupulously implementing the Constitution and laws; and supervise the activities of state agencies, people's deputies, and cadres and state employees. The state is to create conditions for the front and its member organizations to operate efficiently. Article 10 Trade union organizations are the sociopolitical organizations of the working class and laboring people. Together with state agencies and socioeconomic organizations, they look after and protect the interests of cadres, office and manual workers, and other laboring people. They participate in supervising the operations of state agencies and social organizations; in overseeing the activities of state agencies and economic establishments; and in educating cadres, office and manual workers, and other laboring people in national defense and construction. Article 11 Citizens exercise their right to mastery at the grass-roots level through their participation in the handling of state and social affairs. They are dutybound to protect public property and the people's legitimate rights and interests and must help with the maintenance of national security, public safety, and social order as well as with the organization of public life. Article 12 The state is to manage society by law and to constantly strengthen the socialist legislation. State agencies, socioeconomic organizations, members of the people's Armed Forces, and other citizens must scrupulously implement the Constitution and laws and must help prevent and suppress crime and violations against the Constitution and laws.

Misappropriation of state property and encroachment upon the legitimate rights and interests of collectives and citizens must be dealt with accordance to law. Article 13 The Vietnamese fatherland is sacred and inviolable. All attempts and actions against the fatherland's independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity or against the cause of national construction and defense must be punished according to law. Article 14 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam implements a policy of peace, friendship, exchange of relations, and cooperation with all countries in the world, regardless of their different social and political systems, on the basis of respect for each other's independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, noninterference in each other's internal affairs, and equality and mutual benefit. It is also Vietnam's policy to strengthen solidarity, friendship, and cooperation with socialist nations and neighboring countries and to actively support and contribute to the common struggle of the world people for peace, national independence, democracy, and social progress. Chapter II—The Economic System. Article 15 The state develops the multisectoral commodity economy in accordance with the market mechanism based on state management and socialist orientations. The multisectoral economic structure with its various diverse forms of production organization depends on the system of ownership of the entire people, of collectives, and of private parties with the system of ownership of the entire people and collectives being at the core. Article 16 It is the goal of state economic policy to make the country prosperous and the country strong and meet the people's material and spiritual needs more and more satisfactorily by releasing all labor forces; by bringing into full play under various forms the potentialities of all economic components—namely state, collective, individual, private capitalist, and state capitalist economic components; by accelerating the building of material and technical bases; and by promoting expanded economic and scientific-technical cooperation and exchanges with the world market. Article 17 The lands, forests and mountains, rivers and lakes, water sources, underground natural resources, and other resources in the territorial seas, on the continental shelf, and in the air space; capital and assets that the state invests in the various enterprises and projects falling under different economic, cultural, social, scientific-technical, diplomatic, and

national security and national defense programs and other property defined by law as belonging to the state are under the ownership of the entire people. Article 18 All lands are put under unified state management according to plans and laws to ensure that they are utilized according to set goals and bring about results. The state allots land to the various organizations and individuals for use on a stabilized and long-term basis. Organizations and individuals involved have the responsibility to protect, replenish, and exploit such land in a rational and economical fashion. They may transfer the right to the use of land allotted to them by the state as stipulated by law. Article 19 The state economy shall be consolidated and developed, especially in key sectors and areas of activity so that it can assume a leading role in the national economy. State economic establishments have the right to autonomy in production and business and are responsible for the results of their operations. Article 20 The collective economy in which workers may contribute capital and manpower to joint ventures in production or business is organized under various forms based on the principle of voluntarism, democracy, and mutual benefit. The state shall create conditions for consolidating and expanding those cooperatives with effective operations. Article 21 Individual and private capitalist economies may choose their own forms of production and business and may set up trade businesses without any limit on scope and areas of operations provided they engage in branches and trades beneficial to the nation and the people. Family economic development shall be encouraged. Article 22 Production and business organizations belonging to various economic components shall fulfill their obligations toward the state. They all are equal before the law. Their capital and property shall be protected by the state.

Business organizations belonging to various economic components may enter joint ventures and economic cooperation with private individuals and economic organizations, both local and foreign, as stipulated by the law. Article 23 Legal property of individuals and organizations shall not be subjected to nationalization. The state may, when it deems it absolutely necessary to serve national defense and security goals as well as national interests, purchase or requisition with compensation the property of individuals or organizations based on current market prices. Procedures for purchase or requisition shall be defined by law. Article 24 The state shall exercise its unified management over and expand external economic relations; develop various forms of economic relations with all nations and international organizations on the principles of respect for each other's independence and sovereignty as well as mutual benefit and of protecting and spurring local production. Article 25 The state shall encourage foreign organizations and individuals to invest capital and technology in Vietnam in accordance with Vietnamese law and international law and practice. The state shall guarantee the right of ownership of the legitimate capital, property, and other interests of foreign organizations and individuals. Business enterprises with foreign invested capital shall not be subject to nationalization. The state creates favorable conditions for overseas Vietnamese to invest in Vietnam. Article 26 The State shall exercise its unified management over the national economy in accordance with the law as well as with law, plans and policies. The State shall define and delineate managerial responsibilities between various sectors and echelons and link its own interests with the interests of other individuals and collectives. Article 27 It is necessary to strictly practice thrift in all socioeconomic activities and state management. Article 28

The law severely and justly punishes illegal production and business activities and all acts aimed at undermining the national economy, damaging the interests of the state, and disturbing the rights and legal interests of the collectives and citizens. The state adopts a policy aimed at protecting the rights of producers and consumers. Article 29 State organs, units of the armed forces, economic and social organizations, and individuals have the duty to implement state regulations on the rational use of natural resources and protection of the environment. All acts of depleting natural resources and destroying the environment are strictly prohibited. Chapter III—Culture, Education, Science and Technology Article 30 The state and society shall preserve and develop Vietnamese culture—folk, modern, and humanistic; inherit and develop the values of the Vietnamese multiethnic culture as well as Ho Chi Minh's thought, ethics, and personality; absorb the quintessences of human culture; and develop all creative talents among the people. The state uniformly manages cultural activities, strictly prohibits the propagation of reactionary concepts and decadent culture, and combats superstition and out-moded customs. Article 31 The state creates conditions for citizens to comprehensively develop their capability; enhances the citizens' consciousness and responsibility to live and work in accordance with the Constitution and law; preserves good morals and customs; builds happy families with a spirit of patriotism, love for socialism, and a spirit of authentic internationalism to befriend and cooperate with people in the world. Article 32 Literature and art contribute to fostering the dignity and lofty feelings of the Vietnamese people. The state promotes and develops culture, literature, and arts; creates favorable conditions for the people to enjoy valuable literary and artistic works; protects and develops cultural and artistic creativities.

The state promotes various forms of literary and artistic works and encourages the literary and artistic activities of the masses. Article 33 The state develops work related to information, the press, radio, television, cinematography, publications, libraries, and other mass media facilities. Cultural and information activities which are detrimental to the national interest and undermine the dignity, morals, and fine lifestyle of the Vietnamese people will be strictly prohibited. Article 34 The state and society preserve and develop the national cultural heritage. Historical and revolutionary relics, cultural heritages, museums, and public works of art and scenic sites shall be restored, protected, and developed. All acts which are detrimental to historical and revolutionary relics, public works of art, and scenic sites will be strictly prohibited. Article 35 Education and training are key national policies. The state shall develop education to enhance the people's intellectual standard, strengthen manpower, and foster men of talent. The objective of education is to form and foster the people's dignity, develop the citizens' qualities and capabilities, train laborers who actively and creatively work in various occupations and who have pride in their nation, morals, and the impetus to surge forward to contribute to making the people wealthy and the nation strong, thereby meeting requirements for the cause of national construction and defense. Article 36 The state uniformly manages the national education system in terms of objectives, curriculum, contents, and study programs; formulates regulations on the qualifications of teachers, examinations, and the certificate system. The state shall establish the momentum in developing the education system—namely kindergarten, elementary, vocational, university, and post-graduate education; strive to universalize primary education, eliminate illiteracy, develop state- and privately-run schools and other forms of education. The state shall invest in education on a priority basis and encourage sources of capital for this purpose.

The state implements on a priority basis the policy of developing education in the mountain regions, areas of ethnic minorities, and localities with acute difficulties. Various mass organizations, especially the Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union, social organizations, economic organizations, families, and schools have the responsibility to educate youth, teenagers, and children. Article 37 Science and technology play a key role in national socioeconomic development. The state shall formulate and implement a national policy on science and technology; develop modern science and technology; harmoniously develop the various branches of science to devise scientific theories to support the formulation of policies, lines, and laws; carry out technical renovations; develop productive forces; improve managerial skills to guarantee quality and speed for economic growth; and contribute to ensuring national defense and security. Article 38 The state shall invest in, encourage, and provide funds for scientific development through the use of different sources of capital, with priority to be given to key areas of science and technology; train and make rational use of the contingent of professional scientific and technical cadres—especially those with high professionalism—skilled workers, and artists; create conditions for scientists to make inventions and contributions; develop various forms of organization and scientific research work; link scientific research with socioeconomic development needs; and closely combine scientific research and training with production and business operations. Article 39 The state shall invest in, develop, and exercise its unified management over health care activities for the people. It shall mobilize and organize all social forces to build and develop Vietnamese medicine, especially preventive medicine; combine disease prevention with medical treatment; develop and combine modern and traditional medical and pharmaceutical practices; combine the development of state health care with that of folk medicine; offer health insurance; and create conditions for citizens' access to medical care. The state shall give priority in establishing health care programs for its mountainous inhabitants and for various ethnic minority groups. Organizations and individuals are strictly prohibited from illegally providing health care and from producing or selling pharmaceutical products that are harmful to the health of the people.

Article 40 The state, society, families, and citizens shall be dutybound to provide health care and protection to mothers and children and to carry out population and family planning programs. Article 41 National sports and physical culture of scientific and popular character shall be developed by the state and society. The state shall exercise unified management over the development of sports and physical culture; define a compulsory physical education system in schools; encourage and help with the development of the various forms of sports and physical culture among the people on a voluntary basis; create necessary conditions for constantly broadening the various forms of popular sports and physical culture with attention to be given to professional sports; and foster sports talents. Article 42 Tourism shall be developed by the state and society. Tourist activities shall be expanded both at home and abroad. Article 43 The state shall expand its international exchanges and cooperation in various fields— cultural, information, literary, artistic, scientific, technological, educational, health, physical education, and sports. Chapter IV—Defense of the Socialist Vietnamese Fatherland Article 44 It is the duty of the entire people to defend the socialist Vietnamese fatherland and firmly maintain national security. The state shall consolidate and strengthen the all-people national defense and public security of which the people's armed forces are a backbone; and develop the integrated strength of the country to firmly defend the fatherland. State agencies, socioeconomic organizations, and citizens shall adequately fulfill their national defense and security duties as stipulated by the law. Article 45

The people's armed forces shall be absolutely loyal to the fatherland and the people; be dutybound to remain combat ready to defend national independence, sovereignty, security, and public order, as well as territorical unification and integrity; defend the socialist regime and revolutionary gains; and join with the entire people in national construction. Article 46 The state shall build an increasingly modernized and well-trained revolutionary people's public security force; prepare a reserve force for military mobilization; and build a powerful self-defense and militia force on the basis of combining unit building and national defense and combining the strength of the people's armed forces with that of the entire people, and the strength of traditional national unity against foreign aggression with that of the socialist regime. Article 47 The state organizes the people's public security force which will be revolutionary, regular, well-seasoned, gradually modernized, and based on the people. It will be the core of the people's movement to defend national security, social order, and public security; to ensure political stability and the citizens' free and democratic rights, to protect the lives and property of the people and socialist assets, and to prevent and oppose all crimes. Article 48 The state promotes patriotism and revolutionary heroism of the people, educates them on national defense and security, implements the system of military obligations and the army's rear service policy, builds the national defense industry, secures equipment for the armed forces, combines national defense with the economy and vice versa, ensures the material and moral lives of cadres, combatants, workers, and national defense personnel; builds heroic and strong armed forces of the people, and constantly increases the capability of national defense. Chapter V: Citizen's Fundamental Rights and Duties. Article 49 SRV citizens are those who hold Vietnamese citizenship. Article 50 In the SRV, all human rights in the political, civil, economic, cultural, and social fields are respected and manifested as citizen rights stipulated in the Constitution and law. Article 51

Citizen's rights are not separated from their duties. The state guarantees all citizens' rights. Citizens must fulfill their obligations to the state and society. Citizens' rights and duties are stipulated by the Constitution and law. Article 52 All citizens are equal before the law. Article 53 Citizens have the right to participate in the administration of the state and society, and in debating the common issues of the entire country and localities, to petition to state agencies, and to vote when the state organizes a referendum. Article 54 Citizens, regardless of ethnicity, sex, social component, faith, religion, educational level, occupation, time of residence, if 18 years of age or more, are authorized to vote, and if 21 years of age or more, are allowed to stand for election to the National Assembly and the people's councils as stipulated by law. Article 55 Labor is citizens' right and duty. The state and society have plans to create even more jobs for workers. Article 56 The state promulgates policies and systems for labor safety. It prescribes the time of work and systems of wages, rest and social security insurance for state employees and other wage-earners and encourages the development of various forms of social security insurance for workers. Article 57 Citizens are free to do business as prescribed by law. Article 58 Citizens have the right to own legally-earned income, savings, homes, means of activities and production, capital, and other assets of business or in other economic organizations. Concerning state-allocated land, clauses in Articles 17 and 18 will be followed. The state protects citizens' legal rights to ownership and inheritance. Article 59

Education is a right and obligation of citizens, Elementary education is mandatory and free. Citizens have the right to pursue their general education and to learn a profession under various forms. Prodigious students shall be encouraged by the state and society to develop their talents. The state shall adopt policies on tuition fees and scholarships. The state and society shall create conditions for handicapped children to pursue general education and to learn appropriate professions. Article 60 Citizens have the right to undertake scientific and technical research, make technical innovations, initiate technical improvements, rationalize production, create and criticize cultural works and art, and participate in other cultural activities. The state shall protect copyright and industrial patents. Article 61 Citizens have the right to health care The state shall devise systems for hospital charges, and for exemption and reduction of hospital charges. Citizens have the obligation to comply with all regulations on disease control and public sanitation. It is strictly forbidden to produce, carry, traffic, store, or illegally use opium and other narcotics. The state stipulates a mandatory system for weaning addicts and for treating other dangerous social diseases. Article 62 Citizens have the right to build homes according to a plan and law. The rights of tenants and landlords shall be protected by law. Article 63 Citizens of both sexes will have equal rights in all political, economic, cultural, social, and familial aspects. All forms of behavior which discriminate against women and offend their dignity are strictly forbidden. Workers of both sexes shall receive equal pay for equal work. Women workers are entitled to maternity policy benefits. Women state

employees and wage earners are entitled to fully paid pre- and post-natal leave as stipulated by law. The state and society will create conditions for women to raise the level of their knowledge and develop their role in society. It will take care of developing maternity homes, pediatrics, creches, and other social welfare facilities to alleviate family burdens and create conditions for women to produce, work, study, receive medical treatment, rest, and fulfill their duty as mothers. Article 64 Families are the cells of society. The state shall protect marriage and families. Marriages will abide by the principles of voluntarism, progress, monogamy, and equality between husband and wife. Parents have an obligation to raise and educate their children to become good citizens. Children have an obligation to respect and care for their parents and grandparents. The state and society will not accept discriminatory treatment of children. Article 65 Children are protected, cared for, and educated by the family, state and society. Article 66 The family, state, and society will create conditions for youths to study, work, and entertain themselves and to develop their physique and intelligence. It will educate youths on ethics, national traditions, sense of citizenship, and the socialist ideal; and encourage youths to take the lead in creative labor and national defense. Article 67 Wounded and sick soldiers, and survivors of fallen heroes are entitled to the various state policies of privileges. Wounded soldiers may be given conditions for recovering their ability to work, for holding jobs that are suited to their health, and for having a stable livelihood. People and families who have earned merit for the country will be rewarded and cared for. The old, the infirm, and orphans without any support will be assisted by the state and society. Article 68 Citizens are free to move around and live in the country, and to go abroad and return home as stipulated by law.

Article 69 Citizens have the rights to enjoy the freedom of speech and the press, to inform and hold meetings, establish associations, and demonstrate as stipulated by law. Article 70 Citizens have the freedom to believe or not to believe in a religious faith. All religions are equal before law. Worshipping places of all faiths are protected by law. No one can violate the freedom of faith or exploit it in a way that is at variance with the law and state policies. Article 71 Citizens are inviolably corporeal, and their life, health, honor, and dignity are protected by law. No one can be arrested without a decision of the People's Court or a decision or an approval of the organ of people's control except in cases of flagrante delicto. Any arrest or detention must be made in accordance with the law. Any form of oppressive investigation, physical punishment, or offense to honor and human dignity of citizens is strictly forbidden. Article 72 No one can be considered guilty and be punished until a verdict of the court has legally come into effect. People who have been arrested, detained, prosecuted, and tried illegally are entitled to material indemnities and to a rehabilitation of public esteem. People who act against the law by arresting, detaining, prosecuting and trying people, and causing a loss to others must be severely and justly dealt with. Article 73 Citizens' domiciles are inviolable. No one can on his own enter another person's residence without the permission of the occupants, except when such an entry is authorized by law. The safety and privacy of citizens' mail, telephone calls, and telegrams are ensured. Checks on domiciles and the unsealing, seizing, and checking of citizens' mail and telegrams must be carried out by those authorized as stipulated by law. Article 74 Citizens have the right to lodge complaints and denunciations with authorized state agencies on the illegal workings of state agencies, socioeconomic organizations, units of the people's armed forces, or any individual. Complaints and denunciations must be considered and settled by state agencies within the prescribed time by law. All forms of behavior that violate the interests of the state and the rights and legal interests of collectives and citizens must be promptly, sternly, and strictly dealth with. Victims are entitled to material indemnities and rehabilition in public esteem. It is strictly forbidden

to take revenge against complainants and denouncers, and to abuse the right to complain and denounce by accusing, slandering, and injuring others. Article 75 The state protects the legitimate interests of overseas Vietnamese residents and creates conditions for them to maintain close relations with their families and country and to help build the country. Article 76 Citizens must be loyal to the country. Betraying the country is the most serious crime against the nation. Article 77 Defending the fatherland is the citizens' sacred duty and noble right. Citizens are dutybound to perform their military service and participate in building the all-people national defense. Article 78 Citizens are dutybound to respect and protect state assets and public utilities. Article 79 Citizens are dutybound to abide by the Constitution and law, participate in ensuring national security and social order and public safety, preserving national secrets, and observing the rules of public life. Article 80 unchanged: Citizens have the obligation to pay taxes and engage in communal work as defined by law. Article 81 Foreigners residing in Vietnam shall comply with Vietnam's Constitution and laws and shall have their lives, property, and other legitimate rights protected by the state in accordance with Vietnamese law. Article 82 Foreigners who are persecuted for their struggle for freedom and national independence, for socialism, democracy, and peace, or for engaging in scientific pursuits, may be considered and granted the right of asylum by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Chapter VI: The National Assembly.

Article 83 The National Assembly is the people's highest representative agency and the highest organ of state power of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. It is the sole constitutional and legislative agency. It decides the fundamental foreign and domestic policies, the socioeconomic, national defense, and security tasks, the main organizational and operational principles of the state machinery, and the social relations and activities of citizens. The National Assembly exercises its supreme right of supervision over all operations of the state. Article 84 The National Assembly has the following duties and powers: 1. To draw up and amend the Constitution, make and amend laws, and decide on lawbuilding programs. 2. To exercise the supreme right of supervision over the observance of the Constitution, the laws, and National Assembly resolutions; and to examine reports on activities of the president of the state, the National Assembly's standing committee, the government, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Organ of Control. 3. To decide on the country's socioeconomic development plans. 4. To decide on national financial and monetary policies; to decide on state budget estimates and state budget distributions; to ratify the final balance of the state budget; and to institute, revise, or repeal taxes. 5. To decide on the state's nationalities policy. 6. To define the activities of the president of the state, the organization and operation of the National Assembly, the government, the people's courts, the people's organs of control, and local administrations. 7. To elect, dismiss, and impeach the president of the state, the vice president of the state, the National Assembly chairman, vice-chairmen, and members of the National Assembly's Standing Committee, the prime minister, the chief justice of the Supreme People's Court, and the chief procurator of the People's Organ of Control, and to ratify the president of the state's proposal for establishing the Council of National Defense and Security and the prime minister's proposals for appointing, dismissing, and discharging deputy prime ministers. Cabinet ministers, and other members of the government. 8. To decide on the setting up or dissolution of ministries and equivalent governmental agencies; to establish, merge, divide, or readjust the territorial boundaries of various provinces and municipalities directly subordinate to the central government; and to set up or dissolve special administrative-economic units.

9. To abrogate those documents of the president of state, the National Assembly's Standing Committee, the government, the prime minister, the People's Supreme Court and the Supreme People's Organ of Control, which are at variance with the Constitution, the law, and National Assembly resolutions. 10. To decide on general amnesties. 11. To define ranks and positions in the Armed Forces, ranks and positions in the diplomatic sector, and other ranks and positions of the state, to define orders, medals, and other titles of state honor. 12. To decide on matters of war and peace and define the state of emergency and other special measures to ensure national defense and national security. 13. To decide on fundamental foreign policies; to ratify or abrogate signed international treaties or the honoring of international treaties at the proposal of the president of the state. 14. To decide on the holding of referendums. Article 85 The term of each legislature is five years. A new National Assembly shall be elected two months before the end of each legislature. Electoral procedures and the number of deputies shall be defined by law. Under special circumstances, the National Assembly may, if approved by at least two thirds of the total number of deputies, decide to shorten or prolong its term of office. Article 86 The National Assembly shall meet twice a year at the convocation of its Standing Committee. The National Assembly's Standing Committee may convene extraordinary sessions of the National Assembly, either deciding to do so on its own, or at the request of the president of the state, the prime minister of the government, or of at least one-third of the total number of National Assembly deputies. The first session of the new National Assembly legislature must be convened not later than two months after its election, and will be opened and presided over by the chairman of the old legislature until a new chairman of the new legislature can be elected. Article 87

The president of the state, the National Assembly Standing Committee, the Nationalities Council, and other National Assembly committees, the government, the Supreme People's Court, the Supreme People's Organ of Control, and the Vietnam Fatherland Front and its member organizations have the right to submit a bill to the National Assembly. National Assembly deputies have the right to submit suggestions concerning a law or draft law to the National Assembly. Procedures for submitting suggestions concerning laws and draft laws to the National Assembly shall be determined by law. Article 88 The adoption of laws and resolutions of the National Assembly requires a yes vote by more than half of the total number of its deputies. Except for cases where the National Assembly dismisses a National Assembly deputy as stipulated in Article 7, where the term of the National Assembly is cut short or extended as stipulated in Article 85, or where the Constitution is amended as provided for in Article 147, such a law or resolution shall receive a supporting vote by at least two-thirds of the total National Assembly deputies. Laws and resolutions must be promulgated not later than 15 days after their adoption by the National Assembly. Article 89 The National Assembly shall elect the Commission for Verification of the Credentials of Deputies to the National Assembly and, basing itself on the reports of that commission, decide whether to accept the credentials of deputies to the National Assembly. Article 90 The National Assembly Standing Committee is a standing organ of the National Assembly. The National Assembly Standing Committee is composed of the chariman of the National Assembly, vice chairmen of the National Assembly, and other members. The number of members of the National Assembly Standing Committee shall be decided by the National Assembly. A member of the National Assembly Standing Committee shall not concurrently be a Cabinet member. In each term of the legislature, the National Assembly Standing Committee shall exercise its duties and powers until a new National Assembly Standing Committee is elected by a new legislature. Article 91

The National Assembly Standing Committee is vested with the following duties and powers: 1. To proclaim and direct the election of deputies to the National Assembly. 2. To make preparations, convene, and direct National Assembly sessions. 3. To interpret the Constitution, laws, and orders. 4. To issue orders on those issues assigned by the National Assembly. 5. To supervise enforcement of the Constitution, laws and resolutions of the National Assembly, as well as orders and resolutions of the National Assembly Standing Committee itself; supervise the activities of the government, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Organ of Control; discontinue implementation of those documents of the government, the prime minister, the Supreme People's Court, the Supreme People's Organ of Control which are at variance with the Constitution, laws, and resolutions of the National Assembly; and recommend with the National Assembly to rescind these documents as well as those documents of the government, the prime minister, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Court which are at variance with the orders and resolutions of the National Assembly Standing Committee itself. 6. To supervise and guide the operations of people's councils, rescind inappropriate resolutions of the people's councils of those provinces and municipalities directly under the central authority, dissolve the people's councils of those provinces and municipalities directly under the central authority if their activities are deemed seriously detrimental to the interests of the people. 7. To direct, regulate, and coordinate the activities of the Nationalities Council and other committees of the National Assembly; direct and ensure the operational conditions for National Assembly deputies. 8. To ratify recommendations by the prime minister for the appointment, release from duties, or dismissal of a deputy prime minister, a Cabinet minister, or other members of the government when the National Assembly is not in session, and report this to the National Assembly at its next meeting. 9. To decide on the declaration of a state of war when the country is faced with foreign aggression if the National Assembly is not in session and submit this decision to the National Assembly for approval at its next meeting. 10. To order general or local mobilization or declare a state of emergency in the whole country or parts of it. 11. To carry out the National Assembly's foreign relations policy.

12. To hold referendums as decided by the National Assembly Article 92 The chairman of the National Assembly shall preside over all National Assembly sessions; apply his signature to authenticate a law or a resolution of the National Assembly; direct the activities of the National Assembly Standing Committee; carry out the foreign relations policy of the National Asembly; and maintain relations with National Assembly deputies. Vice chairmen of the National Assembly shall, under the direction of the National Assembly chairman, assist him in carrying out his duties. Article 93 Orders and resolutions of the National Assembly Standing Committee shall be approved by more than half of the total members of the National Assembly Standing Committee and shall be approved by more than half of the total members of the National Assembly Standing Committee and shall be promulgated at least 15 days after the day of its approval unless submitted to the National Assembly for reconsideration by the president of the state. Article 94 The National Assembly shall elect members of the Council of Nationalities, including its chairman, vice chairmen, and members. The Council of Nationalities shall study and make proposals on questions of nationalities to the National Assembly. It shall exercise the right to supervise the implementation of policies on nationalities, programs, and plans for socioeconomic development in the mountainous regions and areas inhabited by the people of ethnic minority groups. The government must consult with the Council of Nationalities before issuing any decision on policies concerning nationalities. The chairman of the Council of Nationalities may attend meetings of the National Assembly's Standing Committee and may be invited to attend the government meetings to discuss the implementation of policies on nationalities. The Council of Nationalities is also vested with other duties and powers like various committees of the National Assembly, as stipulated in Article 95. @P = The Council of Nationalities has some members work full time. Article 95 The National Assembly shall elect its committees.

The committees study and review bills, petition laws, draft regulations, other bills and those reports entrusted to them by the National Assembly and its standing committee; submit to the National Assembly and its Standing Committee their views on the programs of legislation and enactment of regulations; exercise their right of supervision within the scope of their tasks and jurisdiction as prescribed by law, and petition those issues within the scope of their operation. Each committee of the National Assembly has some members work full time. Article 96 The Council of Nationalities and other committees of the National Assembly have the right to request members of the government, the chief justice of the Supreme People's Court, the chief procurator of the Supreme People's Organ of Control, and other state officials concerned to present or provide them with information on essential matters. The persons to whom such requests are made have a responsibility to respond. All state agencies are duty-bound to study and answer the proposals made by the Council of Nationalities and National Assembly committees. Article 97 National Assembly deputies are the representatives of the people's will and aspirations. They represent not only the people in their respective constituencies but also the people nationwide. National Assembly deputies shall maintain close contacts with voters, accept their supervision, gather voters' views and aspirations, and faithfully relay them to the National Assembly and other state organs concerned. They shall practice the system of making contacts with voters and reporting their activities and those of the National Assembly. They shall answer requests and petitions of voters and examine, supervise, and monitor the settlement of complaints and denunciations made by citizens. They shall also guide and help citizens in exercising these rights. National Assembly deputies shall publicize the Constitution, laws, and National Assembly resolutions and motivate the people to implement them. Article 98 National Assembly deputies have the right to question the president of state, the National Assembly chairman, the prime minister, Cabinet ministers other members of the government, the chief justice of the Supreme People's Court, and the chief procurator of the Supreme People's Organ of Control.

The persons so questioned shall reply to the National Assembly during its meeting. In case an investigation is required, the National Assembly may decide to authorize the person in question to reply before its standing committee or at its next meeting, or to reply in writing. National Assembly deputies have the right to request state agencies, social organizations, economic organizations, and armed units to answer those questions of interest to the National Assembly deputies. The persons in charge of these agencies, organizations, and units have the responsibility of answering those questions posed by National Assembly deputies within a period defined by law. Article 99 National Assembly deputies may not be arrested nor prosecuted without the consent of the National Assembly and, when the National Assembly is not in session, without the consent of the National Assembly's Standing Committee. If a National Assembly deputy is temporarily held in custody for a flagrant offense, the interim detaining agency shall immediately report the matter to the National Assembly or its Standing Committee for consideration and decision. Article 100 National Assembly deputies shall set aside an appropriate amount of time to do their duty as deputies. The National Assembly's Standing Committee, the prime minister, Cabinet ministers and other members of the government, as well as other organs of the state, are obliged to provide necessary documents requested by deputies and to create favorable conditions for the deputies to discharge their duties. The state will secure operating funds for National Assembly deputies. Chapter VII—The President of the State Article 101 The president of the state, as head of state, represents the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in domestic and foreign affairs. Article 102 The president of the state is elected by the National Assembly from among National Assembly deputies. The president of the state is responsible for his work before, and shall report his work to the National Assembly. His term of office is the same as that of the National Assembly. When the National Assembly's term of office expires, the president

of the state shall continue to perform his duties until a new president of the state is elected by a new legislature. New Article 103 The president of the state has the following duties and powers: 1. To promulgate the Constitution, laws, and regulations. 2. To act as commander-in-chief of the people's Armed Forces and assume the position of chairman of the National Defense and Security Council. 3. To ask the National Assembly to appoint, release from duties, or dismiss the vice president of the state, the prime minister, the chief justice of the Supreme People's Court, and the chief procurator of the Supreme People's Organ of Control. 4. Based on a resolution of the National Assembly or the National Assembly Standing Committee, to appoint, release from duties, or dismiss a deputy prime minister, a cabinet minister, or other members of the government. 5. Based on a resolution of the National Assembly or the National Assembly Standing Committee, to decree the declaration of a state of war and to decree the granting of amnesty. 6. Based on a resolution of the National Assembly Standing Committee, to order general or partial mobilization; and to declare a state of emergency countrywide or in each locality. 7. To ask the National Assembly Standing Committee to review its orders or resolutions on those matters stipulated in Points 8 and 9 of Article 91 within 10 days after the adoption of these orders or resolutions. If the National Assembly Standing Committee continues to vote in favor of these orders or resolutions in spite of the disapproval of the president of the state, the president of the state may refer the matter to the National Assembly for decision in its next meeting. 8. To appoint, release from duties, or dismiss the deputy chief justice of or judges of the Supreme People's Court, deputy chief procurator, or inspectors of the People's Organ of Control. 9. To confirm the appointment of high ranks of officers in the people's Armed Forces; to bestow diplomatic ranks and other titles of state; and to decide the award of orders, decorations, and other honorary titles of state. 10. To appoint or recall Vietnam's ambassadors plenipotentiary and extraordinary; to receive ambassadors plenipotentiary and extraordinary of other countries; in the name of the SRV, to hold talks over and sign international treaties with leaders of other countries;

and to decide to ratify or accede to an international treaty, unless it is deemed necessary to refer this matter to the National Assembly for decision. 11. To decide on the granting or revoking of Vietnamese citizenship; and to approve the renouncing of Vietnamese citizenship. Article 104 The National Defense and Security Council is composed of a chairman, a vice chairman, and members. The president of the state shall propose a namelist of members of the National Defense and Security Council to the National Assembly for approval. It is not necessary for members of the National Defense and Security Council to be National Assembly deputies. The National Defense and Security Council shall mobilize all forces and potentialities of the country for national defense. In case of war, the National Assembly may entrust the National Defense and Security Council with special duties and powers. The National Defense and Security Council shall operate according to a collective system and make decisions based on the views of the majority. Article 105 The president of the state has the right to attend the National Assembly Standing Committee meetings. When deemed necessary, the president of state has the right to attend cabinet meetings. Article 106 The president of the state shall issue orders and decrees when exercising his duties and powers. Article 107 The vice president of the state shall be elected by the National Assembly from among its deputies. The vice president of the state shall assist the president of the state in performing his duties. He may be appointed by the president of the state to perform some duties on his behalf. Article 108

When the president of the state is unable to perform his duties for a long period of time, the vice president of the state shall be acting president of the state. In cases where the presidency is left vacant, the vice president of the state shall be acting president until a new president of the state is elected by the National Assembly. Chapter VIII-Government. Article 109 The government is an executive organ of the National Assembly and the highest administrative body of the SRV. The government shall exercise unified managerial control over the implementation of political, economic, cultural, social, national defense, security, and foreign affairs of the state; ensure the effectiveness of the state machinery from the central down to grass-roots levels, and ensure respect for and compliance with the Constitution and law; promote the people's right to mastery over national construction and defense; and guarantee the stabilization and improvement of the people's material and cultural lives. The government is responsible to the National Assembly and reports its work to the National Assembly, the National Assembly Standing Committee, and the president of the state. Article 110 The government is composed of a prime minister, deputy prime ministers, ministers, and other members. In addition to the prime minister, other members of the government must of necessity not be deputies of the National Assembly. The prime minister is responsible to the National Assembly and reports his work to the National Assembly, the National Assembly Standing Committee, and the president of the state. Deputy prime ministers shall assist the prime minister in performing his duties as he assigns them. When the prime minister is absent, a deputy prime minister shall be assigned by the prime minister to direct government activities on his behalf. Article 111 The chairmen of the Vietnam Fatherland Front Central Committee and the Vietnam Confederation of Vietnamese Workers and the heads of mass organizations can be invited to attend government conferences held to discuss issues directly related to them. Article 112 The government has the following duties and powers:

1. To provide leadership over the activities of ministries and those agencies at corresponding levels, agencies subordinate to the government, and the people's committees at various levels; to build and perfect the unified state administration machinery from the central down to the grassroots levels; to guide and supervise people's councils in implementing various documents of higher-echelon organs; to create conditions for people's councils to exercise their duties and powers as defined by law; to conduct basic and advanced training of state employees and organize and employ them. 2. To ensure implementation of the Constitution and the law by various state agencies, socioeconomic organizations, Armed Forces units and citizens, and to organize and direct propaganda tasks aimed at educating the people on the Constitution and law. 3. To submit bills, draft regulations, and other projects to the National Assembly and the National Assembly Standing Committee. 4. To exercise unified managerial control over the building and development of the national economy; to implement national financial and monetary policy; to manage and ensure the effective use of those assets under the possession of the entire people; to achieve cultural, educational, health, scientific, and technological development; and to implement the plan for socioeconomic and state budgetary development. 5. To take measures to protect citizens' legitimate rights and interests and create conditions for citizens to exercise their rights and fulfill their obligations; to protect the property and interests of the state and society; and to protect the environment. 6. To consolidate and strengthen all-people national defense and public security; to maintain national security and social order and safety; to build the people's armed forces; and to enforce mobilization orders and state of emergency-related orders and other necessary measures to defend the country. 7. To organize and direct those tasks having to do with state inventory, statistics, inspection, and control; the fight against bureaucracy and corruption in the state machinery; and efforts to settle complaints and denunciations filed by citizens. 8. To exercise unified managerial control over the foreign affairs of the state; to sign agreements, to accede to international treaties or ratify international treaties on behalf of the government; to direct implementation of those international treaties signed or participated in by the SRV; and to protect the interests of the state and those legitimate interests of Vietnamese organizations or citizens abroad. 9. To implement policies concerning social welfare, nationalities, and religions. 10. To decide the adjustment of territorial boundaries of those administrative units at levels lower than the provinces and municipalities directly under the central authority.

11. To achieve cooperation with the Vietnam Fatherland Front and other mass organizations while exercising governmental duties and powers, and to create conditions for these organizations to operate effectively. Article 113 The term of office of the government is the same as that of the National Assembly. When the National Assembly's term expires, the government will continue to discharge its duties until the new National Assembly elects a new government. Article 114 The prime minister of the government has the following duties and powers. 1. To direct activities of the government and its members and the people's committees at all levels; and to preside over government meetings. 2. To recommend with the National Assembly to set up or deactivate ministries or agencies of corresponding levels; and to ask the National Assembly or the National Assembly Standing Committee—if the National Assembly is not in session—to ratify decisions to appoint, release from duties, or dismiss a deputy prime minister, a minister, or other government members. 3. To appoint, release from duties, or dismiss vice ministers and those in equivalent positions; to ratify decisions to elect, release from duties, transfer, and dismiss chairmen or vice chairmen of those provincial and municipal people's committees directly under the central authority. 4. To discontinue the enforcement of or to rescind the decisions, directives, and circulars of minsters and other members of the government and also decisions and directives of those provincial and municipal people's committees and people's committee chairmen directly under the central authority which are at variance with the Constitution, laws, and other documents of higher-echelon state organs. 5. To discontinue the implementation of resolutions of those provincial and municipal people's committees directly under the central authority which conflict with the Constitution, laws, and other documents of higher-echelon state organs; and at the same time to propose to the National Assembly Standing Committee the abrogation of these documents. 6. To implement a system of reporting to the people through the various mass media on those important issues to be settled by the government. Article 115

Based on the Constitution, laws, and resolutions of the National Assembly, on the regulations and resolutions of the National Assembly Standing Committee, as well as on orders and decisions of the president of the state, the government is to issue resolutions and decrees; while the prime minister is to issue decisions and directives, and control their implementation. Those important issues that fall under the government's authority shall be discussed collectively and decided according to the views of the majority. Article 116 Ministers and other government members are responsible for exercising state management over domains and sectors within their responsibility on a national scale; and are to ensure the autonomy in production and business of various primary installations as stipulated by law. Based on the Constitution, laws, and resolutions of the National Assembly, on the regulations and resolutions of the National Assembly Standing Committee, on orders and decisions of the president of the state, on various documents of the government and the prime minister, of various ministers, and of other government members, the heads of various government agencies shall issue decisions, directives, and circulars, and shall control the enforcement of these documents among all sectors, localities, and primary installations. Article 117 Ministers and other government members are responsible to the prime minister and the National Assembly for the domains and sectors under their responsibility. Chapter IX: People's Councils and People's Committees. Article 118 Administrative units of the SRV are divided as follows: The country is divided into provinces and municipalities that are subordinate to the central government. Provinces are divided into precincts and municipalities that are subordinate to provincial and city governments. Municipalities are subordinate to the central government and are divided into districts, precincts, and cities. Precincts are divided into villages and townships. Municipalities subordinate to provincial government and cities are divided into wards and subwards. Precincts are divided into wards. The establishment of the people's councils and administrative committees in various administrative units is defined by law. Article 119

The people's councils are the organs of state power in localities to represent the will, aspiration, and right to mastery of the local people. They are elected by the local people, and are responsible to the local people and the higher state agencies. Article 120 Based on the stipulations of the Constitution and the laws and documents of higher state agencies, the people's councils will issue resolutions on measures to ensure the enactment of the Constitution and local laws, on local socioeconomic development plans and budgets, on national defense and security in localities, and on measures to stabilize and raise the people's living standard; and will fulfill all tasks assigned by higher echelons and their obligations to the entire country. Article 121 Since the people's councillors represent the will and aspirations of the local people, they must maintain close relations with voters, accept their supervision, regularly inform voters of their activities and those of the people's councils, respond to the requests and petitions of voters, and examine and supervise the settlement of complaints and denunciations by the people. The people's councillors have the duty to motivate the people to implement state laws and policies and resolutions of the councils, and encourage the local population to take part in the management of state affairs. Article 122 The people's councillors have the right to question their own chairmen, the chairmen and other members of the people's committees, chief judges of people's courts, chief procurators of people's organs of control, and other heads of agencies of the people's committees. The individuals so questioned must answer before the people's councils within the time limit set by law. The people's councillors have the right to petition to state organs in their localities. Leading officials of these organs have the responsibility to receive the councillors and examine and handle their petitions. Article 123 The people's committees elected by the people's councils are their executive agencies and the state administrative agencies in localities. They are responsible for enforcing the Constitution, laws and documents of higher state agencies, and resolutions of the people's councils. Article 124

The people's committees, within the sphere of their responsibility and authority prescribed by law, shall issue decisions and directives, and control the enforcement of these documents. The people's committee chairmen will lead and supervise the operations of the people's committees. Important locality issues must be debated collectively by the people's committees and decided by the majority. The people's committee chairmen have the right to suspend the enforcement or to abrogate erroneous documents of agencies of their own committees and subordinate people's committees; suspend the enforcement of erroneous resolutions of subordinate people's councils; and, at the same time, recommend the people's councils at their own levels to rescind those resolutions. Article 125 The chairman of the Vietnam Fatherland Front (VFF) and heads of mass organizations in localities may be invited to attend the meetings of the people's councils and the conferences of the people's committees at the same levels when discussing those issues related to them. The people's councils and the people's committees will implement a system to inform the VFF and mass organizations of all aspects of the local situation, listen to the views and petitions of these organizations on building the administration and developing the socioeconomic situation of localities: and coordinate with the VFF and mass organizations to mobilize the people to join the state effort to implement the socioeconomic, national defense and security tasks in localities. Chapter X: People's Courts and People's Organs of Control. Article 126 The people's courts and people's organs of control in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam are, within the sphere of their function, obliged to protect the socialist legal system, the socialist system, the people's right to mastery, the assets of the state and collectives, and the lives, property, freedom, honor, and dignity of citizens. People's Courts. Article 127 The Supreme People's Court, the local people's courts, the military tribunals, and other courts set up by law are adjudicating organs of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Under special circumstances, the National Assembly may decide to set up special tribunals. Appropriate people's organizations shall be formed at the grass roots to deal with minor breaches of law or disputes, as stipulated by law.

Article 128 The term of office of the presiding judge of the Supreme People's Court corresponds to the term of the National Assembly. The systems of appointment, dismissal and demotion; the office term of judges; the electoral system and term of office of people's jurors of the people's courts at all levels will be defined by law. Article 129 As stipulated by law, in adjudicating trials at the people's courts participated by people's jurors and at courts martial participated by military jurors of justice, the people's jurors have the same powers as judges. Article 130 During trials, judges and people's jurors are independent and subject only to law. Article 131 The people's courts shall adjudicate publicly with the exception of cases prescribed by law. They shall adjudicate collectively and decide by majority. Article 132 The defendant's right to plead their cases is guaranteed. Defendants may plead their cases themselves or ask others to help them. A jurist organization may be formed to give legal assistance to the defendants and other persons concerned to protect their rights and legitimate interests and to contribute to protecting the socialist legal system. Article 133 The people's courts shall ensure on behalf of the citizens of all nationalities in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam the right to use their own spoken languages and scripts before the courts. Article 134 The Supreme People's Court is the highest juridical body of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The Supreme People's Court shall supervise the proceedings of the local people's courts and the military tribunals. The Supreme People's Court shall supervise the proceedings of the special and other courts, unless the National Assembly decides otherwise when setting up these courts.

Article 135 The Supreme People's Court presiding judge shall be responsible and accountable to the National Assembly. When the National Assembly is not in session, it shall be responsible and accountable to the National Assembly Standing Committee and the president of the state. Presiding judges of local people's courts shall be responsible and accountable to the people's councils. Article 136 The verdicts and decisions of the people's courts, as soon as they are legally effective, must be respected by the state organs, economic and social organizations, the people's Armed Forces, and all citizens. The persons and units concerned must strictly enforce them. People's Organ of Control. Article 137 The Supreme People's Organ of Control shall control the observance of law by the ministries and equivalent agencies and other government bodies, local administration agencies, economic and social organizations, people's Armed Forces units, and all citizens. It shall exercise the right of public prosecution and ensure the strict and uniform observance of law. The local people's organs of control and the military organs of control shall control the observance of law and exercise the right of public prosecution within their spheres of responsibility defined by law. Article 138 The people's organ of control shall be led by its chief procurator. The chief procurator of a lower people's organ of control shall be subject to the leadership of the next higher people's organ of control chief. The chiefs of the local people's organs of control and chief procurators of military organs of control at all levels shall be under the unified leadership of the chief procurator of the Supreme People's Organ of Control. The formation of the control committees, the problems that the chief procurators of the people's organs of control have the power to decide on, and the important issues the control committees must discuss and decide based on the view of the majority are

proscribed by law. The term of office of the chief procurator of the Supreme People's Organ of Control corresponds to that of the National Assembly. The chief procurators and deputy chief procurators as well as members of the local people's organs of control in the various military regions and other areas shall be appointed, relieved of office, or dismissed by the chief procurator of the Supreme People's Organ of Control. Article 139 The chief procurator of the Supreme People's Organ of Control shall be responsible and accountable to the National Assembly; when the National Assembly is not in session, he or she shall be responsible and accountable to the National Assembly Standing Committee and the head of state. Article 140 The chief procurators of the local people's organs of control shall be responsible for keeping the people's councils informed of the situation of local law enforcement and also for answering questions raised by local people's councillors. Chapter XI: The National Flag, Emblem, Anthem, Capital, and Independence Day. Article 141 The national flag of the SRV consists of a rectangle of red cloth with a five-pointed golden star in the middle; the ratio of the width of the flag to its length is two-thirds. Article 142 The national emblem of the SRV is round with a red background. In its center is a fivepointed golden star framed by ears of rice. It lower half is rimmed by a halved-cogwheel with the inscription: The Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Article 143 The national anthem of the SRV is the "Tien Quan Ca" (Troops Marching Song). Article 144 The capital of the SRV is Hanoi. Article 145 The date of declaration of independence, 2 September 1945, is the national independence day. Chapter XII: The Legal Force of the Constitution and Constitutional Amendments.

Article 146 The Constitution of the SRV is the basic state law and has supreme legal force. All other legal documents must be consistent with the Constitution. Article 147 Only the National Assembly shall have the power to amend the Constitution. Amendments to the Constitution shall require, for their adoption, a majority vote of not less than two thirds of the total number of National Assembly deputies. The text of this Constitution was unanimously adopted at 1145 hours on 15 April 1992 by the 11th Session of the Eighth SRV National Assembly.

