THE NEW CONSTITUTIONS OF EUROPE
BY

HOWARD LEE McBAIN
Eaton Professor of Municipal Science and Administration in Columbia University

AND

LINDSAY ROGERS
Associate Professor of Government in Columbia University

GARDEN CITY	

NEW YORK

DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY 1922

COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF TRANSLATION INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES, INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

PRINTED IN TEE UNITED STATES AT THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y.

First Edition

2. CONSTITUTION OF THE KINGDOM OF THE SERBS, CROATS, AND SLOVENES (JUGOSLAVIA)
ADOPTED BY THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY IN BELGRADE ON JUNE 15, 191, AND PROCLAIMED BY THE KING ON JUNE 28, 191 SECTION I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1. The government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes is a constitutional parliamentary and hereditary monarchy. The official title of the government is the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes. Art. 2. The coat of arms of the Kingdom is a double-headed white eagle with wings widespread upon a red shield; the crown of the Kingdom is directly above both heads of the doubleheaded white eagle; upon the breast of the eagle is a shield having thereon the Serbian coat of arms, consisting of a white cross

upon a red shield, with one jewel in each angle of the cross; the Croatian coat of arms, consisting of a shield with twenty-five squares alternately of red and silver color; the Slovenian coat of arms, consisting of three gold six-angled stars upon a blue shield. Under this is a white half moon. The flag is blue, white, and red, in horizontal stripes against an upright spear. Art. 3. The official language of the Kingdom is SerboCroatian-Slovene.
SECTION II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENSHIP

Art. 4. The right of citizenship is equal (uniform) in the entire kingdom. All the citizens are equal before the law. All enjoy equal protection of the authorities. Nobility and titles are not recognized, neither are any privileged rights of birth. Art. 5. Personal liberty is guaranteed. No one can be held responsible or imprisoned or deprived of his liberty by any one except in cases provided by law. No one can be imprisoned for any crime without written statements giving the reasons and facts substantiating the charges of the competent authorities. The charges must be submitted to the party accused at the time of arrest, or, if that is not possible, at the latest within twenty-four hours from the time of imprisonment. Against an order for imprisonment an appeal can be made within three days to the competent court. If there is no appeal filed within this period the prosecuting authorities must send their decision to the court within twenty-four hours. The court must make its findings in the period of two days from the time it received the decision. The findings of the court are supreme. Organs of the authorities who violate these provisions shall be punished for unlawful deprivation of liberty. Art. 6. No one can be tried except by a competent court. Art. 7. No one can be sentenced until he has been authoritatively heard or has been summoned to defend himself according to law. Art. 8. Punishment can be dealt only by law and applied only to the acts for which the law provides and prescribes such punishment. Art. 9. The death penalty cannot be inflicted for purely political crimes, except in cases of accomplished or attempted

assassination of the ruler and of members of the royal house, for which the death penalty is provided in the criminal code. Exceptions are made in addition to the above in cases where with purely political crimes some other criminal act is committed for which the death penalty is provided in the criminal code, and also in cases which the military law punishes with the death penalty. Art. 10. No citizen can be exiled from the country. A citizen cannot be forcibly moved within the border of the country from one place to another, nor can he be confined in one place, except in cases for which the law explicitly provides. Under no condition can any one be driven out from his native place without due process of law. Art. 11. The home is inviolable. The authorities cannot attempt any search or investigation in the home of a citizen except in cases authorized by law and in the manner prescribed by law. Before any search can be made the authorities are in duty bound to give the person whose home is being searched a written notice from the competent authorities on the strength of which the search is made. Against this order there is an appeal to the court of first instance. However, the appeal does not delay the process of search. The search must always be made in the presence of two citizens. Immediately after the search is completed the authorities are bound to give the person whose home was searched a statement of the results of the search and a signed list of all articles taken for the purpose of further investigation. At night the police can enter a private home only in cases of extreme necessity or when they are appealed to for help from the home. To that act a representative of the community or two citizens should be present, except in cases where an appeal for help is made. Agents (officials) of the authorities who violate these orders will be punished for an unlawful violation of the home. Art. 12. Freedom of faith and conscience is guaranteed. Acknowledged religious denominations are equal before the law and are at liberty to profess their faith publicly. Enjoyment of civil and political right is independent of any religious belief. No one can be exempt from his civic and military duties and responsibilities upon the grounds of his religious belief. Creeds that have secured lawful recognition in any part of the kingdom are sanctioned. Other creeds can be recognized only by the law. Authorized and recognized creeds govern their internal

church activities, affairs, and administration independently, and manage their property and funds within the boundary of the law. No one is compelled publicly to confess his religious belief. No one is compelled to take a part in religious activities, feasts, ceremonials, and exercises, except at national holidays and celebrations, within the manner provided by law for persons who are subordinate to parental, guardian, or military authorities. Authorized and recognized denominations may preserve the ties of their faith with the religious heads outside of the borders of the country in so far as the necessity of spiritual regulations of the different creeds require. The manner in which these ties should be preserved will be regulated by law. The disbursement which the national budget provides for lawful religious purposes will be divided among lawful and recognized spiritual bodies, according to the number of their faithful and actually shown necessity. Spiritual representatives cannot employ their spiritual authority outside of their spiritual edifices or outside of their spiritual character, or in any act while doing their official duty in partisan affairs.. Art. 13. Freedom of press is guaranteed. No measure can be instituted that would prevent printing, selling, and distributing of literature and newspapers. Censorship can be enforced only in time of war or mobilization and that for measures foreseen by law. Distribution and selling of newspapers or printed matter which contain libel on the ruler or the members of the royal house, foreign ruling heads, national assembly, indirectly calling upon the citizens to change the constitution or the national laws by force, or which contain offense against public morals, are forbidden. However, in these cases the authorities are bound to take the matter to court within twenty-four (24) hours after the suspension, and the court is in duty bound to sustain or dismiss the charge within twenty-four hours; otherwise the suspension is considered as rescinded. Courts of proper jurisdiction decide the matter of damages independently of court's decision regarding the suspension. For an offense committed by the press the following are responsible: The writer, editor, printer, publisher, and distributor. By special law for the press it will be decided when and in what cases and in what manner any of the above-mentioned persons will be responsible for the offense committed through the press. All offenses committed by the press will be tried by courts of proper jurisdiction.

Art. 14. Citizens have the right of assembly, meetings, and conferences. Additional regulations regarding this will be provided by law. No person will be permitted to carry arms to meetings. Holding of open-air meetings must be announced to the proper authorities at least twenty-four hours beforehand. Citizens have the right of assembly for any objects that are not punishable by law. Art. 15. Citizens have the right to petition. Petition can be signed by one or more of them, as well as all judicial persons. Petitions can be submitted to any of the authorities without exception. Art. 16. Learning and arts are free and enjoy the protection and support of the government. University education is free. Education is national. Education is based upon the same foundation throughout the country, adapting itself to the localities for which it is intended. All schools must teach moral uplift and broad national ideals in the spirit of national unity and religious tolerance. Elementary education is national, general, and compulsory. Religious training is given according to the wishes of the parent or elders, based on their creeds and in accordance with their religious beliefs. Technical schools will be established according to the needs of vocations. Education is given by the government without entrance fees, tuition, or other taxes. The manner in which private schools, their like, and under what conditions they shall be permitted will be provided by law. All institutions for education are under government control. The government will aid the work of national education. Minorities of race and language are given elementary education in their mother tongue, under provisions which will be prescribed by law. Art. 17. The secrecy of letters, telegrams, and telephone communication is inviolable, except in cases of criminal investigations, mobilization, or war. All those who are guilty of violating the secrecy of postal, telegraph, or telephone communication will be punished according to law. Art. 18. Every citizen has the right directly and without any one's approval to bring complaint to the court against the governmental or self-governing bodies for criminal acts which they may commit against him in their official capacity. For ministers, judges, and soldiers under colors, special provisions apply. For damages done to citizens by governmental or self-governing bodies by illegal performance of their duties, the government or

self-governing bodies are responsible before the proper court. The agent in question is responsible to them. Limitation for damages expires in nine months. Art. 19. To all positions in all branches of government service all citizens are equally eligible under the provisions of the law, those by birth as well as those who become naturalized, who are of the Serbo-Croat-Slovene nationality. Other naturalized citizens can obtain government positions only if they are residents of the country for ten years, and by special permission of the government's council upon the prior recommendation of the competent minister. Art. 20. Every citizen enjoys the protection of the government in foreign countries. Every citizen is at liberty to withdraw from citizenship after he has fulfilled his obligations to the government. Extradition of citizens is forbidden. Art. 21. Every citizen is obliged to obey the law, serve the interest of national unity, defend his native country, and carry the national burden according to his earning ability, according to the provisions of the law.
SECTION III SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC REGULATIONS

Art. 22. The government will endeavor to create for its citizens equal opportunity to prepare themselves for profitable vocations to which they are inclined. In that direction it will establish educational trade organizations and arrange for permanent assistance for education of worthy poor children. Art. 23. The laboring classes are under the protection of the government. Women and minors must be protected from work dangerous to their health. The law provides separate measures for the welfare and protection of the workman and prescribes working hours in all undertakings. Art. 24. Inventions are the property of the inventor and enjoy the protection of the government. Art. 25. Freedom of negotiation and organization in business affairs is recognized in so far as it does not interfere with social interests. Art. 26. The government has, in the interest of the whole and based upon the spirit of the law, the right and duty to intervene in the economic affairs of its citizens in the spirit of justice and for the prevention of social adversity.

Art. 27. The government will take care: (1) To improve general hygienic and social conditions, which are essential to national health; (2) to give special protection to mothers and small children; (3) to guard the health of all citizens; (4) to check and prevent all the acute and chronic contagious diseases, as well as to check the harmful use of alcohol; and (5) to furnish free medicine and other necessities for the protection of national health to poor and needy citizens. Art. 28. Marriage is under the protection of the government. Art. 29. The state aids materially national associations; also the state aids materially other national economic organizations that are not for profit. To such associations and to such economic organizations priorities are given in the transaction of business upon equal terms with other private institutions. Laws will be formulated as regard the associations which will apply to the entire country. Art. 30. By special legislation betterment of the agrarian conditions will be provided. Art. 31. Protection of workmen in case of accident, illness, lack of work, incapability, old age, or death will be provided by special legislation. Art. 32. Invalids, war orphans, war widows, the poor and those incapable of work, parents of the killed or those who died in the war, enjoy special protection of the state and assistance as a mark of appreciation. The question of rehabilitation of the invalid and the education of war orphans for work and the future will be regulated by law. Art. 33. The rights of the workingmen to organize for the purpose of improving working conditions is guaranteed. Art. 34. To navigation and fisheries will be given special attention. The welfare of the seaman in case of sickness, invalidity, old age, and death will be provided for by special law. Art. 35. The state will supervise the building and maintaining of all transportation facilities wherever the general national interest demands. Art. 36. Usury of every description is forbidden. Art. 37. Property is guaranteed. Property creates responsibilities. The use of property must not be to the detriment of the whole. Contents, size, and limits of private property are fixed by law. Expropriation of private property in the public interest is permissible according to law, with just compensation. Art. 38. Fidei commissum is abolished. Bequests with

general advantageous purposes are recognized. It will be determined by legislation what changes of the bequests can be made in accordance with change of conditions. Art. 39. By the inheritance tax law the government will be assured of its participation in the inheritance, having in mind the interests of the relations between the heir and the deceased and the value of the inheritance. Art. 40. The supplying of provisions and other necessities for the army is carried out for just compensation. Art. 41. Large private forest tracts are expropriated according to law and become the property of the state or its selfgoverning bodies. The law will provide how large forest tracts can be property of other lawful public bodies that now exist or will be created. Natural forestry, whose cultivation is necessary for climatical and cultural purposes, also passes over, according to the law of expropriation, to the ownership of the state or its self-governing bodies, in so far as forestation cannot be done by other means. Large forest tracts which foreign powers have given to individual persons become, according to law, the property of the state or municipality without any compensation to those persons. The forestry law will make provisions under which farmers and those who are indirectly occupied with tilling the land can benefit by wood-cutting for building and fuel; also for grazing purposes in the state forests. Art. 42. The feudal system is abolished from the day of the liberation from foreign authority. In so far as before that time injustice was committed by the feudal system or by its transformation to self-justification, these conditions must be corrected by law. Land tenants and land workers in general who cultivate lands in tenancy are considered freeholders of government lands without any compensation for the same, and they will receive title to the property. Art. 43. Expropriation of large estates and their apportionment to ownership to those who till the lands will be regulated by law. The law will provide the kind of compensation that will be given expropriated estates. For large estates which belong to members of the former alien dynasty and those which the foreign powers have granted to individuals, no compensation will be given. Land settlements -will be carried out primarily by the aid of organized colonization societies, seeing that the inheritors must be provided with necessary means for successful production. In colonization and in apportionment of ex-

propriated lands, needy soldiers have first choice, meaning those who have fought for the liberation of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes and their families. The law will provide the maximum possession of property and the cases in which the minimum of land cannot be alienated from them. Art. 44. For the framing of social and economic legislation the economic council is created. Its regulations, duties, and competence will be designated by law.
SECTION IV GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES

Art. 45. All government functions are carried out according to this constitution.
Art. 46. Legislative power is vested in the King and National Assembly together. Art. 47. Executive power is administered by the King, through his responsible ministers, according to the provisions of the constitution. Art. 48. Judicial power is administered by the courts. Their rulings and sentences are pronounced and administered in the name of the King, according to law.
SECTION V THE KING

Art. 49. The King approves and proclaims the laws, appoints government officials, and gives military titles as prescribed by law. The King is the supreme commander of the entire military forces. He gives decorations and other honorary distinctions. Art. 50. The King has the right to grant amnesty for political and military offenses. Amnesty nullifies the legal consequences of punishable acts, but amnesty cannot interfere in damages allowed to individual persons. Amnesty can be given before the beginning of the proceedings, during the proceedings, or after the decision is given. Amnesty is general or individual. For amnesty to the ministers it is necessary first to have the concurrence of the National Assembly. However, no amnesty can be given to ministers until after the sentence is pronounced. The King has the power to pardon. He can pardon, reduce, or lighten the sentence. The right to pardon for the crime of the

defendant, on personal appeal, will be provided by the law of court procedure in criminal acts. Art. 51. The King represents the nation in all intercourse with foreign governments. He declares war and makes peace. If the country is not attacked or war is not declared against it by some other nation, it is necessary first to have the consent of the National Assembly to declare a war. If war is declared against the country or the country is attacked, the National Assembly must be convened at once. Art. 52. The King calls the National Assembly in regular or extra sessions. He opens and closes the sessions in person with a message from the throne or through the Council of Ministers by a message or a decree. The message from the throne, communication, or decree must be signed by all the ministers. The decree by which one session is adjourned must contain the order for the date of calling a new session. The King can at all times, in case of national emergency, convene the National Assembly which has adjourned. The King has the right to dismiss the National Assembly, but the decree of its dismissal must contain an order for new election, at the latest within three months' time, and an order for convening of the National Assembly, at the latest within four months from the day of the dismissal of the assembly. The decree to dissolve the National Assembly is attested to by all ministers. Art. 53. The King cannot rule over some other state at the same time without the consent of the National Assembly. If the King should, notwithstanding this act, accept the crown of some other country it will be considered that he has resigned the rulership of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes. Art. 54. No act of the King's authority is valid nor can it be executed unless it has been signed by the competent minister. For all King's actions, verbal or written, signed or unsigned, as well as for all his acts of political nature, the competent minister is responsible. For the actions of the King, as the commander in chief of the army, the minister of war and navy is responsible. Art. 55. The King and the heir to the throne are of age when they attain 18 years. The King's person is immune. He cannot be held responsible nor can a complaint be brought against him. This does not apply to the King's personal property. Art. 56. In the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes the ruler is Peter, the first Karagorgjevich. King Peter's successor is Crown Prince Alexander and his male issue from a legal

marriage in order first born. When the King has no male issue he will select for himself his heir from the royal line, with the approval of the National Assembly. For this act it is therefore required a majority of one-half, plus one vote of the entire membership of the National Assembly. Art. 57. The royal household is made up of the Queen Wife, the living ancestors and heirs to the King in direct line, with their wives, full brothers and their heirs, with their wives, and the sisters of the ruling King. Relatives and prerogatives of the members of the royal household will be defined by statute. No member of the royal household can become a minister or a member of the National Assembly. Art. 58. The King takes oath before the National Assembly, which is as follows: "I, [name], ascending the throne of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, and accepting the royal power, do hereby swear in the name of Almighty God that I will guard the union of the people, independence of the nation, and the entity of the national authority; that I will keep the constitution inviolable; that I will rule by the constitution and the law, and that I will endeavor to have the welfare of the people before me, so help me God. Amen." Art. 59. The King resides in the country permanently. Should it be necessary for the King to leave the country for a short time, the heir to the throne will represent him. If the heir to the throne is a minor or prevented from acting by any reason, the King will be represented by the Council of Ministers. Representation is conformed to according to the instructions given by the King within the bounds of the constitution. This applies also in case of the King's disability when it is not of a permanent nature. During the absence of the King or the heir to the throne the Ministers' Council has no right to adjourn the National Assembly. The King can be represented by the Ministers' Council at the most for six months. Upon the expiration of that time the provision made by constitution relative to substitutes becomes effective.
SECTION VI SUBSTITUTION

Art. 60. The royal prerogatives are performed by substitutes: First, when the King is a minor, and second, when he is

mentally or physically permanently incapable of performing royal acts. The creation and suspension of substitutes will be done by National Assembly by secret ballot. When the Council of Ministers finds that the King is disabled, they report to the National Assembly, together with an opinion from three physicians taken from the national medical faculties. The same procedure is followed in the case of the heir to throne. Art. 61. The right to substitute for the King belongs to the heir of the throne if he is of age. If the heir to the throne, because of the reasons set forth in Article 60, cannot perform the duties of substitute, the National Assembly elects by secret ballot three royal substitutes. The royal substitutes are elected for four years. After that in case the substitution has to be prolonged for at least one year, there must be a new election. If the substitution is to last longer the election is again for four years. The substitutes must be born Serbian, Croatian, or Slovenian, 45 years of age, and of higher education. Before they assume the royal authority the substitutes will take an oath before the National Assembly that has elected them, that they will be faithful to the King and that they will rule according to the constitution and the laws of the country. Art 62. If one of the three substitutes is temporarily absent, the other two can perform the governmental functions without him. Art. 63. The substitutes will supervise the education of the minor King. The property of the minor King will be supervised by guardians named in the King's will. If the deceased King has not named a guardian, they will be named by the substitutes in cooperation with the Council of State. Art. 64. Until the substitutes are elected, the Council of Ministers will temporarily execute royal authority under their own responsibility. Art. 65. In case of death or abdication of the King, the heir to the throne, if he is of age, immediately takes authority and announces the same to the people by proclamation. Within ten days he takes the prescribed oath before the National Assembly. If the National Assembly has adjourned earlier and the new Assembly is not elected, the old National Assembly is reconvened. Art. 66. If at the time of the King's death there is no male issue, but the Queen is enceinte at the time of his death, the national assembly will elect temporary substitutes who will exe-

cute the King's authority only to the time of the birth. The government is obliged to put before the national assembly the opinion of three physicians taken from medical faculties of the nation as to the Queen's prospects of becoming a mother. This also applies in case of the death of the Crown Prince if his wife should be pregnant at the time of the King's death. Art. 67. In case the throne in accordance with this constitution is left without an heir, the Council of Ministers will take charge of the royal powers and at once call the National Assembly in special session, which will decide the matter of succession. Art. 68. The civil list of the King will be appropriated by law. The civil list once established cannot be enlarged without the consent of the National Assembly, nor diminished without the consent of the King. The King's substitutes will receive from the state treasury for the time they perform their duties the amount allowed by the National Assembly at the time of their election.
SECTION VII NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

Art. 69. The National Assembly is composed of representatives freely chosen by the people by general, equal, direct, and secret ballot with representation of the minority. For every 40,000 inhabitants one representative is chosen. If the excess of inhabitants in one elective district is more than 25,000, one additional representative will be chosen for that excess. The National Assembly is elected for four years. Other regulations for the election will be prescribed by law. Art. 70. The right to vote belongs to every citizen by birth or naturalization if he is 21 years of age. Officers, active or out of service, as well as non-commissioned officers and soldiers under the colors, cannot have the privilege of voting, nor can they be candidates for office. The law will provide for woman suffrage. Art. 71. The franchise is denied temporarily to those (1) who are sentenced to prison, until their rights are restored; (2) who are sentenced to lose their citizenship for the duration of the sentence; (3) who are public charges; and (4) who are under guardianship. Art. 72. For representative to the National Assembly only a person who has right to vote, regardless of whether his name

appears on the ballot, can be elected. Every candidate must comply with the following: (1) That he is a citizen by birth or naturalization of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes; a naturalized citizen if he is not of the nationality of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, must be a resident at least ten years from the date of naturalization; (2) that he is 30 years of age; and (3) that he speaks and writes the national language. A national assemblyman cannot at the same time be a government supply agent or government contractor. Art. 73. Police, customs, and forestry officials, as well as the officials of the agrarian reforms, cannot be candidates unless they have resigned one year prior to the call for the election. Other officials who perform public duty cannot be candidates in the election districts of their territorial jurisdiction. Officials who are elected to the National Assembly must resign their office for the time of their tenure as Assemblyman. Ministers, active and at large, and university professors may be candidates and, if elected, hold their positions. Art. 74. Every National Assemblyman represents all the people and not only those who have elected him. The voters cannot give, nor the National Assemblyman accept, commanding and obligatory instructions. All National Assemblymen take an oath that they will faithfully uphold the constitution. Art. 75. The National Assembly meets at the capitol Beograd (Belgrade), in regular session annually on the 20th day of October, unless it has been previously called by the King's decree in special session. If, in case of war, the capital is moved, the National Assembly meets in the place of the temporary capital. Regular call of the National Assembly cannot be made until the national budget is passed. In time of war the National Assembly is permanently in session unless the Assembly rules otherwise. Art. 76. The National Assembly verifies the credentials of its members and passes on them. The National Assembly prescribes its own rules of order. Art. 77. The National Assembly elects from its membership its officers for every session. Art. 78. Legislative measures are submitted by the Ministers' Council or individual ministers with the authority of the King. The right to present legislative measures is a privilege of each member of the National Assembly. Art. 79. The King concludes treaties with foreign nations. However, for confirmation of those treaties the concurrence

of the National Assembly is necessary. • For approval of purely political agreements, if they are not contrary to the constitution and the law, it is not necessary to have the confirmation of the National Assembly. A treaty to allow a foreign army to occupy the territory of the Kingdom or to pass over the country is not valid without first being confirmed by the National Assembly. The National Assembly can, when the national interests demand it, by resolution in advance authorize the Ministerial Council to take measures for immediate acceptance of the submitted treaty. National territory cannot be alienated or exchanged without the sanction of the National Assembly. Art. 80. The King proclaims the laws by a decree which contains also the laws adopted by National Assembly. The decree is signed by all ministers. The minister of justice attaches to it the government seal and publishes the law in the "official organ." The law becomes effective fifteen days after publication in the "official organ" unless the law specifies otherwise. The day of publication in the "official organ" is counted. Art. 81. The National Assembly has the right of inquiry and also of investigation in elections and purely administrative questions. Art. 82. Every member of the National Assembly has the right to direct questions and interpellations to the ministers. The ministers are obliged to reply during the same session within the time prescribed by the rules of order. Art. 83. The National Assembly communicates directly with the ministers only. Art. 84. The National Assemblymen, members of the Government and Government representatives are the only ones having right to speak in the National Assembly. Art. 85. The National Assembly can legally function if onethird of all the Assemblymen are present at the sessions. To carry a motion it is necessary to have a majority of the Assemblymen present. In case of equal division of votes the motion is considered lost. Art. 86. No legislative motion can be debated in the National Assembly until it first has gone through the proper committees. Voting in the National Assembly is public; only the elections are carried out by secret ballot. Votes can be cast only in person. On every legislative motion two votes must be taken in the same session of the National Assembly before it can be finally carried. Art. 87. At no time can anyone hold an Assemblyman re-

sponsible for the vote he has given as a member of the National Assembly. For all statements and conduct of the National Assemblymen in performing their duty in sessions of the National Assembly, in committees, in special sessions, or in special duties delegated to them by the Assembly, the Assemblymen are responsible only to the National Assembly according to the rules of order. Art. 88. Without the authority of the National Assembly its members cannot be held for any offense regardless of its nature, nor can they be deprived of their freedom by any authority or for any cause as long as their mandates have not expired, except when they are apprehended in the act of actual crime or transgression. However, even in the latter case, the National Assembly, if in session, is at once informed, and the National Assembly gives or rejects the authority to have the trial continued during the session. The right of immunity of the National Assemblyman begins on the day of his election. If anyone becomes Assemblyman before the sentence is pronounced on him for any offense the authorities that have the matter in charge will inform the National Assembly, which will give or refuse permission to prolong the action. Members of the National Assembly can be held responsible only for the acts of which they are accused. Art. 89. The National Assembly has the exclusive right to preserve order at its meetings through its President. No armed force can be placed in the building of the National Assembly nor its grounds without the permission of the President of the National Assembly; without its permission no government agents can perform any of its functions in the National Assembly. No one carrying arms can enter the grounds of the National Assembly except persons who are authorized to carry weapons and are on duty at National Assembly.
SECTION VIII ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY

Art. 90. The Ministerial Council is composed of all the ministers and stands immediately under the King. The King names the President and members of the Ministerial Council. Ministers are placed at the heads of respective branches of the government authority. A minister can be without portfolio. State under-secretaries can be appointed in the ministries should a need require them for a specified part of duties in that branch

of government service. The state under-secretaries, if they are taken from the National Assembly, do not lose their mandates. The ministers name subordinate government officials according to the provisions of the law. The ministers take an oath before entering upon their duties of fidelity to the constitution and the King. Art. 91. The ministers are responsible to the King and the National Assembly. The King and the National Assembly can accuse ministers for violation of the constitution and the country's laws while in official positions. For damages done by ministers, by unlawful acts, the state is responsible. Art. 92. A minister can be accused during the time of his service and for five years after leaving office. A motion to accuse the minister must be made in writing and contain the charges. When the National Assembly accuses a minister a decision as to whether or not the minister shall be placed on trial must be brought by two-thirds of the votes of the members present. Art. 93. The ministers are tried before the State Court. The State Court is composed of six state counselors and six Supreme Court judges, who are chosen by their respective bodies by a ballot in a plenary meeting. The president of the Supreme Court is the president of the State Court. For deeds which are not provided for in the criminal code the punishment will be fixed by the law of ministerial responsibilities. More detailed directions regarding ministers' responsibilities are to be embodied in a separate law. Art. 94. Administrative authority can issue ordinances necessary for the application of the law. Administrative authority may, with an ordinance of legal force, regulate conditions only on the basis of lawful authority, which is to govern separately in every instance. The ordinances must not be contrary to the constitution or the law in behalf of whose application they are given. They cannot be contrary to the legislative provisions on the grounds of which they have been prescribed. The National Assembly can by a resolution place the ordinances issued by the authority of the law out of force in whole or part. The ordinances must be published and in them must always be indicated the law on the ground of which they were given. Art. 95. The administration in the Kingdom is executed by provinces, districts, counties, and municipalities. Division of governments is done by law, in accordance with natural

social and economical conditions. A province can have at the most 800,000 inhabitants. Two or more smaller provinces can unite in one larger one. The final decision rests with the provincial conventions of the said provinces, and such a province cannot have more than 800,000 inhabitants. At the ..head of every province is a governor, who is appointed by the King and governs through the state's agencies the affairs of the state administration in the province. Art. 96. For the affairs of a local character in the municipalities, counties, districts, and provinces, a municipal, county, district, and provincial home rule is established and organized upon the principle of elections. For the home rule and self-administration of cities a special law will be enacted. In the line of provincial home rule authorities are these duties: (1) Provincial finances: (a) making of provincial budget; (b) disposition of provincial taxation which is payable according to law to cover the provincial expenditures. (2) Provincial public works; also building laws. (3) Attending to advancement of provincial economic interests—farming, stock raising, wine growing, fruit growing, forestry, river and lake fishing, hunting—as well as technical and agricultural betterments. (4) Administration of provincial property. (5) Supervision of the national health in the province and making all provisions for the betterment of health conditions in the province. (6) Supervision of social tasks in the province. (7) The humanitarian institutions in the province. (8) Transportation institutions in the province. (9) Contributions to the advancement of culture in the province. (10) Contributions to special education in the province. (11) Instituting and maintaining organizations for savings, mutual benefits, and insurance. (12) Giving opinions at the request of the Government as to the advisability of proposed laws that have to do with the province and in general in all other objects for which the Government asks their opinion. Other matters also can be intrusted by law to the home rule authorities of the province. If in some of the enumerated conditions the province cannot perform by its own means, the Government will, upon the application of the provincial assembly and according to the decision

of the National Assembly, give the necessary means, or will itself carry out the undertakings. Art. 97. Home rule units have their own yearly budgets. The administration of the home rule units is under the supervision of the minister of finances and the supreme controller, and will be regulated by special law. Art. 98. Agencies of the provincial administration are the provincial assembly and the provincial committee. The provincial and county assemblies elect their own presidents, who preside at their meetings; they choose also the local provincial and county committees. According to law, with exceptions, combined authority can be provided for the same objects of state and home rule competence in the province. The governor is the supreme authority of the general state administration in the province, in so far as there do not exist, according to law, for special affairs of state, special administrative authorities for one or more provinces. The law provides which of the states' functions are decided by the governor, with the advice of the provincial committee. Detailed regulations regarding organization and competent home rule bodies, of municipality, county, district, and province, will be enacted by special legislation. Art. 99. The provincial assembly has the right to establish provincial regulations in all questions within its jurisdiction. Provincial regulations are proclaimed by the governor. The provincial governor will not proclaim regulations which he finds are not based upon the constitution and the law. In that case he sends such regulations with his opinion to the State Council for decision and advises the competent minister. If the State Council finds that the order is not based on the constitution or some law, it will not be proclaimed or published. The State Council is bound to make its decision within two months. If the State Council does not make the decision in that time it becomes operative. Art. 100. The provincial committee prescribes regulations for performing the provincial functions. Art. 101. The state administrative authorities supervise the activities of the home rule authorities through the provincial governor and other special organs. The provincial governor has the power to suspend the enforcement of any decision of the home rule officers that is not based upon the constitution, the law, or the provincial regulations. A complaint can be filed

against the decision of the governor with the State Council, within the time provided by law. If the State Council renders no decision within a month from the date of its submission then the decision of the provincial governor becomes operative. Art. 102. For disagreements of an administrative nature administration courts are established. The law will provide their locality, jurisdiction, and organization. Art. 103. The State Council is the Supreme Administrative Court. Members of the State Council are appointed by the King on the motion of the President of the Council of Ministers and in the following manner: One-half of the members are named by the King from twice the number of names submitted by the National Assembly; the National Assembly elects the other half from a like number and in a like manner submitted by the King. The filling of vacant places in the State Council will be done by especially formulated laws, which may obviate the above principles. For members of the State Council only the higher public officials or men in public life who have a higher education and have been for ten years in government service or public work can be appointed. At least two-thirds of the members of the State Council must have diplomas of qualification as having finished law studies. Members of the State Council can be removed from their places, moved to other branches of the government service and placed on pension only upon the judgment of the court. When they arrive at the age of 70 years or when through illness they cannot perform their duties, they will be placed on pension. The duties of the State Council are: (1) As the Supreme Administrative Court it decides conflicts of an administrative nature. Conflicts based on complaints against the decrees and ministerial decisions are decided by the State Council in the first and last instance. (2) As the administrative organ of the supreme state administration it decides acts of administrative nature for which it is necessary to have its consent by special laws. (3) It performs supervising duties over the home rule bodies by order of the law. (4) It decides conflicts of jurisdiction between the state and the administrative authorities, and also decides conflicts of jurisdiction between the state and the home rule authorities. (5) It also decides other questions that are placed by the law in its jurisdiction. Detailed regulations regarding the composition of jurisdictions and procedure in the State Council will be prescribed by special law.

Art. 104. State jurisdictions are established by and according to rules prescribed by law. Art. 105. The law will prescribe the manner in which the officials will be appointed. Art. 106. Professions in government service, rights and duties, salaries and pensions of government officials in all branches, will be regulated by law for officials. Art. 107. Government employees are agents of the whole government and are obliged to work in the common interest of the state. The use of authority and position by the government employees for partisan aims, as well as the use of influence by the supervisors of government employees in that direction, will be punished by law. Art. 108. Any employee who is guaranteed a permanent position by the law cannot be discharged against his wish without being sentenced by a regular criminal or disciplinarian court.
SECTION IX THE COURTS' AUTHORITY

Art. 109. The courts are independent. In dealing justice they do not stand under any authority, but administer justice by law. Courts and court jurisdictions can be established only by law. Under no circumstances can special courts be established as commissions for investigations. In family and inheritance matters of the Mohammedans, justice is administered by the Sheriatha's Courts (religious). Art. 110. For the entire Kingdom only one Supreme Court exists, with sittings at Zagreb. The Supreme Court has also authority to decide conflicts of competency between administrative, civil, or military authorities and judicial authorities. In the same manner it is competent to decide conflicts of jurisdiction between administrative and regular courts. Art. 111. The appointment of Supreme and Appellate Court judges and the presidents of lower courts is done by the King's decree on the motion of the minister of justice, from the number of candidates which are chosen by the nominating body, whose composition will be closely defined by law. Art. 112. Judges of all courts are permanent. A judge cannot be deprived of his position nor for any reason be removed from his duty against his will, without a sentence by the regular courts or the Supreme Court. A judge cannot be accused in

respect to his judicial duty without the permission of the competent Appellate Court. For members of the higher courts this permission is given by the Supreme Court. A judge cannot be placed even temporarily to perform any other paid or unpaid public service, without his consent and the approval of the Supreme Court. A judge can be transferred only by his own consent. A judge can be in service to the end of his 65th year, and presidents of the Supreme and Appellate Courts to the end of their 70th year. Before that time a judge can be placed on pension only by written application or when he is physically disabled or mentally unable to perform his duties. Decision as to pensioning in this last instance is given by the Supreme Court.
SECTION X THE GOVERNMENT FINANCES

Art. 113. Every year the National Assembly approves the state budget, which is good for one year. The budget must be submitted to the National Assembly at the latest one month from the date it convenes. At the same time with the budget must be submitted to the National Assembly for examination and approval the final report for the last past fiscal year. The National Assembly cannot increase the submitted items, but it can lower or omit them. The budget is approved by sections. The form of making and executing of the budget is prescribed by law. Saving from one item of the budget or of the budget year cannot be used for payment of other items or for another year, without the consent of the National Assembly. Art. 114. Until it has approved the submitted budget the • National Assembly can approve one-twelfth of the budget for one or more months. If the National Assembly is adjourned before the budget is decided, the budget of the expiring fiscal year is prolonged by decree, at the longest for four months. Art. 115. Government taxes and general government incomes are regulated by law. State loans are decided by National Assembly. The Government is obliged to submit to the National Assembly a true certified report approved by the supreme controller if the agreement for the loan is made and executed according to law. Art. 116. Tax obligations are general and all the government taxes are equal for the entire country. Taxes are paid according to taxable capacity and progressively. The King and the heir to

the throne pay government tax on private property. No aid, permanent or temporary, nor gifts or compensation, can be given out of the government's treasury if they are not based on the law. Art. 117. The minister of finance directs the state property in so far as the law does not provide otherwise. Special laws will be enacted for the disposal of government property. The right of monopoly appertains to the state. Minerals and natural water powers are property of the state. Special laws will be enacted for the giving of mining, industrial, or any other concessions. Art. 118. For auditing state accounts and supervising the execution of state and provincial budgets there exists a chief controller as the supreme accounting court. The president and members of the supreme control are chosen by the National Assembly from the nominating list, which is arranged, by the State Council and on which there are nominated twice as many candidates as there are vacant places. The president and onehalf of the members of the supreme control must be jurists. Other members must have been ministers of finance or they must have ten years of executive financial service. The president and members of the supreme control enjoy the same right of being irremovable as the members of State Council. Detailed regulations as to construction and competent procedure of the supreme control will be enacted by separate law. In what cases, against the decision of the supreme control, a complaint to the Supreme Court will have a place will be decided by law. The supreme control inspects, corrects, and liquidates accounts of general administration and of all those obliged to render accounts to the state treasury. It sees that no expenditures are made in excess of the budget and that no part of the budget is transferred from one section of the budget to the other. It closes the accounts of all state administrations and is obliged to collect all necessary evidence and information. Final state accounts are submitted to the National Assembly for approval with remarks of the supreme controller, and that, at the latest, within one year, counting from the end of each fiscal year.
SECTION XI THE ARMY

Art. 119. Military service is general as prescribed by law. The organization and strength of the army and navy are also

prescribed by law. The formation of units is ordered by the King at the suggestion of the minister of war and the navy. The size of the standing army shall be determined each year at the time of making the budget. Art. 120. Military courts are independent. • In the execution of justice they are under no other authority, but their judgments shall be according to law. Judges of the military court of appeals are appointed for life. The tenure of office of judges of the first-instance military courts will be prescribed by law. Judges of the first-instance military courts cannot be impeached for their judicial acts without the sanction of the mili-	 tary court of appeals, nor judges of the appellate court without the consent of the Supreme Court. Judges of the military court of appeals may be transferred only at their own request or if elevated to a higher office and judges of the first-instance military courts according to law. The findings of the military courts are to be reviewed by the Supreme Court as the court of last resort. Art. 121. Law violations committed by citizens and soldiers together will be tried before civil tribunals, except in time of war, when they will be tried by military courts. Art. 122. No one over 20 years of age shall be eligible to appointment under the government or remain in the same unless he has complied with the rules of the military authorities as to military service performed or has been exempted from such service by the same authorities. Art. 123. The army can be employed for the preserving of law and order in local affairs only upon the request of local authorities. Art. 124. Aliens shall not be recruited as soldiers of the nation, nor can the army of the nation be placed in the service of any other nation without having previously obtained the sanction of the National Assembly.
SECTION XII AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION

•

Art. 125. Amendments to the constitution shall be made by the National Assembly with the consent of the King. Art. 126. Motions to amend or alter the constitution shall be made by the King and the National Assembly. When such a motion to amend or alter the constitution is made, all such amend-

ments or changes must be presented in writing. If the motion to amend is made by the King it will be communicated to the National Assembly and the National Assembly will then adjourn and a new one will be called at the latest within four months. If such a motion is introduced by the National Assembly it shall be enacted in the manner contemplated for the solution of statutory laws by a three-fifths majority vote of the entire membership. When such a motion is passed the National Assembly will be dissolved and a new one shall be called within four months of the passage of such motion. In either event the National Assembly can only discuss the amendments or changes in the constitution as per original call. The vote of the National Assembly shall be based on a majority of one-half, plus one, of the total number of its membership. Art. 127. In the event of war or general mobilization, the National Assembly may for the whole of the national territory, or in the case of armed insurrection for the insurgent district, enact temporary emergency laws abrogating the following rights of citizens: The right of assembly, free speech, liberty of movement, immunity of domicile, correspondence, and telegraphic communication. In the same manner the freedom of the press may be abridged in case of armed insurrection in the district so affected.
SECTION XIII GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS

Art. 128. At the first meeting of the National Assembly after the proclamation of the constitution the heir to the throne, Alexander, as the representative of King Peter I, as per Article 58 of the constitution, will take the following oath: "In the name of his majesty King Peter I, I swear before the Almighty God that I will uphold the constitution without any mental reservations, that I will rule by it and by the laws, that I will safeguard the liberties of the people, the independence of the state and the entity of the national authorities, and that in all my actions and deeds I will have before me the , welfare of the people. So help me God. Amen." Art. 129. After this each of the national representatives in meeting assembled and before the speaker of the house will take the following oath: "I [name] swear before the Almighty God and all that is

under the law most sacred to me and in this world the most precious that I will in the discharge of my legislative duties have the welfare of the nation before me as the paramount issue and will fulfill my duties that the welfare of the king and people and the sovereignty of the nation may be executed to the best of my knowledge and belief." Art. 130. Temporary laws, rules, regulations, and findings of the Council of Ministers and all other acts and decisions of a definite duration which are of a statutory nature are in force from Dec. 1, 1918, until the day of the proclamation of this constitution; said laws will be in force until they are amended or repealed. Within thirty days from the promulgation of the constitution it will be the duty of the Government to give to the legislative body for examination all such provisional laws, rules, regulations, statutes, and decisions. The committee, divided into sections according to the branch of the national administration, after passing upon them, will pass in committee of the whole on which of said laws shall remain in force without change, which are to be amended, and which repealed. The unreported temporary laws, rules, regulations, and decisions of the Council of Ministers and all other acts and laws of a temporary legal nature are hereby repealed. The findings of the committee will be proclaimed as law. Those upon which the committee does not report will remain in full force until such time as they are changed in the regular legislative manner. All temporary laws, rules, statutes, and decisions which are of a legal nature of the Ministerial Council with reference to the agrarian problem of the nation, the national banks of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, and the liquidation of the moratorium, liquidation of the legal status created by the war, and the reparation for damages caused by the war, rules pertaining to the loan and the simplifying of the judiciary, can only be changed in a legislative manner. Art. 131. Until such time as the constitution goes into effect the administration of the Ministry, of the National Council, of the supreme control, of the rules of order in the National Council and of the ministerial responsibilities, the laws now existing in the Kingdom of Serbia are hereby extended to the rest of the country, with such amendments and additions as will be enacted in the manner as prescribed in Article 133. Art. 132. In accordance with Article 57 of this constitution, until the new statutes are in force the ones enacted by order of

the King on Aug. 30, 1909, and published in the "Serbian Press" Feb. 26, 1911, will be in effect. Art. 133. For the equalization and administration of the laws in the land a shorter method is the following: All legal motions which have as their basis the coordination of laws and administration will be introduced either by the Government or by individual representatives to the legislative committee through its chairman. The report of the legislative committee relative to the motion which the committee has adopted is sent to the National Assembly for final action. Of these legal motions the Assembly votes the bill in its entirety with a roll-call vote and first reading before the full house, whether they are passed or rejected. Before voting is in order, one representative from each parliamentary group may address the house upon the motion with a limited speech. Such a shorter method for the uniformity of legislation and administration in the nation may be for five years from the time that this constitution goes into effect, but such time may be extended legally. During the sitting of the Constituent Assembly as a legislative body the constitutional committee will fulfill the duties of the legislative committee. Art. 134. After the constitution goes into effect the present provisional authorities will remain as such temporarily, each with a provisional governor named by the King on the recommendation of the minister of the interior. The provisional governor will administer the province through and with the chiefs of the department and under the immediate supervision of the minister of the interior and as the agent of competent ministers, and upon the basis of the existing laws and regulations. Laws enacted after this constitution goes into effect shall not give the provisional administration new duties. In the gradual transfer of the affairs of the administration of the provinces to the several ministries and authorities as per rules issued in Article 135, the Council of Ministers after due representation from the provisional governor will decide. As long as the provisional administration is in force the bureaus of the several ministries in the provinces are bound to confer and learn the views of the province's representatives as to their bills which are of a general character or that have any bearing on civil service employees before the ministerial decision. The parties have the right to be heard before the National Council relative to administrative contentions, which are decided by the temporary provisional

administration as the first and last. For this duty the National Council will prepare whatever is necessary. Administrative contention may exist only between a private individual or a person of the legal calling on the one side and the administrative authorities on the other; and it exists then where through an order or decision of the administrative authorities the rights of the private individual or of the individual of the legal calling are interfered with in contravention of law. However, the issue will not arise in cases where the law has provided that the provincial or district authorities shall proceed, consider, or decide the case. Art. 135. The government law relating to the division of the land into provinces and the regulation of provinces as per Articles 95 and 96, as well as the transfer of the present provincial sovereignty to the ministry and provincial administrations as per Article 134, shall be brought by the government before the National Assembly for passage. If the National Assembly does not pass these laws within three months they will be brought up according to Article 133 for the uniformity of the code and administration of the land, and if even after this shorter method these laws are not enacted within two months, then the Crown will issue an order whereby the land shall be divided within one month, together with the apportionments on the provincial administration as per Articles 95 and 96 of the constitution. This order may be changed only by legislative action. If the division of the land is not accomplished either according to the first or second part of this Article, but according to the third, then there shall be established in Croatia and Slovenia four administrative authorities. If a division of the land is to be carried out according to the resolutions of this Article then Montenegro, within the frontiers of 1913, with the Bokokotorski district, but without the districts of Plevlja and Belopolje, shall be considered as one department and will be administered by the provincial authorities as per this constitution. With the law of the division of authority Bosnia and Herzegovina will be divided in authority in their present borders. Until the passage of such a law the counties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be considered as the de facto authority. The amalgamation of these authorities will be accomplished by the decision of the provincial assemblies of the said provinces and carried by a majority of two-thirds votes, according to the provision in the third section of Article 95 of the constitution. Each municipality or district may secede from its present allegiance and join a different municipal

authority in the present borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina or outside of them if that is accepted by their self-governing representatives by a vote of three-fifths, and if such a decision is authorized by the National Assembly. The counties will remain as units of the national administration until such time as they are abolished by law; their authority will be regulated by law. The self-governing districts will terminate their administration in the interest of the provincial and county districts as soon as the organization of the departments is completed. Art. 136. Until the new law affecting the employees (government officials), as per Article 106 of the constitution, the laws now in effect shall be the law governing their duties and rights. The new law shall embody the temporary orders with the object of revision and coordination of the personnel of the administrative officials and must be brought up for action not later than two years after the passage of the constitution, by which time the revision and coordination of the government officials must be completed. Art. 137. The president of tribunals (chief justices) and all other judges whose appointment under the constitution or the statutes is of a permanent nature shall not be removed, but they will retain their positions and fulfill their duties in the judiciary as heretofore. In the other parts of the nation, except what was originally Serbia proper, the tenure of office of individual judges may be terminated within one year from the enactment of this constitution. In that time the minister of justice will form the commissions of the higher tribunals of these districts and together they will decide which of the judges are to be considered as not coming under the provision of the law excluding them from the permanent tenure of office. The necessary filling of the places thus made vacant by chief justices and other judges will be done according to the statutes now existing. Judges who were or will be appointed under the provision of the statutes for temporary appointment to official positions during the war, or under any other law or ordinance, are directed within one and one-half years from the enactment of this constitution to take the examination for judges. Those who fail to do so in the prescribed time will by such failure forfeit their' positions. The Supreme Court of Beograd (Belgrade), the court of seven in Zagreb, the high court of Sarajevo, the high court of Podgoriza and the branch of the Supreme Court of Novi Sad will function as heretofore until the formation of the

Supreme Court for the whole nation. In the interim they will be considered as branches of the Supreme Court. Art. 138. The publication and distribution of newspapers and printed matter may be prohibited which advocate hatred toward the government as a whole, religious or class hatred, and also when they appeal to the citizenry to resort to violence having for its object the overthrow of the constitution or the laws of the land by force, if from the contents it is plainly implied that the intent is to bring about such overthrow by citizenry. Section 13, Article 3, of the law as to the enforcement of the prohibition is valid in this instance. When the necessity for these measures ceases to exist these laws may be repealed in the legal way. Art. 139. Until such time as a law is enacted relative to privileges (grants or concessions) as to Article 117 of the constitution, all such privileges (grants or concessions) until the time of the enactment of the constitution shall be revised in the manner as provided in Article 133 of the constitution. The privilege for the clearing of the national forests shall be revised in so far as the price (or tax) shall have retroactive value from Dec. 1, 1918. Art. 140. When this constitution becomes effective the Constituent Assembly, elected on the 28th day of November, 1920, automatically (ipso facto) becomes the regular legislative assembly, with a definite time for its sittings as provided in the election laws for the Constituent Assembly. Art. 141. Until such time as a new code is enacted relative • to the election of national representatives the law under which the election of November, 1920, was held shall be held valid, with the changes which shall be brought in harmony with the constitution. These changes will be brought in the manner as contemplated in Article 133 of this constitution and will become valid when they receive the King's sanction. The committee may make the necessary changes in terms which the law contemplates, and besides that it is empowered to prescribe the manner in which the division of the mandates shall be made on each list of candidates according to the number of voters.
SECTION XIV FINAL RULES

Art. 142. This constitution with the orders becomes a law when it is countersigned by the King, and it gets its binding

strength when it is published in the "official organs." From that day all other laws or regulations which are contrary to it are hereby revoked. For the execution of this constitution the President and all the ministers of the Ministerial Council shall be responsible. We recommend to the ministers that this constitution be given publicity and to see that it is carried out. To the authorities, then, we command that they shall govern according to it and to all and everybody to obey it. (Signed) ALEXANDER. June 28, 1921, in Beograd (Belgrade).

