CONSTITUTIONS

of
NATIONS
SECOND EDITION

The first compilation in the English language of the texts of the constitutions of the various nations of the world, together with summaries, annotations, bibliographies, and comparative tables

VOLUME III NICARAGUA to YUGOSLAVIA

by

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Formerly Ambassador of the United States of America to Australia, Secretary General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the San Francisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author of INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS THEIR CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS (Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague; and Justice House, New York, 1956), A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams,1942), UNITED NATIONS GOVERNMENT (Putnams, 1945), and co-author of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

Copyright 1956 by Martinus Nijhoff , The Hague, Netherlands All rights reserved, including the right to translate or to reproduce this book or parts thereof in any form

PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS

FUNDAMENTAL LAW PERTAINING TO THE BASES OF THE SOCIAL AND POLITICAL ORGANIZATION OF THE FEDERAL PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA AND OF THE FEDERAL ORGANS OF STATE AUTHORITY
January 13, 1953 I. FEDERAL PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA
Art. 1. The Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia is a socialist democratic federal state of sovereign peoples equal in rights. Art. 2. All power in the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia belongs to the working people. The working people exercise their power and manage social affairs through their representatives in the People's Committees and People's Assemblies, in Workers' Councils and in other self-governing bodies, as well as directly through election, recall, referendum, meetings of voters,

councils of citizens, participation of citizens in administration and justice, and through other forms of self-government. Art. 3. The People's Committees are the basic organs of state authority of the working people and the highest organs of state authority in the municipality, town and district. Only those rights which are designated in the Federal Constitution belong to the Federation, and only those rights which are designated in the Republic Constitutions belong to the governments of the respective People's Republics. Art. 4. Social ownership of the means of production, self-government by the !producers in the economy and self-government by the working people in the municipality, town and district constitute the basis of the social and political organization of the country. Self-government by the working people in the fields of education, culture and social services is guaranteed. Self-government by the producers and by the working people is exercised in conformity with general social interests which are expressed in law and in other decisions of the representative bodies of the working people—the People's Assemblies and the People's Committees. Art. 5. The following are guaranteed : Free association of the working people for the purpose of realizing democratic political, economic, social, scientific, cultural, artistic, professional, athletic and other common interests; Personal freedom and the other basic rights of the man and of citizen; The right to work. Art. 6. Self-government by the producers in the economy consists particularly in: The right of the working collectives to manage their economic units directly and through Worker's Councils, assemblies of agricultural cooperatives and other representative bodies which they themselves elect and recall; The right of the producers to be elected to the representative bodies of the economic units: The right of the economic unit to fix independently its economic plans; the right of the economic unit upon the fulfilling of its obligations to the social community to dispose independently of the income of the unit, and in this the economic unit is guaranteed a minimum provided for by the law; the right of the economic unit to fix within the limits of its income the earnings of its workers, and in this the workers in economic enterprises are guaranteed by law minimum earnings from the resources of the social community; The right of the producers to determine, through their representatives in the Councils of Producers, the amount of material funds to be set aside for meeting social requirements and to decide on the utilization of these funds. The producers exercise the rights of self-government on the basis of the Constitution and the laws and within the framework of the economic plans.

The working collectives acquire their self-governing rights by the very act of founding of an economic unit. Art. 7. Self-government of the working people in the municipality, town and district consists particularly in: The right of the citizens to elect and recall their representatives in the People's Committee of the municipality, in the district and town councils of the People's Committee of the district and town, as well as the right of the producers to elect and recall their representatives in the Council of Producers of the People's Committee of the district and town; The right of citizens and producers to be elected to the People's Committees; The right of citizens to participate directly in the exercise of state authority by means of referendums, meetings of voters, councils of citizens, participation of citizens in administration and justice and other forms of self-government. The right of the People's Committee to govern independently the affairs of general interest to the community in the field of economic, communal, social and cultural life and development of the municipality, town and district, relying upon the economic units the various institutions and associations and the initiative of citizens. The right of the People's Committee to dispose freely, in conformity with the Federal and Republic economic plan, of the portion of income of the economic units which the economic units set aside for the municipality, town and district; the right of the People's Committee to a percentage designated by law, of taxes, and the right to introduce local surtaxes and local contribution; the right of the People's Committee to independently draw up and approve its economic plan and budget; The rights designated by law of the People's Committee with regard to the economic units on its territory; the right of the People's Committee to to supervise the management of social property; as well as the right of the municipality and town to manage all land and buildings which are social property to the extent that this right does not belong to other government organs, to economic units, to various institutions and communities; The right of the People's Committee to elect and remove from office the judges of the district and circuit courts; The right of the People's Committee to form and to elect its own organs and to appoint employees of the committee; The right of the People's Committee to prescribe by statute its own internal organization and conduct of affairs; The right of the People's Committee to maintain peace and order in the territory of the municipality, town or district. The People's Committee shall exercise state authority on the basis and within the framework of the Constitution and the laws. Art. 8. The organs of state authority of the Republics have with respect to the People's Committees rights designated by law. The state organs of the Republics have the right to supervise the legality of the work of the People's Committees. In the economic plan of the respective Republics only those law-desig-

nated financial means are set aside for the respective People's Republic which are to be used for the performance of functions within the sphere of competence of the People's Republic, for aid to towns and districts, and for aid to the various institutions and economic units of general interest for the entire republic. Only by law can the Federal or Republic administrative organs be established in municipality, town, or district to perform functions within ,the Federal or Republic competence in the municipality, town, or district. Art. 9. The Federal government has the following rights and duties. Protects the independence and territorial integrity of the federal state; organizes the armed forces and defense of the country; protects the social and political order; Protects the unity and equality of rights of the peoples of Yugoslavia; Maintains and regulates international relations; Ensures the essential unity of the socialist social order and legal system; Ensures the essential unity of the economic system and the planned development of the national economy as a whole; Ensures self-government by the producers in the economy and selfgovernment by the working people in the municipality, town and district and in the various institutions; Ensures the freedoms and democratic rights of citizens and their equality of rights regardless of nationality, race and religion; Ensures lawfulness, uniform application of federal laws and the essential unity of the judicial system. The rights and duties of the Federation are exercised by the federal organs of state authority according to their respective spheres of competence as laid down by the Constitution. The federal laws are directly executed by the People's Committees or the respective republican organs of state authority. The federal organs directly execute the federal laws and perform other executive functions only within the framework of the exclusive rights and duties of the Federation as laid down by the Constitution, as well as when executive functions are placed within the sphere of competence of the Federal Government by law in conformity with the rights and duties of the Federation. Art. 10. The territory of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia is composed of the territories of the several People's Republics and constitutes a single state, economic and customs territory. The marketing of merchandise is free throughout the country and may not be restricted by any act of the organs of state authority of the Republics or by an act of a People's Committee. Administrative and judicial acts and documents of the state organs of one People's Republic have equal validity in the remaining Republics. Art. 11. Federal laws and other acts of federal state organs are applied on the entire territory of the Federal state. In case of disagreement between a federal law and the law of a People's Republic, the federal law applies directly. The People's Republic, however, may initiate proceedings for determining the conformity of the federal

law and the law of the respective Republic with the Federal Constitution. Art. 12. For the citizens of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia there exists a uniform Federal citizenship. Every citizen of a People's Republic is simultaneously a citizen of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia. The citizen of a People's Republic enjoys in every other People's Republic the same rights enjoyed by the citizens of that Republic. II. FEDERAL ORGANS OF STATE AUTHORITY A.
FEDERAL PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY 1. RIGHTS OF THE ASSEMBLY

Art. 13. The Federal People's Assembly is the representative of the sovereignty of the people and is the highest organ of authority of the federal government. The Federal People's Assembly exercises its rights and duties on the basis of and within the framework of the Constitution. Art. 14. The Federal People's Assembly exercises the rights of the Federation directly and through the President of the Republic and the Federal Executive Council as its executive organs. Designated executive affairs are conducted by federal organs of administration according to the directives of and under the supervision of the Federal Executive Council. The rights of the Federation in the field of justice are exercised by the Federal Supreme Court and other federal courts on the basis of federal laws. Art. 15. Within the sphere of exclusive competence of the Federal People's Assembly are : 1. amendment of the Constitution; 2. election and removal from office of the President of the Republic ; 3. election and removal from office of the members of the Federal Executive Council; 4. election and removal from office of the judges of the Federal Supreme Court; 5. Federal Legislation:
(a) executive legislation : on personal liberties and other basic rights of the man and citizen ; on federal citizenship, on the personal status of citizens ; on social security; the civil code ; on copyrights ; on patents, trade marks, samples and models ; on the introduction of social contributions and taxes ; on customs ; on currency, the credit system, banks, and financial operations ; on foreign exchange ; on public loans ; on bills of exchange, checks and other media of payment ; maritime Code ; on insurance ; on weights and measures ; on standards ; the penal Code ; on judicial and general administrative procedure ; on administrative disputes ; on the execution of penalties and security measures ; on the organization of the courts of arbitration ; on public prosecution ; on the legal profession ; on disabled war veterans ; on questions of national defense, foreign relations and other questions within the sphere of exclusive competence of the Federation ; on election and recall of People's Deputies for the Federal People's Assembly ; (b) basic legislation : on planned management of the national economy; on economic units; on communications, and roads and properties in public

use ; on budgets, social contribution, taxes and other dues ; on utilization of natural wealth and power; on labor ; on associations, meetings and agreements ; on family, marriage and guardianship ; on measures of general interest to the entire country for the reduction of contagious diseases and for the protection of public health and the life of the citizen ; on employees of the state administration ; on the office of the public solicitor; on the infractions of the law. (c) general legislation : in the field of, the organization of authority, education and culture, public health and social policy, as well as in other fields which are of general interest for all the People's Republics ;

6) approval of the federal economic plan and the federal budget; approval of the balance sheet on the execution of the federal economic plan and approval of the federal final account; 7) decision on the course of foreign policy, economic policy and on other basic questions and measures of internal policy within the framework of the rights of the Federal Government; 8) proclamation of the state of war and conclusion of peace; ratification of international agreements on political or military cooperation and the ratification of international agreements which require the introduction of new laws or changes in the existing laws; 9) approval of changes of frontier lines between the several People's Republics which the Republics concerned propose by mutual agreement, and decision on disputes in connection with territorial changes; 10) evaluation of the compatibility of Republic Constitutions as well as of Republic and Federal law, with the Federal Constitution; 11) granting of amnesty for criminal acts specified by federal law. The Assembly issues declarations and resolutions concerning questions from the sphere of competence of the Federal government and concerning other questions of general interest to the Federal state. The Assembly makes recommendations for the work of state organs, of self-governing institutions and of economic units. Art. 16. In the field of exclusive federal legislation, the People's Republics may introduce laws only in the case that and to the extent to which they are specifically authorized to do so under the federal law. In a field in which a basic federal law has been introduced, the People's Republic may introduce its complementary laws. A general law lays down the principles for the related legislation of the People's Republic and may be directly applied only if there exists no law of the People's Republic in the corresponding field. The People's Republic shall introduce its own laws in conformity with the principles of the general law. In all other fields the People's Republic introduces its own laws independently. The People's Republics may independently introduce their own laws in the fields of basic federal and general legislation if corresponding federal law has not been introduced. With the introduction of the corresponding basic federal law those provisions of law of the People's Republic relating to questions regulated by the basic law cease to be valid. A proposal for evaluation of the conformity of republican and federal laws with the Federal Constitution may be made to the federal People's

Assembly by the Federal Executive Council, by the Federal Supreme Court, by the People's Assembly of the People's Republic and its executive council, by the representative body of the autonomous province and autonomous region, by the People's Committee of the district or town, as well as by the interested economic units and self-governing institutions. Art. 17. The Federal Social Plan ensures the development of the national economy as a whole and regulates the basic distribution of national revenue of the FPRY. The Federal Economic Plan sets aside for the Federal Government only those financial means which are specified by law and which serve for the conduct of affairs within the sphere of competence of the Federal Government, for ensuring the normal development of the economy and for the provision of aid to the insufficiently developed regions of the country. The Federal Budget fixes and provides for the distribution of the financial means for the conduct of affairs within the sphere of competence of the Federal Government and for the work of its organs and institutions. Art. 18. The Federal People's Assembly may decide that a draft law, before or after its adoption, or any other question from the sphere of competence of the Federal Government be brought before the electoral body for decision (referendum). A referendum may be proposed by one fifth of the members of one House, the Council of Nationalities, or the Federal Executive Council. The decision of the electoral body is binding. During a period of two years after the completion of the referendum no law nor other act contrary to the decision of the electorate may be passed. A special law shall be introduced concerning the referendum. Art. 19. Federal laws are introduced and published in the languages of all the People's Republics. The laws are published in the Official Gazette and take effect on the eighth day after publication unless the laws themselves shall otherwise provide. Art. 20. The laws may not be retroactive unless this is explicitly provided by the law. A law establishing penalties may be retroactive only in case it provides a milder penalty for the violator, than would otherwise be the case. Art. 21. The Federal People's Assembly is elected for a term of four years. The Assembly may, in case of war or other emergencies, prolong its mandate for the duration of the situation concerned. The Assembly may decide upon its own dissolution before the expiration of the period for which it has been elected. Art. 22. The elections for the Federal People's Assembly must be called before the expiration of the last day of the period for which the Assembly is elected. If the mandate of the Assembly has been extended, the elections must be called as soon as the circumstances owing to which the mandate has been extended, cease to prevail. Not less than two and not more than three months may elapse between

the date of dissolution of the Federal People's Assembly and the date of elections. Art. 23. A proposal to amend the Constitution may be submitted by not less than twenty members of the House, the Council of Nationalities, as well as by the Federal Executive Council. The Assembly previously decides in each Council by a majority of votes whether a proposal to amend the Constitution will be considered. An amendment of the Constitution is adopted if three fifths of the members of each Council vote in favor of it. 2.
ORGANIZATION OF THE FEDERAL PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY

a) Houses of the Assembly Art. 24. The Federal People's Assembly is composed of two Houses: The Federal Council and the Council of Producers. Art. 25. The Federal Council is composed of Deputies elected by the citizens in districts and towns on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage, and of People's Deputies elected from among their members by the respective Republic Councils of the Assemblies of the several republics and by the province council and the region council of the respective assemblies of the Autonomous Province and Autonomous Region. The Council of Producers is composed of People's Deputies elected by the producers engaged in production, transport and commerce in proportion to the participation of the respective economic sectors in the total social product of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia. Art. 26. The citizens in districts and towns elect deputies to the Federal Council according to the norm: one deputy to every 60,000 inhabitants. Art. 27. The Republican Council of each People's Republic elects ten deputies, the province council of the Autonomous Province six, and the region council of the Autonomous Region four deputies. If during the period for which the Federal People's Assembly is elected there takes place a new election of the representative body of a People's Republic or of the Autonomous Province or Autonomous Region, the newly elected representative body shall hold a- new election to elect deputies to the Federal Council. Art. 28. The deputies for the Council of Producers are elected, as representatives of their economic units, by the workers and employees of economic enterprises and by members of agricultural cooperatives, as well as by craftsmen and handicraft workers acting through craftsmen's guilds. To the Council of Producers is elected that number of deputies which corresponds to the norm: one deputy to every 70,000 of producers population. Art. 29. The deputies to the Council of Producers are elected by industrial, agricultural and handicraft producers in such a manner that each deputy is elected in his own producer group. The industrial group includes workers and office employees engaged in industry, mining, forestry, construction, transport, commerce, hotels and restaurants industry and communal activities.

The agricultural group includes members of agricultural cooperatives and workers and office employees of agricultural enterprises. The handicraft group includes working men and women employed in trades. The producers enjoying general suffrage have the right of electing deputies to the Council of Producers. In every producer group that number of deputies is elected to the Council of Producers which is in proportion to the participation of the group concerned in the total social product of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia as specified by the current Federal Economic Plan. Within the framework of each producing population the deputies shall be elected according to the norm: one deputy to constant number of producing population. Art. 30. In districts and towns every citizen enjoying the right of general suffrage may be elected to the Federal Council. — Every producer enjoying general suffrage and belonging to a producer group from which deputies are elected may be elected to the Council of Producers. The right to be elected to the Council of Producers belongs also to those producers who are elected to the organs of trade union organizations. A deputy who ceases to be a producer or leaves the producer group in which he has been elected loses his mandate. Art. 31. The People's Deputies elected in the district and town are entitled to the rights of committeemen of the district or city council of the People's Committee of the district or city in whose territory they are elected. The People's Deputies elected to the Council of Producers are entitled to the rights of committeemen of the Councils of Producers of the People's Committee of the district or town in whose territory they are elected. Art. 32. The voters have the right to recall their People's Deputy. Art. 33. Election and recall of the People's Deputies is effected by secret ballot. Art. 34. The Federal Council and the Council of Producers participate with equal rights : 1. In the amendment of the Constitution; 2. In the approval of the federal economic plan and the federal budget; in the approval of the final balance sheet of the execution of the federal economic plan and in the approval of the final account of the execution of the federal budget; 3. In the introduction of exclusively federal legislation on currency, the credit system, banks and financial operations; on social security; the civil code; on patents, trade marks, samples and models; on the introduction of social contributions and taxes; on customs; on foreign exchange; on bills of exchange, checks and other media of payment; on insurance; on standards; on election and recall of People's Deputies; 4. In the introduction of basic laws: on planned management of national economy; on economic units; on communications; on budgets; on social contributions, taxes and other dues; on exploitation of natural wealth and power; on labour.

5. In the ratification of international treaties pertaining to economy, labour and social security; 6. In the rendering of decisions pertaining to conformity of the Constitutions of the People's Republics with the Federal Constitution, as well as to conformity of republican and federal laws with the Federal Constitution, if both Houses have participated in the passing of the federal laws in question; 7. In the calling of referendums pertaining to questions from the sectors of economy and social security; 8. In the deciding on prolongation of the mandate of the Assembly in the determination as to whether the circumstances due to which the mandate had been extended have ceased, as well as in the deciding on the dissolution of the Assembly; 9. In the fixing of the remuneration of People's Deputies, of the president, vice-presidents and secretary of the Federal People's Assembly and of the President of the Republic and members of the Federal Executive Council; 10. In issuing declarations and resolutions pertaining to questions from the fields of economy, work and social security. Art. 35. The Federal Council and the Council of Producers hold separate sessions. A bill may be submitted to either House if both Houses are entitled to participate with equal rights in passing a corresponding law. The two Houses may decide to debate in a joint session particular bills or other questions in the solution of which both Houses participate. The voting on bills, however, shall be effected at separate sessions of the two Houses. Art. 36. The Federal People's Assembly performs the following functions in joint sessions of both Houses:
(1) Elects and removes from office the President of the Republic; (2) Elects and removes from office members of the Federal Executive Council ; (3) Elects and removes from office the President, Vice-Presidents and Secretary of the Federal People's Assembly ; (4) Elects and removes from office the judges of the Federal Supreme Court; (5) Elects and removes from office the members of committees and commissions of the Assembly; (6) Proclaims amendments of the Constitution.

Art. 37. All the matters of business from the sphere of competence of the Federal People's Assembly in the deciding of which both Houses do not participate with equal rights or jointly, or on which the Council of Producers does not decide alone, are conducted by the Federal Council alone. The members of the Council of Producers have the right to propose amendments to laws on which the Federal Council alone decides, as well as to submit proposals for amending the existing laws which the Federal Council alone has introduced. Art. 38. A bill or another act in the enactment of which both Houses

participate with equal rights is regarded as adopted if the same text is adopted by both Houses. Each House has the right to propose amendments to a bill or another act which has already been passed by the other House. The draft thus amended is returned for approval to the House in which it originated. Should the two Houses disagree on the text of the bill, they shall appoint a joint commission composed of an equal number of members of both Houses for the purpose of reaching agreement. Should the commission fail to reach an agreement by the majority of representatives of each House, or should the Houses not approve the text proposed by the commission, the discussion of the question in dispute shall be postponed for seven days. After the expiration of this period, the question on which agreement has not been reached shall be discussed again in the sessions of the Houses and if after two consecutive debates agreement is not reached, the Federal People's Assembly shall be dissolved and elections called for a new Assembly. Art. 39. Disputes between the two Houses with respect to spheres of competence shall be settled by the Federal People's Assembly at a joint session of both Houses. Art. 40. The Council of Producers may make recommendations to economic units for their work and to government organs and self-governing institutions in problems for the fields of economy, work and social insurance. The Council of Producers may, within the framework of rights fixed by law, render decisions with respect to the work of economic units, government organs and self-governing institutions. Art. 41. Each House determines itself on the verification of the mandates of its members. Art. 42. Either of the two Houses may decide on its dissolution before the expiration of the period for which the Assembly has been elected. A House so deciding, however, must remain on duty until a new House is elected. The newly elected House is dissolved when the period for which the Assembly has been elected expires. Art. 43. Each House determines its own procedure and both Houses jointly determine the procedure for joint sessions. b) Special Rights of People's Deputies elected by the representative bodies of the several People's Republics, the Autonomous Province and the Autonomous Region. Art. 44. The Federal Council operates as a single House, but its members elected by the representative bodies of the several People's Republics, the Autonomous Province and Region have special rights fixed by this Law. Art. 45. The members of the Federal Councils elected by the representative bodies of the several People's Republics, the Autonomous Province and Region render decisions separately, as the Council of Nationalities, when on the agenda of the Federal Council are included proposals concerning constitutional changes or the federal economic plan.

Art. 46. The Council of Nationalities also renders decisions separately when on the agenda of the Federal Council is included a bill or other proposed act which concerns the Constitution designating relations between the several People's Republics and the Federation, if this separate consideration is proposed by a majority of the Deputies elected by the representative body of one People's Republic. The Council of Nationalities preliminarily deliberates and determines whether it will render a separate decision. Art. 47. If the text of a bill or other act adopted by the Federal Council does not agree with the text adopted in the Council of Nationalities, the Deputies constituting the Council of Nationalities shall meet separately and again discuss the questions in dispute, after which the questions shall also be discussed in session of the Federal Council. If agreement is not then reached with respect to the texts, a commission shall be formed consisting of an equal number of People's Deputies whom the Federal Council elects from deputies who are not members of the Council of Nationalities, and of People's Deputies by the Council of Nationalities from among its own members. In case the Council of Nationalities, adheres to the text which differs from the text adopted in the Federal Council further discussion of the bill or other proposed act shall be set aside and the question in dispute may not be placed on the agenda of the Assembly before the expiration of one year from the time of the setting aside of discussion. In case the Council of Nationalities does not agree with the Federal Council on the terms of the federal economic plan, discussion of the plan shall be postponed for two months. In case agreement is not reached during this period the Federal Council shall be dissolved. Until the Federal Council is elected, the economic plan adopted by the Council of Producers shall be applied. Art. 48. The Council of Nationalities meets separately in order to render an opinion on the need for passing a general federal law before a bill for the federal law is placed on the agenda of the Federal People's Assembly. In case the Council of Nationalities does not agree that there exists a need for introducing a particular general federal law, the corresponding bill may not be placed on the agenda of the Assembly. 49. The rules of procedure of the Federal Council contain also Art. provisions pertaining to the work of the Council of Nationalities. These provisions become valid when adopted by the Council of Nationalities at a separate session. c) The President of the Assembly and Presidents of Councils Art. 50. The Federal People's Assembly elects from its membership the President of the Assembly, two or more Vice-Presidents and one Secretary. The President, Vice-Presidents and the Secretary are elected for the period for which the Assembly is elected, but they remain on duty after

the dissolution of the Assembly until the new President, Vice -P r esidents, and the Secretary are elected. The President of the Assembly represents the Assembly, signs with the President of the Republic decrees pertaining to the promulgation of laws, presides over joint sessions of both Houses, sees to the application of the rules of procedure and the execution of the decisions of the Assembly and its Councils. The Vice-Presidents of the Assembly act as deputies of the President when the latter is prevented from exercising his presidential duties. The President or the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly when presiding over a session may not participate in the discussion nor vote. The Secretary of the Assembly is concerned with the administrative service of the Assembly. From their respective memberships, the Federal Council and Council of Producers each elect for the period of one year a President, Vice-President and three recording Secretaries. From its members the Council of Nationalities elects for each of its sessions a President, his deputy and a recording Secretary. The President of the Council presides over the sessions of the Council and sees to the application of the rules of procedure. The President or the Vice-President of the Council, when presiding over a session may not participate on the discussion nor vote. 3. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PEOPLE'S DEPUTIES Art. 52. Each Deputy has the right to submit to the House of which he is a member bills and proposals for decisions, recommendations, declararations, and resolutions. The Deputies have the right at a joint session of both Houses to submit proposals for decisions, recommendations, declarations, and resolutions for the passing of which the Federal People's Assembly is competent. Deputies who are not members of committees have the right to participate without the right of decision in the work of every committee of the House of which they are members. Art. 53. Each Deputy has the right to put questions to the Federal Executive Council, to which questions the Federal Executive Council replies in the sessions of the House or at joint sessions of both Houses, or in writing. The Deputy who has put the question has the right to propose to the House or to the Assembly the opening of discussion on the question he has raised. Every Deputy has the right to request, through the House of which he is a member, information from a State Secretary. The State Secretary is obliged to give the requested information in writing, unless the House or the Assembly decides that the State Secretary should reply in person at the session of the House or Assembly. Art. 54. Members of the Federal Council elected in the district or town are obliged to inform the voters concerning their work and the work of the Federal Council and Assembly, either directly or through the district

or town council of the People's Committee, in which they have the rights of committeemen. Members of the Federal Council elected by the representative bodies of the several People's Republics the Autonomous Province and the Autonomous Region are obliged to report on their work and the work of the Federal Council and Assembly to the representative body which has elected them. The district or town council of the People's Committee in which the People's Deputy has the rights of a committeeman, has the right to request the People's Deputy to inform the Federal Council or the Assembly concerning its proposal or opinion if the proposal or opinion questions if it is within the sphere of competence of the Federal Council or Assembly. The People's Deputy is duty-bound to present such a proposal or opinion. Art. 55. Members of the Federal Council of Producers are obliged to report to their constitutents on their work and the work of the Council of Producers and the Federal Assembly directly or through the Local Council of Producers in which they have the rights of committeemen. The Council of Producers in which the People's Deputy has the rights of a committeeman may request the Deputy to inform the Federal Council of Producers or the Federal Assembly concerning its proposal or opinion if the proposal or opinion concerns questions within the sphere of competence of the Federal 'Council of Producers or Assembly. The People's Deputy is duty-bound to present such a proposal or opinion. Art. 56. The members of the Federal Council are entitled to a permanent monthly salary. The members of the Council of Producers perform their duties gratuitously and are entitled to compensation for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as Deputies, as well as to compensation for losses of earnings incurred while performing these duties. Art. 57. A People's Deputy may not be made responsible, arrested nor punished because of his opinions expressed or vote cast in the Assembly. A Deputy may not be arrested nor can criminal proceedings be initiated against him without the approval of the House of which he is a member except in case of involvement in a criminal act for the perpetration of which is provided a penalty of imprisonment for a period over five years or a heavier sentence. In such a case, the state organ which arrested the Deputy or initiated criminal proceedings against him is obliged to inform at once the President of the Federal People's Assembly who then places the question to the corresponding House for the purpose of decision as to whether the proceedings will be continued or whether the arrest will remain in force. When the House is not, in session, approval for arrest and for initiation or continuation of criminal proceedings against a Deputy is given by the mandate-immunity committee of the corresponding House subject to the subsequent approval by the House. Art. 58. The People's Deputy may not be at the same time either an employee in the state administration or a judge.

4.

SESSIONS

Art. 59. The Federal People's Assembly is in permanent session during the period for which it has been elected (term of office) and performs its work in separate sessions of the Councils in joint sessions of both Houses, in permanent and other committees and commissions. The newly elected Assembly meets at the latest on the thirtieth day after the elections. Art. 60. The sessions of individual Councils are convoked by the President of the Federal People's Assembly on the basis of a decision of the Council itself, or on the proposal of the President of the Council, of a committee, of one fifth of the members of the Council, of the Federal Executive Council, or on his personal initiative or when provided for by this Law. A joint session of both Houses is convoked by the President of the Federal People's Assembly on the basis of a decision of the Assembly, or on the proposal of one House, of a committee, of the Federal Executive Council, or on his personal initiative, or when provided for by this Law. If the President of the Assembly does not convoke the session or does not convoke it when convocation is provided for or proposed, the Assembly or its Council will meet at the request of twenty Deputies or at the request of the Federal Executive Council. Art. 61. The Councils of the Assembly render valid decisions by a majority of votes in sessions at which the respective majorities of their memberships are present. The Federal People's Assembly at joint sessions of both Houses render valid decisions by a majority of votes. For the rendering of decisions it is necessary that the respective majorities of members of the two Houses be present. A decision pertaining to conformity of the Constitution of a People's Republic, as well as of republic and federal laws with the Federal Constitution is adopted if the majority of all members of the Federal Council or, in the appropriate case, of both Houses, have voted for it. 5.
COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS

Art. 62. The Federal Council and the Council of Producers have respectively, as permanent committees, a legislative committee and mandateimmunity committee. Each House may also form permanent committees for other questions from its sphere of competence, as well as committees of inquiry and other committees and commissions for the performance of special tasks. The Federal People's Assembly has a permanent commission for the interpretation of laws. According to need, committees and commissions of the Federal People's Assembly may be formed. The Council of Nationalities may form committees for the questions which it discusses. Art. 63. The members of the Federal Executive Council may not be

members of committees or commissions nor may they be elected to other positions of permanent duty in the House or Assembly. The President of the Assembly may not be a member of a committee or commission. Art. 64. The committees study bills, discuss questions raised by committee members and all other questions from the sphere of competence of the House, and submit their reports and proposals to the House. Every bill before being submitted to the House for discussion must be discussed in the corresponding committees of the House, unless the House decides that the bill should be discussed according to urgent procedure. Every member of a committee has the right to propose that there shall be placed on the agenda of the committee, or to raise during the discussion in the committee, within the framework of the sphere of competence of the committee, all questions relating to the application of the law, to the work of state organs, self-governing institutions and economic units, or to propose for discussion and to raise other questions of general interest or of interest to the electoral unit in which the particular committee member has been elected. A Deputy who is not a member of a committee has the right to raise before a committee of the House of which he a is member questions from the sphere of competence of the committee. The committee decides whether the questions should be placed on its agenda. Art. 65. The committee may adopt resolutions and make, within the framework of their respective sphere of competence, recommendations concerning the work of state organs, self-governing institutions and economic units. Art. 66. The committees may request the Federal Executive Council to reply to questions and to give them information concerning its work. Members of the Federal Executive Council may attend sessions of the committees and participate in discussion, but without the right of decision. The Federal Executive Council may propose that individual questions be placed on the agenda of committee sessions and that committee sessions be called in order to present the position of the Federal Executive Council on the questions concerned. The committee may discuss these questions, pass resolutions and make recommendations. The committees may invite State Secretaries, undersecretaries, directors, and other officials and experts to answer questions and to offer information and explanations orally or in writing. The committees may invite a People's Deputy to inform them about the situation in electoral unit or in the economic units which have elected him. Art. 67. The committees may conduct inquiries and interrogation, and for this purpose request that all state organs, self-governing institutions and economic units submit necessary data and documents. Art. 68. Every committee works according to the rules of procedure adopted by the committee and confirmed by the Council or in the appropriate case by the Federal People's Assembly. Every committee has a chairman and secretary, who are elected by the committee.

The committees of one House and the committees of both Houses may, according to need, hold joint sessions. Art. 69. The commission for the interpreting of laws has the right to issue binding interpretations of federal laws. A request for interpretation of a law may be submitted : by a People's Deputy, by a committee of a House, by the Federal Executive Council, by the Federal Supreme Court and by the executive council of a People's Republic. The commission submits binding interpretations to the competent House for subsequent confirmation. The commission studies the proposals submitted to the Assembly for determining the conformity of Federal and Republic laws with the Federal Constitution, and gives its opinion in a report to the Houses. The commission for the interpreting of laws has nine members elected from the People's Deputies by Assembly at a joint session of both Houses. The commission for interpreting laws remains on duty after the dissolution of the Assembly, until a new commission is elected. B. EXECUTIVE ORGANS OF THE FEDERAL PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY The Federal People's Assembly entrusts the President of the Republic and the Federal Executive Council with the representation of Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia as a State, the conduct of law enforcement, supervision over the work of the federal administration and other executive affairs within the sphere of competence of the Federal government.
1. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

Art. 71. The President of the Republic : 1) Represents the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia within the country and in international relations; 2) Proclaims laws by decree; 3) Issues documents pertaining to the ratification of international treaties and other agreements; 4) Appoints and recalls by decree Ambassadors and Ministers plenipotentiary of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia; 5) Receives credentials and letters of recall of foreign diplomatic representatives accredited to him; 6) Awards by decree distinctions and honorary titles. Art. 72. The President of the Republic is the President of the Federal Executive Council. The President of the Republic has the right to withhold the execution of an act of the Federal Executive Council with which he does not agree, with the obligation to bring the question in dispute before the Federal People's Assembly at once for decision. In this case the President of the Assembly is obliged to convoke a session of the Assembly at once. Art. 73. The President of the Republic is the Supreme Commander of the armed forces.

The President of the Republic appoints, promotes and dismisses generals and admirals, as well as other officers, and military chiefs designated by law. The President of the Republic presides over the Council for National Defence. The Council for National Defence concerns itself with the organization and mobilization of the resources and strength of the country for the needs of national defense. The members of the Council for National Defence are appointed by the Federal Executive Council at the proposal of the President of the Republic. The Federal Executive Council prescribes by regulation the organization and powers of the Council for National Defense. Art. 74. The President of the Republic is elected from among the members of the Federal People's Assembly. The newly elected Assembly elects the President of the Republic at the first joint session of both Houses. A Candidate for President of the Republic may be nominated by twenty People's Deputies. The President of the Republic is elected by secret ballot. The candidate receiving the majority of votes of the total number of all People's Deputies is regarded as the elected President of the Republic. Immediately after his election, the President of the Republic takes the oath of office before the Federal People's Assembly at a joint session of both Houses. Art. 75. The President of the Republic exercises his duties on the basis and within the framework of the Constitution and laws. Art. 76. The President of the Republic is responsible for his work to the Federal People's Assembly. The President of the Republic submits a report on the work of the Federal Executive Council to the Federal People's Assembly and is responsible together with the other members of the Federal Executive Council for the work of that Council. Art. 77. The President of the Republic is elected for the period for which the Federal People's Assembly is elected, but the Assembly may remove him from office before the expiration of this term. The President of the Republic remains on duty after the dissolution of the Federal People's Assembly, until the election of a new President of the Republic. Art. 78. The President of the Republic does not participate in voting in the Federal People's Assembly. In case of absence or prolonged illness of the President of the Republic his duties shall be assumed by one of the Vice-Presidents of the Federal Executive Council whom the Council designates. 2.
THE FEDERAL EXECUTIVE COUNCIL

Art. 79. The Federal Executive Council: 1) Concerns itself with the execution of federal laws, of the federal economic plan, of the federal budget, and of other acts of the Federal

People's Assembly, and issues acts and undertakes measures for their execution; undertakes measures for the conduct of affairs within the sphere of exclusive competence of the Federal government; exercises general supervision over the application of the Federal laws; 2) Approves the proposed federal economic plan and federal budget and submits them to the Assembly; drafts and submits bills; 3) Issues directives for the work of the federal organs of administration; 4) Proclaims general mobilization and state of war in case of an armed attack against the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia or in case of need for immediate fulfillment of international obligations; proclaims a general state of emergency in case of danger of war; issues regulations having the power of law on measures necessary during a state of emergency, mobilization or war; 5) Ratifies international treaties and other international agreements whose ratification is not effected by the Assembly; 6) Prescribes the organization of federal organs of administration and takes measures for the improvement of their administrative work; invalidates and annuls the acts of Federal organs of administration if they are contrary to the law and regulations of the Federal Executive Council; 7) Establishes enterprises and self-governing institutions of interest to the entire country, prescribes the sphere of activity and basic organizational structure of the self-governing institutions which it establishes; establishes, within the sphere of competence of the Federal Government general principles for the organization and conduct of affairs of state organs of administration and self-governing institutions; 8) Disposes of the resources funds; 9) Appoints and dismisses State Secretaries and Under-Secretaries, the Governor of the National Bank of FPRY, the Federal Prosecuting Attorney, the Federal Solicitor and other higher officers designated by law; 10) Proclaims the dissolution of the Assembly and Federal Council in cases of disagreement between the Houses or Councils; calls elections for the Federal People's Assembly; concerns itself with the publication of federal laws and other regulations; 11) Grants pardon in accordance with a separate law; 12) Concerns itself with the essential uniformity of judicial administration, and with the fulfillment of functions in connection with international legal assistance; 13) Performs other functions designated by federal laws. The Federal Executive Council may present any question from its sphere of competence to the Federal People's Assembly and propose that it be discussed and decided upon. Art. 80. The Federal Executive Council performs its functions on the basis of and within the framework of the Federal Constitution and laws. Art. 81. For the execution of laws the Federal Executive Council 	 may issue regulations, and for the performance of other functions from its sphere of its competence it may issue decisions and instructions. The Federal Executive Council may issue regulations for the execution of a general law only if authorized by the law concerned to do so.

,

The Federal Executive Council issues a regulation to its organization and operation which it submits to the Assembly for approval. Regulations are signed by the President of the Republic. Art. 82. To the Federal Executive Council are elected from 30 to 45 People's Deputies from the membership of the Federal Council. The newly elected Federal People's Assembly elects the Federal Executive Council at the first joint session of both Houses. Candidates for members of the Federal Executive Council may be nominated by twenty People's Deputies. Each of the People's Republics must be represented in the Federal Executive Council. The Presidents of the Executive Council of the People's Republics are ex officio members of the Federal Executive Council. Art. 83. The Federal Executive Council has two or more Vice-Presidents. The Federal Executive Council elects the Vice-Presidents from its members and also removes them from office. Art. 84. The Federal Executive Council is responsible for its work to the Federal People's Assembly. The Federal Executive Council is elected for the period for which the Federal People's Assembly is elected, but the Assembly may remove from office the whole Council or individual Council members before the expiration of this term. The Federal Executive Council remains on duty after the dissolution of the Federal People's Assembly until the election of a new Council. Art. 85. The Federal Executive Council is obliged to report to the Federal People's Assembly about its work. The Assembly may at any time request that the Federal Executive Council submit a report on its work or on individual questions within its sphere of competence. The Assembly discusses the report of the Federal Executive Council and on the basis of this discussion may pass resolutions and make recommendations. If, during the discussion, the Assembly establishes that some act of the Federal Executive Council is not in conformity with the law, it may invalidate the said act. The Assembly may exercise these rights in a joint session of both Houses or in the session of only one House if the problems in question fall within the exclusive sphere of competence of that House. Art. 86. The Federal Council decides all matters from its sphere of competence at its sessions. The Federal Executive Council reaches decisions by a majority of votes. Art. 87. The Federal Executive Council may, from the ranks of its members, form committees and commissions for the purpose of studying individual questions and drafting bills, regulations and other acts of the Federal Executive Council, as well as for the purpose of making decisions in particular matters within its sphere of competence. Art. 88. The Federal Executive Council elects a Secretary from its members.

The Secretary is concerned with the administration of the Federal Executive Council and performs other functions as authorized by the Council. Art. 89. The Federal Executive Council may withhold from execution regulations or other acts of the Executive Council of a People's Republic if they are contradictory to federal law or regulations. The Executive Council of a People's Republic may bring the question in dispute before the Federal People's Assembly for decision in case it does not agree with the decision of the Federal Executive Council. The Federal Executive Council may request the Executive Council of a People's Republic to invalidate or annul an act of the state organs of a Republic administration if the act is contrary to federal regulation. C. FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION Art. 90. State Secretariats, independent administrations, administrative institutions and other independent organs of administration are formed for the direct performance of designated executive functions within the sphere of competence of the Federal government. Federal organs of administration execute directly the laws and other acts of the Federal People's Assembly, and the regulations and other acts of the Federal Executive Council when their execution is placed within the sphere of competence of the Federal Government. Direct execution may be placed within the sphere of competence of federal organs of administration, by a general federal law only when this is of general interest to all People's Republics. In direct execution of laws the Federal organs of administration issue administrative acts, undertake administrative operations and issue acts for which they are authorized. Art. 91. The Federal organs of administration perform functions within their respective spheres of competence on the basis of and within the framework of laws and the regulations of the Federal Executive Council and in conformity with the directives of the Federal Executive Council. The Federal organs of administration conduct these affairs independently within the framework of the respective authorizations granted to them. Art. 92. The State Secretariats are established for the conduct of affairs of one or more branches of administration from the sphere of competence of the Federal Government. The Federal State Secretariats are: the State Secretariat for Foreign Affairs, the State Secretariat for National Defense, the State Secretariat for Internal Affairs, the State Secretariat for the National Economy, and the State Secretariat for the Budget and State Administration. The State Secretariat shall be established, merged and abolished by law. Art. 93. Independent administrations, administrative institutions and other independent organs of state administration are established for the performance of designated administrative functions from the sphere of competence of the Federal Government. Indepedent administrations, administrative institutions and other

independent Federal organs of administration are established by regulation of the Federal Executive Council. Art. 94. State Secretariats are headed by State Secretaries who independently exercise the authority granted to State Secretariats by the law and by the act of the Federal Executive Council. The State Secretary for Foreign Affairs and the. State Secretary for National Defence are appointed by the Federal Executive Council from among their members. The State Secretaries are responsible for their work to the Federal Executive Council. The State Secretaries take the oath of office before the President of the Republic. The text of the oath is fixed by the Federal Executive Council. Art. 95. A State Secretary is authorized to issue rules, orders and instructions for the implementation of regulations and other acts of the Federal Executive Council. The State Secretary may issue rules, orders and instructions for the execution of laws only on the basis of special legal authorization. The State Secretaries may by law or regulation be obliged to submit determinative rules and orders to the Federal Executive Council for preliminary approval. It is the right and duty of the State Secretary within the frame work of the sphere of competence of the State Secretariat, to call the attention of the Federal Executive Council to acts of republic organs of administration which are contrary to federal law and other acts and to recommend that the Federal Executive Council take appropriate measures for which the Council is authorized. The State Secretary has the right, within the framework of his sphere of competence, to annul or invalidate unlawful acts of the corresponding republic organs of administration issued in the execution of functions from the sphere of competence of the Federal Government which execution has been transferred to republic organs by federal law or regulation. Art. 96. Directors and other officials may be appointed to head the various independent administrations, administrative institutions and other federal organs of administration. These officers independently exercise the authority granted to the respective organs of administration. The Federal Executive Council may transfer to these higher officers special authorizations granted to State Secretaries only if it is authorized to do so by law. One or more Under-Secretaries may be appointed in a State Secretariat. The State Secretary may transfer some of his authorization to the UnderSecretary with the consent of the Federal Executive Council . The higher officers in State Secretariats and in other state organs may be authorized by law and by acts of the Federal Executive Council to render decisions on designated matters. Art. 97. The Federal Executive Council is obliged to submit for approval to the competent committees of the Houses the drafts of its acts on the establishment of organizational changes in the organs of state admin-

istration which involve expenditures not provided for by the federal budget or which must be covered from budget reserves. Art. 98. According to the provisions of a special law a suit can be filed with the courts against- acts of State Secretariats and other independent organs of state administration. A complaint may be lodged with the Federal Executive Council against acts of State Secretariats and other independent federal organs of administration when these acts are completed on the primary administrative level in matters in which an administrative dispute is excluded, unless it is provided by law or by regulation that the complaint be lodged with some other government organ. Art. 99. The employees of federal organs of administration are responsible for any damage caused to the State by their unlawful work. The State is responsible for any damage caused to citizens or legal persons by the unlawful work of government employees. The State has the right to compensation from those government employees who have caused such damage by their unlawful work. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs are valid also with respect to the responsibility of the President of the Republic and the members of the Federal Executive Council. III. PRINCIPLES PERTAINING TO THE ORGANS OF STATE AUTHORITY OF THE REPUBLICS Art. 100. The People's Assemblies of the Republics are the representatives of the people's sovereignty and the highest organs of state authority of the People's Republics. Art. 101. The rights of a People's Republic are exercised by the Republic People's Assembly directly and through the Executive Council as its executive organ. Designated executive affairs are conducted by the republic organs of administration according to the directives and under the supervision of the Executive Council. Art. 102. The Republic People's Assembly exercises its rights and duties on the basis and within the framework of the Federal Constitution, the Republic Constitution and federal laws. Art. 103. The Republic People's Assembly is elected for a period of four years. Art. 104. The Republic People's Assembly is composed of two Houses: the Republic Council and the Council of Producers. The Republic Council is composed of Deputies elected by the citizens in districts and towns on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. The Council of Producers is composed of Deputies elected by the producers engaged in production, transport and commerce in proportion to the participation of the respective economic sectors in the total social product of the People's Republic. Art. 105. The Republic Council and the Council of Producers participate with equal rights in the amending of the Republican Constitution, in the approving of the republic economic plan and budget, as well as in

passing laws and other acts in the fields of economy, labor and social security. The elections of the Executive Council and of the other state organs are conducted at a joint session of both Houses. Art. 106. The representation of the People's Republic, the conduct of law enforcement, the supervision of the work of the republic administration, the supervision of the People's Committee from the standpoint of legality of work, and other executive affairs from the sphere of competence of the People's Republic are entrusted by the People's Assembly to the Executive Council. Art. 107. The Executive Council performs the functions from its sphere of competence on the basis and within the framework of the Federal and Republican Constitutions, Federal and Republic laws and Federal regulations. The Executive Council is composed of 15 to 30 People's Deputies elected by the People's Assembly from the members of the Republic Council. Art. 108. The Executive Council is headed by the President of the Council. The President of the Executive Council represents the Council, presides over its sessions, and signs the Council's regulations. The President of the Executive Council has the right to withhold from execution acts of the Executive Council with which he does not agree, with the obligation to bring the question in dispute before the Assembly of the People's Republic at once for decision. Art. 109. The Executive Council is responsible for its work to the People's Assembly of the Republic. The Executive Council is authorized to issue regulations for the execution of Republic laws, as well as decisions and instructions for the performance of other functions designated by the Republican Constitution and Federal and Republic laws. The Executive Council may issue acts for the execution of Federal laws and Federal regulations only if authorized to do so by a Federal law or regulation. Art. 110. For the direct conduct of designated executive affairs from the sphere of competence of the People's Republic, Republic State Secretariats and other Republican organs of administration are organized, as well as Councils in which representatives of self-governing institutions, social organizations, and citizens participate. The Republic organs of administration are responsible for their work to the Executive Council. Art. 111. The Republic organs of administration conduct the affairs from their sphere of competence on the basis and within the framework of Federal and Republic laws, acts of the Federal Executive Council and Executive Council of the People's Republic, as well as acts of Federal organs of administration issued within the sphere of competence of the Federation. The Republic organs of administration execute directly the Republic laws and acts of the Executive Council of the People's Republic when their execution is placed by the Republic Constitution or law within the

competency of Republic organs of administration. The Republic organs of administration execute directly the Federal laws and acts of the Federal Executive Council and Federal organs of administration when their execution is placed by Federal law or regulation within the sphere of competence of the Republic organs of administration. The People's Committees execute directly Federal and Republic laws and other acts with the exception of those acts the execution of which is placed within the sphere of competence of Federal and Republican organs of administration. Art. 112. The People's Republic independently enacts its Fundamental Law in conformity with the principles of this Law. IV. PRINCIPLES PERTAINING TO ORGANS OF STATE AUTHORITY OF THE AUTONOMOUS PROVINCE AND AUTONOMOUS REGION Art. 113. The Autonomous Province of Vojvodina and the Autonomous Region of Kosovo-Metohija are ensured the rights of autonomy. The rights of autonomy of the Autonomous Province and the Autonomous Region are laid down by the Constitution of the People's Republic of Serbia. The Province People's Assembly is the highest organ of state authority of the Autonomous Province. The Region People's Committee is the highest organ of state authority of the Autonomous Region. The Province People's Assembly is composed of the Province Council and the Council of Producers, while the Region People's Committee is composed of the Region Council and the Council of Producers. Art. 114. The basic principles of the organization and sphere of competence of the organs of state authority of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina and the Autonomous Region of Kosovo-Metohija are laid down by the Fundamental Law of the People's Republic of Serbia in conformity with the principles of this Law. The Autonomous Province and the Autonomous Region enact independently their Statutes by which, in conformity with the Constitution of the People's Republic of Serbia, they lay down the organization and sphere of competence of their respective organs of state authority. Concluding Provisions Art. 115. On the day this Law becomes effective the following shall cease to be valid: Chapters VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII and XV of the Constitution of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia of January 31, 1946, as well as the provisions of the Constitution, laws and other acts which are contrary to the provisions of this Law. This Law shall enter into force on the day of its proclamation in joint session of both Houses of the People's Assembly of FPRY. Its implementation shall be conducted according to the provisions of a separate law.

