We, the representatives of the people of the Argentine Nation, assembled in constitutional convention by the will and election of the Provinces of which it is composed, in pursuance of previous agreements, for the purpose of framing a Constitution for the National Union, to establish justice, insure domestic peace, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the benefits of liberty to ourselves, our posterity, and to all men in the world who may desire to inhabit the Argentine soil, invoking the protection of God, the source and origin of all reason and justice, do hereby ordain, decree, and establish this Constitution for the Argentine Nation. 
Part I 
<title> Declarations, Rights, and Guaranties 
Article 1. The Argentine Nation adopts for its government the Federal republican representative form, as established by this Constitution. 
Article 2. The Federal Government supports the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church. 
Article 3. The authorities exercising the Federal Government shall reside in the city which shall be declared by special act of Congress to be the capital of the Republic, a proper cession of the territory which shall become federal; being previously made by one or more of the provincial legislatures. 
Article 4. The Federal Government shall defray the expenses of the Nation with funds of the national treasury, consisting of: 
<list>
A. Receipts from import and export duties; duties to be levied until 1866 on the exports of domestic merchandise as provided in paragraph No. 1 of article 67 of the present Constitution; 
B. Proceeds of the sale or lease of national lands; yieldings of the postal service; taxes levied by the general Congress equitably and in proportion to the population; and moneys obtained through loans and financial operations decreed by Congress for urgent national necessities, or for works of national utility. 
</list>
Article 5. Each Province shall have its own constitution providing for the administration of justice in its own territory, its municipal regime, and primary instruction, said constitution to be framed upon the basis of a republican representative system of government, and in harmony with the principles, declarations, and guaranties of the National Constitution. Upon these conditions, the Federal Government guarantees to each Province the exercise and enjoyment of its own institutions. 
Article 6. The Federal Government shall have the right to intervene for the preservation in the territory of the Provinces of the republican form of government or for repelling foreign invasion; and, when requested by the provincial authorities, for maintaining them in power, or reestablishing them if deposed by sedition or by invasion from another Province. 
Article 7. Full credit shall be given in each Province to the public acts and judicial records of all the others; and Congress shall, have the power to provide by general laws how said acts and records shall be proved, and what legal effects they shall produce. 
Article 8. The citizens of each Province shall enjoy in all the others the rights, privileges, and immunities inherent to citizenship. The extradition of criminals is reciprocally obligatory in all the Provinces. 
Article 9. All custom-houses in the Argentine territory shall be national, and governed by the tariff laws enacted by Congress.
Article 10. The circulation in the interior of the Republic of articles which are the product or manufacture of the Nation, and of goods and merchandise of all classes introduced into the country through the national customhouses, shall be free from duties. 
Article 11. Articles of national or foreign production or manufacture, and cattle of all kinds, when passing from the territory of one Province into the territory of another shall be exempted from transit duties. The same freedom shall be enjoyed by the carriages, ships, or beasts used for their transportation, and no other duty, whatever its name may be, shall be levied upon said articles and vehicles for the mere fact of their transit through the territory. 
Article 12. Vessels bound from one Province to another shall not be compelled to enter, cast anchor and pay duties on account of transit, and in no case shall any preference be given by law or commercial regulations to one port over another. 
Article 13. New Provinces may be admitted into the Nation, but no new Province shall be erected within the territory of another, nor shall two or more Provinces be consolidated into one, without the consent of the legislatures of the interested Provinces and of Congress. 
Article 14. All the inhabitants of the Nation shall enjoy, subject to the laws regulating their exercise, the right to work and engage in lawful industry; the right to navigate and engage in commerce; the right to petition the authorities; the right to enter the Argentine territory, remain in it, travel through it, or leave it; the right to publish their own ideas through the press without previous censorship; the right to use and dispose of their own property; the right to associate themselves for useful purposes; the right to freely profess their religion, and the right to teach and to learn. 
Article 15. There shall be no slaves in the Argentine Nation. Those few now existing in it shall become free at the very moment in which this Constitution shall be sworn to. The indemnifications which may have to be paid in consequence of this declaration shall be regulated by special law. Contracts involving the purchase or sale of persons are criminal acts, for which the contracting parties; as well as the notary or official before whom they are executed, be made responsible. Slaves introduced in any way whatever into the country shall become free by the mere fact of their treading upon the territory of the Republic. 
Article 16. The Argentine Nation does not recognize prerogatives of blood or birth, personal privileges, or titles of nobility. All its inhabitants are equal before the law, and their eligibility to office shall depend exclusively upon their fitness. Equality is the basis of taxation and of all public burdens. 
Article 17. Private property is inviolable, and no inhabitant of the Nation shall be deprived of it except by judicial decision founded on law. Condemnation of property for public use shall be regulated by law, and the payment of the indemnification shall be previously made. Congress alone shall have the power to impose the taxes referred to in article 4. No personal service shall be required of anyone, except when ordered by law or by judicial decision founded on law. Authors or inventors are the exclusive owners of their works, inventions, or discoveries, for the length of time established by law. Confiscation of property is forever stricken out of the Argentine penal code. No armed body can make requisitions or demand assistance of any kind. 
Article 18. No inhabitant of the Nation can be punished except upon trial and conviction, under laws anterior in date to the offense; neither shall he be tried by special commissions, or removed from the jurisdiction of the courts, which, under the laws in force at the time in which the offense was committed, should take cognizance of his case. No one shall be compelled to testify against himself; neither can anyone be arrested except by an order in writing of the proper authority. The defense of persons and rights before the courts is inviolable. Domicile as well as private correspondence and papers are inviolable; but a law shall determine in which cases and upon which evidence the former can be entered, and the latter seized. The penalty of death for political offenses, torture of all kinds, and whipping are abolished. The national jails shall be healthy and clean, intended for the safekeeping and not for the punishment of the prisoners, and any measure which, under color of precaution, inflicts upon the prisoners more hardships than those required for their security shall cause the court authorizing it to be held responsible. 
Article 19. Private actions which in no way offend public order or morals, or are not injurious to a third party, are reserved to God alone, and exempted from all action of the constituted authority. No inhabitant of the Nation shall be bound to do what is not ordered by law, nor shall he be forbidden to do what it does not prohibit. 
Article 20. Aliens shall enjoy in the territory of the Nation the same civil rights as are vested in the citizens; they shall be allowed to engage in industrial, commercial, and professional occupations; to own, hold, and sell real estate; to navigate the rivers and travel along the coasts to practice freely their religion; to dispose of their property by will, and to contract marriage according to the laws. They are not bound to become citizens or to pay forced extraordinary taxes. They may obtain naturalization by residing two consecutive years in the Republic, but this period of time can be shortened upon application and proof that the applicant has rendered services to the Republic. 
Article 21. Every Argentine citizen is bound to do military service in defense of his country and of the present Constitution, in the manner and form which may be provided by laws of Congress or decrees of the National Executive. Citizens by naturalization are free to render or refuse military service during the ten years following the day of their naturalization. 
Article 22. The people do not deliberate, or exercise the powers of government, except through their representatives and the authorities created by this Constitution. Any armed force or gathering of persons assuming to be vested with the representation of the rights of the people and petitioning in their behalf shall be guilty of sedition.
Article 23. In case of domestic disturbance or foreign attack, endangering the observance of this Constitution and the safety of the authorities created by it, a state of siege shall be proclaimed in the Province or territory wherein public order is disturbed, and the constitutional guaranties shall be suspended within its limits. But during this suspension the President of the Republic shall have no power by himself to condemn any one or inflict punishments. His power shall be limited in such cases, so far as the persons engaged in the affair are concerned, to cause them to be arrested or removed to some other section of the country, should they not prefer to leave the Argentine territory. 
Article 24. Congress shall promote the reform of the laws which are now in force, and the establishment of trials by jury. 
Article 25. The Federal Government shall encourage European immigration, and shall not restrict, limit, or obstruct, by taxation of any kind, the entrance into the Argentine territory of foreigners coming to it for the purpose of engaging in the cultivation of the soil, the improvement of industrial business, or the introduction and teaching of arts and sciences. 
Article 26. Navigation on the rivers in the interior of the Republic is free to all flags and subject to no other regulations than those proclaimed by the national authority. 
Article 27. The Federal Government shall be bound to strengthen, by means of treaties consistent with the principles of public law established by this Constitution, the commercial and peaceful relations of the Argentine Nation with all foreign countries. 
Article 28. No principle, guaranty, or right recognized in the foregoing articles shall be altered by any law which may be enacted to regulate their exercise. 
Article 29. Neither Congress, nor the provincial legislatures, shall ever have the power to grant to the national Executive or to any provincial governor, extraordinary faculties, or the whole of the public authority, or give them faculty to accept submission or supremacy through which the lives, the honor, or the property of Argentines may be placed at the mercy of governments, or of any person whatsoever. Acts of this character shall be utterly void, and render their authors, or those who consent to them or authorize them with their signatures, liable to be tried and punished as infamous traitors to their country. 
Article 30. The Constitution can be amended either wholly or in part. The necessity for such amendment shall be declared by Congress, by a vote of at least two-thirds of its members; but the amendment itself shall not be made except by a convention called to meet for that purpose. 
Article 31. The present Constitution, the national laws which in pursuance thereof may be enacted by Congress, and the treaties with foreign Powers are the supreme law of the Nation; and the provincial authorities shall be bound to abide by them, any provision in their own provincial constitution or laws to the contrary notwithstanding. This rule is not applicable to the province of Buenos Ayres, in so far as the treaties ratified after the compact of the 11th of November, 1859, are concerned. 
Article 32. The Federal Congress shall not pass any law restricting the liberty of the press, or subjecting it to Federal jurisdiction. 
Article 33. The declarations and statements of rights and guaranties made by the present Constitution shall not be construed as involving the denial of any other rights and guaranties not enumerated, but naturally derived from the principles of the sovereignty of the people and of the republican form of government. 
Article 34. The justices and judges of the Federal courts shall not serve at the same time in the same capacity in the provincial courts. The tenure of a Federal position in any branch of the service, whether civil or military, shall not confer upon the official who holds it, the rights of residence in the Province wherein it is held, unless it is his habitual abode, this provision being made to prevent federal officers from soliciting positions, in the Province in which they accidentally find themselves. 
Article 35. The names of "The United Provinces of the River Plate," "The Argentine Republic," "The Argentine Confederation," adopted in succession ever since 1810, shall be allowed in the future to be used indistinctively for the official designation of the government and the territory of the Provinces; but the name of "The Argentine Nation" shall be used in the enactment and approval of the laws.
 
Part II 
<title> Authorities of the Nation 
Title I 
<title> The Federal Government 

Section I 
<title> The Legislative Power 
Article 36. The legislative power of the Nation is vested in a Congress consisting of two chambers, one called the Chamber of Deputies of the Nation, and the other the Chamber of Senators of the Provinces and of the capital. 

Chapter I 
<title> The Chamber of Deputies 
Article 37. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of representatives elected directly by the people of the Provinces and of the capital. Both the Provinces and the capital shall be considered for this purpose as mere electoral districts of the whole Nation. The election shall be by plurality of votes in the proportion of one deputy for each twenty thousand inhabitants or fraction of this number not less than ten thousand. 
Article 38. The deputies for the First Congress shall be elected in the following proportion: For the Province of Buenos Ayres, twelve; for the Province of Cordoba, six; for the Province of Catamarca, three; for the Province of Corrientes, four; for the Province of EntreRios, two; for the Province of Jujuy, two; for the Province of Mendoza, three; for the Province of Rioja, two; for the Province of Salta, three; for the Province of Santiago, four; for the Province of San Juan, two; for the Province of Santa Fe, two; for the Province of San Luis, two; for the Province of Tucuman, three. 
Article 39. A general census shall be taken before the meeting of the Second Congress, and the election of deputies shall then be made according to its results. The census shall not be taken more than once in every ten years. 
Article 40. No person can be elected a deputy who is not over twenty-five years of age, a citizen for four years, and either a native or a resident for the two preceding years, of the Province electing him. 
Article 41. The measures to secure the election of deputies by direct vote of the people of each Province shall be taken this time by the provincial legislatures. In the future, the whole matter shall be regulated by Federal law, enacted by the Congress. 
Article 42. The deputies shall be elected to serve for four years, and are reeligible. The Chamber, however, shall be renewed by halves every two years, and for this purpose the deputies elected to the First Congress shall draw lots as soon as they meet, and determine in this way those who shall leave at the end of the first period. 
Article 43. In case of vacancy, the governor of the Province or of the capital shall order an election to fill it. 
Article 44. The initiative of laws relating to taxes and recruiting of troops shall exclusively belong to the Chamber of Deputies. 
Article 45. The Chamber of Deputies alone has the right to impeach before the Senate the President, the vice-president, the members of the cabinet, the justices of the supreme court, and the judges of other national tribunals, for malfeasance in the exercise of their functions, or for crimes and misdemeanors whether official or common; the impeachment to be made upon proper investigation, and a resolution to that effect passed by a vote of two-thirds of the deputies present. 
Chapter II 
<title> The Senate 
Article 46. The Senate shall consist of two senators for each Province elected by a plurality of votes by the respective legislatures. There shall be also two senators for the capital, who shall be elected in the same way as the President of the Nation. Each senator shall have one vote. 
Article 47. No person shall be elected senator who does not possess the following qualifications: to be at least thirty years old, to have been a citizen of the Nation for six years, to have an annual income of two thousand dollars, and to be either a native of the Province which elects him or have resided in it the two next preceding years. 
Article 48. Senators shall serve for nine years, and are reeligible indefinitely. But the Senate shall be renewed by thirds every three years. To this effect the senators themselves shall decide by lot those who shall leave at the expiration of the first and second periods of three years. 
Article 49. The vice-president of the Nation shall be president of the Senate; but he shall have no vote unless the chamber be equally divided. 
Article 50. The Senate shall elect a President pro tempore to replace the vice-president in case of absence, or when the latter is called to act President of the Republic. 
Article 51. The Senate shall have the sole power to try in public the officials impeached by the Chamber of Deputies, and senators, when sitting for that purpose, shall take the proper oath. When the impeached official is the President of the Nation, the chief justice of the supreme court shall preside over the Senate. No person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present. 
Article 52. Sentences in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than removal from office, or even disqualification from holding any office of honor, trust, or profit under the Nation; but the convicted official shall nevertheless be subject to indictment, trial, and punishment according to law, in and by the ordinary courts. 
Article 53. It is also incumbent upon the Senate to authorize the President of the Nation to declare, in case of foreign aggression, one or more points in the national territory in state of siege. 
Article 54. When the seat of a senator becomes vacant on account of death, resignation, or any other reason, the executive authority shall immediately order an election to fill the vacancy. 
Chapter III 
<title> Provisions Relating to Both Chambers 
Article 55. Both Chambers shall meet in ordinary session on the first day of May of each year and shall continue their sessions until the thirtieth of September. They may also be convened in extraordinary session or adjourned by the President of the Nation. 
Article 56. Each Chamber shall be the judge of the elections, rights, and titles of its own members, in so far as the question of their validity is concerned. Neither Chamber shall meet to do business without a quorum consisting of an absolute majority of its members; but a smaller number shall have the power to compel, by such means and under such penalties as each Chamber may establish, the attendance of absent members. 
Article 57. Both Chambers shall sit simultaneously. Neither shall have the power, during the session of the Congress, to adjourn, without the consent of the other, for more than three days.
Article 58. Each Chamber may determine the rules of its proceedings, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds of its members, punish any one of the same for disorderly behavior in the discharge of his functions, remove him for physical or moral inability subsequent to his admission, or expel him from the body. An absolute majority shall be sufficient to act upon the resignation of a member voluntarily made. 
Article 59. Senators and deputies, on taking their seats, shall be sworn to perform their duties in the proper way and to, act in all things in accordance with the present Constitution. 
Article 60. No member of Congress shall be indicted, judicially questioned, or molested for opinions expressed or speeches delivered, by him while fulfilling his duties as a legislator. 
Article 61. Senators and Deputies shall be, from the day of their election to the day of the expiration of their term, exempted from arrest, except, when caught in the act of perpetrating a crime or offense punishable by death, or any other penalty entailing bodily, suffering or disgrace, in which case the matter shall be reported to the Chamber to which the member belongs, with a full statement of all the facts. 
Article 62. Should any charge be made in writing, before the ordinary tribunals, against a Senator or Deputy, the Chamber to which he belongs may, by a two-thirds vote, and upon examination in public of the merits of the case, suspend him from his legislative functions and surrender him for trial to the proper court. 
Article 63. Each Chamber shall have power to summon to its presence the members of the cabinet, in order that they may give orally the information which may be deemed necessary. 
Article 64. No member of Congress shall receive from the Executive any appointment to offices of honor, trust, or profit without first obtaining the consent of the Chamber to which he belongs. This a
Article 65. No member of the religious orders shall be elected to Congress. Nor shall any Provincial governor represent his Province. 
Article 66. The remuneration of the services of Senators and Deputies shall be fixed by law and paid out of the funds of the national treasury. 
Chapter IV 
<title> Powers of Congress 
Article 67. The National Congress shall have power: 
<list>
1. To legislate in regard to custom-houses and foreign commerce, and establish import duties, which, as well as the rates of appraisement on which they must be based, shall be uniform in the whole Nation; it being understood, however, that these duties and all other taxes of national character may be paid in the currency of the respective Provinces in their just equivalent value. And, to establish likewise export duties up to 1866, at which time they shall cease to be either national or provincial taxes. 
2. To levy direct taxes for a period of time and in a manner proportionately equal in all the territory of the Nation, whenever the defense of the country, the common safety, or the public good may require it. 
3. To borrow money, pledging the Nation's credit for its payment. 
4. To provide for the use, sale, and disposition of the national lands. 
5. To establish and organize at the capital a national bank, with branches in the Provinces, with power to issue bank notes. 
6. To make arrangements for the payment of the national debt, both foreign and domestic. 7. To annually appropriate the money necessary to meet the expenses of the National Government, and approve or disapprove the accounts of its disbursement. 
8. To grant subsidies, to be paid out of the national treasury, to those Provinces whose revenues, according to their own budgets, are insufficient to meet their ordinary expenses. 
9. To make rules for the free navigation of the rivers in the interior of the country, to declare ports of entry those which may be deemed fit for that purpose, and to establish or abolish custom-houses. But the custom-houses for foreign commerce, existing in each Province at the time of its coming into the National Union, shall not be abolished. 
10. To coin money, fix the value thereof and that of foreign coins, and adopt a uniform system of weights and measures for the whole Nation. 
11. To enact the civil, commercial, penal, and mining codes without encroaching upon the local jurisdictions, the provisions of said codes to be enforced either by the Federal or provincial courts, as the nature and condition of the things or persons affected by them may require. And especially to enact laws on naturalization and citizenship, general for the whole nation, and based upon the principle of citizenship by nativity, as well as laws on bankruptcy, forgery, and counterfeiting of money and State public documents, and the establishment of trial by jury. 
12. To regulate the commerce by land and sea with foreign countries, and that of the Provinces, among themselves. 
13. To establish and regulate post-offices and post-roads. 
14. To settle finally the limits of the Republic, to fix those of the' Provinces, to create new provinces, and to provide by special laws for the organization and the administration of the government of the national territories, which may be left outside the limits of the Provinces. 
15. To provide for the security of the frontiers and the preservation of peaceful intercourse with the Indians, and to promote their conversion to the Catholic religion. 
16. To provide for everything conducive to increase the prosperity of the country, the progress and welfare of the Provinces, and the enlightenment of the people, by promoting industrial enterprise, foreign immigration, the construction of railroads and navigable canals, the colonization of the national lands, the introduction and establishment of new industries, the importation of foreign capital, and the exploration of the interior rivers. Laws intended to promote these purposes, granting privileges for a limited time, rewards and other inducements, shall be enacted to secure complete success of this policy. 
17. To establish courts inferior to the supreme court of justice; create and abolish offices and fix the duties of the same; grant pensions, decree honors, and promulgate general amnesties. 
18. To accept, or refuse to accept, the resignation of the President or vice-president of the Nation, and declare that the time has arrived to proceed to a new election, to count the returns thereof, and to ascertain the result. 
19. To approve or reject the treaties concluded with any foreign nations, and the concordats entered into with the Holy See, and to make rules for the exercise of ecclesiastical patronage in the whole Nation.
20. To admit into the territory of the Republic religious orders in addition to those now existing. 
21. To authorize the Executive power to declare war or make peace. 
22. To grant letters of marque and reprisal and make rules concerning prizes. 
23. To fix the strength of the land and naval forces of the Nation, both in time of peace and of war, and to make rules and ordinances for the government of the army and navy. 
24. To authorize the calling out of the militia of any or all the Provinces, whenever the execution of the laws of the Nation, the suppressing of insurrections, or the repelling of invasions, may render it necessary. To provide for the organization, equipment, and discipline of said militia, and the command and government of the part thereof which may be employed in the service of the Nation, leaving to the Provinces themselves the power to appoint the chiefs and officers of their respective militias, and to enforce in regard to them the discipline established by Congress. 
25. To permit the introduction of foreign troops into the territory of the Republic, and the departure from it of the national ones. 
26. To proclaim a state of siege in one or more places in the Nation in case of internal disturbances, and to approve or suspend the state of siege declared during the recess of Congress by the Executive power. 
27. To exercise exclusive legislation in all the territory of the national capital and in all other places acquired by purchase or cession in any Province for the construction of forts, arsenals, magazines, or other useful national establishments.
28. To enact all the laws and regulations which may be deemed necessary to carry into effect the powers and faculties hereinbefore enumerated and all others granted by the present Constitution to the Government of the Argentine Nation. 
</list>
Chapter V 
<title> Enactment and Approval of Laws 
Article 68. Laws may originate in either Chamber of Congress by means of bills introduced by the members thereof or by the Executive; except, however, those relating to the subjects mentioned in article 44. 
Article 69. When a bill has been passed in the Chamber where it originated, it shall be sent to the other Chamber for discussion. Having been passed by both, it shall be sent to the Executive of the Nation for examination. If approved, the Executive shall promulgate it as law. 
Article 70. Bills not returned by the Executive within ten working days shall be considered approved. 
Article 71. No bill wholly rejected in one Chamber shall be introduced again during the same year. But if merely amended by the revising Chamber, it shall be returned to the Chamber of origin, and if the amendments are adopted there by absolute majority, it shall be sent for approval to the Executive power of the Nation. If the amendments are rejected, the bill shall be again referred to the Chamber, where they were made, and if insisted upon by a majority of two-thirds of the members, the bill shall be again referred to the other Chamber, where it shall not be deemed rejected unless the rejection is made by a majority of two-thirds of the members present. 
Article 72. A bill rejected, either wholly or in part, by the Executive, shall be returned with the objections of the latter to the Chamber of origin, where it shall be discussed a second time, and if passed by a two-thirds majority shall be again referred to the other Chamber. If the bill passes both Chambers by the majority aforesaid it becomes a law and shall go to the Executive for its promulgation. The vote in this case shall be by yeas and nays, and the names of the members who took part in the vote, as well as the grounds upon which they founded their votes, and the objections of the Executive, shall be immediately published by the press. If the chambers disagree in regard to the objections, the bill shall fail and shall not be allowed to be presented again during that year. 
Article 73. The enacting clause of the laws shall be as follows: "The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies of the Argentine Nation, in Congress assembled, decree or sanction as law." 

Section II 
<title> The Executive Power 
Chapter I 
<title> Its Nature and Duration 
Article 74. The Executive power of the Nation shall be vested in a citizen with the title of "President of the Argentine Nation." 
Article 75. In case of illness, absence from the capital, death, resignation, or removal of the President, the Executive power shall be exercised by the vice-president of the Nation. In case of removal, death, resignation, or inability of both the President and vicepresident of the Nation, Congress shall determine what officer shall then act as President until the disability is removed or a new President is elected. 
Article 76. To be elected President or vice-president of the Nation it is necessary to have been born in the Argentine Territory, or if born in a foreign country to be the son of a native citizen; to belong to the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion; and to have all the other qualifications required to be a senator. 
Article 77. The President and the vice-president shall hold their offices during a term of six years, but neither can be reelected until after an intermission of a full term.
Article 78. The President shall cease to exercise his powers on the same day on which his term of six years expires; and no event of any kind which may have interrupted said term shall ever be alleged as a reason for completing it afterwards. 
Article 79. The President and vice-president shall receive for their services a compensation, to be paid by the national treasury, the amount of which shall not be changed during their term of office. During the same period they shall not be qualified to fill any other office or receive any other emolument, either national or provincial. 
Article 80. On entering upon the discharge of their duties the President and the vice-president shall take an oath, which shall be administered to them the first time by the president of the Constitutional Convention and subsequently by the president of the Senate, Congress being in session, in the following terms: 
"I do swear, before God our Lord and these Holy Gospels to fill loyally and patriotically the office of President (or vice-president) of the Nation, and observe and cause others to observe, faithfully, the Constitution of the Argentine Nation. Should I fail to do so, may God and the Nation demand it of me." 
Chapter II 
<title> Manner and Time of Electing the President and Vice-President of the Nation 
Article 81. The election of the President and vice-president of the Nation shall be made in the following manner: The capital and each one of the Provinces shall appoint, by direct vote, an electoral college, consisting of twice as many members as the number of senators and deputies constituting their respective representation in Congress, who shall have the same qualifications, and shall be elected in the same manner, as provided in the present Constitution for the election of deputies. Deputies, senators, and officials receiving pay from the Federal Government, shall be disqualified from being electors. Four months before the expiration of the Presidential term, the electors chosen by the capital shall meet in the capital, and those chosen by the Provinces in their respective capitals, and then they shall proceed to elect by ballot the President and vice-president of the Nation. Each elector shall give his vote by means of two ballots signed by him, one expressing his choice for President and the other for vice-president. 
Two lists shall be made of all the persons named for President and two others of those named for vice-president, with the statement in each case of the number of votes cast in favor of the respective candidates. These lists shall be signed by the electors and sent by them under sealed envelope, two (one of each class) to the president of the provincial legislature, and in the case of the capital to the president of the municipal council—to be filed and kept, with their seals unbroken, in their respective archives—and the other two to the president of the Senate (the first time to the president of the Constitutional Convention). 
Article 82. The president of the Senate (the first time the president of the Constitutional Convention), having all the lists in his possession, shall open them in the presence of the two chambers. Four members of Congress, selected by lot, shall assist the secretaries in counting and announcing the votes cast for each candidate, either for President or for vice-president of the Nation. Those receiving in each case an absolute majority of all the votes shall be immediately proclaimed President or vice-president. 
Article 83. In case the vote is divided and no absolute majority can thus be obtained, Congress shall make the election by choosing one of the two persons who obtained the greatest number of votes. If the first majority obtained proves to be in favor of more than two persons, Congress shall make its choice from among all of them. If the first majority obtained proves to be in favor of only one person and two or more persons are favored with the next largest majority, the choice of Congress shall be made from among all those who obtained the first and second majorities. 
Article 84. This choice shall be made by an absolute majority of votes, the name of each voter to be entered on the record. If the absolute majority is not secured on the first ballot, a second vote shall be taken, but only to select one out of the two persons in whose favor the greatest number of votes was cast. If the vote is equally divided the balloting shall be repeated, but if it again results in an equal division, the president of the Senate (the first time the president of the Constitutional Convention) shall decide by his vote. The counting of the votes in these elections shall not be made without three-fourths of all the members of Congress being present. 
Article 85. The election of the President and vice-president of the Nation shall be concluded in a single sitting of Congress, and the result thereof, as well as the journal of the electoral proceedings, shall be published immediately through the newspapers. 
Chapter III 
<title> Powers of the Executive 
Article 86. The President of the Nation shall have the following powers: 
<list>
1. He is the Chief Magistrate of the Nation, and has in his charge the general administration of all the executive business of the country. 
2. He may issue all the instructions and rules necessary for the execution of the laws of the Nation, taking care that the spirit of said laws is not changed nor their scope limited by exceptions through the said regulations. 
3. He is the chief local authority of the capital of the Nation. 
4. He assists, in the manner provided by the Constitution, in making the laws, gives them his approval, and causes them to be promulgated. 
5. He appoints, with the advice and consent of the Senate, the justices of the supreme court and of all other Federal tribunals.
6. He may grant pardons and commutations of sentences upon report of the trial courts, in cases of offenses subject to Federal jurisdiction, except, however, in cases of impeachment by the Chamber of Deputies. 
7. He may place on the retired list with pay, when so permitted by , the laws of the Nation, all classes of national officials, and grant pensions and leaves of absence in accordance with the same laws. 
8. He exercises the right of ecclesiastical patronage by presenting for each national diocese the name of a bishop, selected out of three suggested to him for this purpose by the Senate. 
9. He can, with the advice and consent of the supreme court, grant or refuse passage to decrees of the councils, bulls, briefs, and rescripts of the Supreme Pontiff of Rome; but said grant or refusal shall be made by law, whenever the ecclesiastical enactments affected by either action contain provisions of general or permanent character. 
10. He appoints or removes, with the advice and consent of the Senate, the ministers plenipotentiary and charges d'affaires, and by himself alone, without senatorial action, the cabinet ministers, the officials of the departments, the consular agents, and all the Government employees whose appointment is not otherwise provided for by the present Constitution. 
11. He opens every year, in the presence of the two chambers assembled for this purpose in the hall of the Senate, the sessions of Congress, on which occasion he shall furnish information as to the state of the Nation, and the progress made in the work of reform promised by the Constitution, recommending such measures as he may deem advisable.
12. He may prorogue Congress when sitting in ordinary session, or convene it in extraordinary session, when some grave interest of order or progress may require it. 
13. He causes the revenue of the Nation to be collected, and decrees the disbursement of the national moneys, in conformity with the provisions of the appropriation laws. 
14. He concludes and signs treaties of peace, commerce, navigation, alliance, limits, and neutrality, as well as concordats and all other arrangements or agreements required for the maintenance of friendly relations with foreign powers. He also receives the ministers accredited by the latter and admits their consuls. 
15. He is the commander in chief of all the land and naval forces of the Nation. 
16. He appoints all the military officers of the Nation, but the advice and consent of the Senate shall be required when the position to be filled, or the rank to be given, is that of a superior officer in either the army or the navy. When the appointments or concessions of rank are made on the battlefield, senatorial approval is not necessary. 
17. He manages the land and naval forces of the Nation and attends to their organization and distribution, according to the necessities of the case. 
18. He, with the authority and approval of Congress, declares war and grant letters of marque and reprisal. 
19. He declares, with the consent of the Senate, one or several points of the Nation to be, for a limited time, in case of foreign attack, in a state of siege. Should the trouble be domestic, the declaration of a state of siege can be made by the President if Congress is not in session; otherwise the power to make it belongs to that body. The President shall exercise this power with the limitations established by article 23. 
20. He may ask of the heads of all the bureaus and departments of the Government, and through them of all other employees, whatever information he may desire, and said officials are bound to furnish it. 
21. The President shall not leave the national capital without the permission of Congress. During the recess of the latter, he may, however, absent himself from the capital without such permission, if some grave necessity of the public service shall demand it. 
22. He shall have the power to fill all vacancies occurring during the recess of Congress and requiring the approval of the Senate. In this case the appointment shall expire at the close of the next session.
</list> 
Chapter IV 
<title> The Members of the Cabinet 
Article 87. Five ministers, secretaries of state—respectively named of the interior, of foreign affairs, of the treasury, of justice, worship, and public instruction, and of war and the navy—shall have charge of the Nation's business, and shall countersign and attest all the acts of the President; and none of these acts shall have validity when lacking the signature of the respective ministers. The scope of the business of each department shall be determined by law. 
Article 88. Each minister is individually responsible for the acts signed by him, and jointly and severally for all other acts agreed upon between him and his colleagues. 
Article 89. The ministers shall not, in any case, take individual action on any subject, unless it is concerning the internal government of their own respective departments.
Article 90. As soon as Congress meets, each minister shall submit to it a report on the state of the Nation, as far as represented by his own department. 
Article 91. No minister shall be either senator or deputy without first resigning his position in the cabinet. 
Article 92. The ministers may attend the sessions of Congress and take part in the debates, but they shall have no vote. 
Article 93. The ministers shall receive for their services a salary established by law; but this salary shall not be increased or decreased in favor or against the incumbent of the position. 
Section III 
<title> The Judicial Power 
Chapter I 
<title> Its Nature and Duration 
Article 94. The judicial power of the nation shall be vested in a supreme court of justice and in the inferior tribunals which Congress may establish in the national territory. 
Article 95. The President of the Republic shall not in any case exercise judicial functions, assume jurisdiction of any pending cause, or reopen cases already decided. 
Article 96. The justices of the supreme court and the judges of the inferior tribunals shall hold their offices during good behavior, and shall receive for their services a compensation to be fixed by law, which shall never be diminished in any way or manner while exercising their functions. 
Article 97. No one shall be a justice of the supreme court of the Nation who is not a lawyer, with eight years' practice in the national courts, and has not, furthermore, the qualifications necessary to be a senator.
Article 98. On the first assembling of the supreme court under the present Constitution, the members thereof shall take an oath, which shall be administered to them by the President of the Nation, to fulfill their duties, and administer justice well and legally and in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. In the future the oath shall be administered to them by the chief justice. 
Article 99. The supreme court shall make proper rules for the transaction of its business, and shall appoint all its subordinate employees. 
Chapter II 
<title> Functions of the Judicial Power 
Article 100. The supreme court, as well as the Federal inferior tribunals, shall have jurisdiction in all cases and causes not mentioned in clause 11, article 67 of the present Constitution, involving points to be decided by the same Constitution, the Federal laws, or foreign treaties; cases and causes concerning ambassadors, public ministers, and foreign consuls; admiralty cases; cases falling under maritime jurisdiction; cases and causes in which the Nation is a party to the contention; and cases and causes between two or more Provinces, or between a Province and the citizens of another, or between citizens of different Provinces or between a Province or its citizens against a foreign citizen or State. 
Article 101. In all the cases and causes above named the supreme court shall have appellate jurisdiction, under such rules and exceptions thereto as Congress may establish. But in the cases concerning foreign ambassadors, ministers and consuls, and in those to which a Province shall be a party, the jurisdiction of the court shall be original and exclusive. 
Article 102. The trial of all ordinary crimes; except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury, as soon as this institution is established in the Nation. Such trials shall take place in the Province where the offense was committed; but when the wrong was done outside the limits of the Nation, and in violation of the law of nations, Congress shall decide, by a special law, the locality in which the trial shall take place. 
Article 103. Treason against the Nation shall consist only in taking up arms against it or in joining its enemies and lending them aid and succor. Congress shall by a special law fix the penalty for this crime, but the punishment shall not go beyond the person of the offender, nor shall any infamy resulting therefrom attaint his relatives in whatever degree. 
Title II 
<title> Provincial Governments 
Article 104. The Provinces retain all the powers not delegated by the present Constitution to the Federal Government, and those which they expressly reserved, through special agreements at the time of their coming into the Union. 
Article 105. Each Province shall have its own local institutions and laws and shall be governed by them. They shall elect their governors, legislators, and provincial functionaries of all classes without intervention of the Federal Government. 
Article 106. Each Province shall enact its own constitution, subject to the provisions of article 5. 
Article 107. The Provinces shall have the power to conclude, with the knowledge of the Federal Congress, such partial treaties as they may deem necessary for the purposes of administration of justice, regulation of financial interests, or the execution of public works of common utility, and to promote, by means of protective laws and at their own expense, the increase of their own industries, the immigration into their territories, the building of railroads and navigable canals, the settlement and colonization of the provincial lands, the introduction and establishment of new industries, the importation of foreign capital, and the exploration of their rivers. 
Article 108. The Provinces shall not exercise any power delegated to the Nation. They shall not, without authority from the Federal Congress, enter into any partial treaties of a political character, or pass laws relating to the domestic or foreign commerce or navigation, or establish provincial custom-houses, coin money, or create banks of issue; neither shall they enact any civil, commercial, criminal, or mining codes, subsequent to the promulgation of the national ones enacted by Congress, or pass special laws on the subjects of citizenship, naturalization, bankruptcy, and counterfeiting of money or Government bonds, or establish tonnage dues, arm war vessels, or raise armies, except in case of foreign invasion or of such imminent danger as to admit of no delay, and on condition that they give full account thereof to the Federal Government, or appoint or receive foreign agents, or admit new religious orders. 
Article 109. No Province shall declare or wage war against another. Their complaints against each other must be submitted to and settled by the supreme court of justice. Actual hostilities on the part of one Province against another shall be deemed acts of civil war, seditious and riotous, which the Federal Government should put down and repress according to law. 
Article 110. The governors of the Provinces shall be the natural agents of the Federal Government for the enforcement of the Constitution and the laws of the Nation.

