SECTION I
<title> Religion of the State
ART. I. The Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion is the Religion of the State. The Government owes to it the most effectual, and the most powerful protection; and the Inhabitants are bound to pay to it every respect, whatever may be their private opinions. 
II. The infraction of the preceding Article shall be considered as of the Fundamental Laws of the Country.

SECTION II.
<title> Legislative Power 
II. The Legislative Power is vested in a National Congress, composed of 2 Chambers; the one of Representatives, and the other of Senators.
 
CHAPTER I. 
<title> Chamber of Representatives.
IV. The Chamber of Representatives shall be composed of Deputies, elected in the proportion of I for every 25,000 Inhabitants, or for a fraction of riot less than 16,000. 
V. No Person shall be elected as a Representative, unless he be qualified, by having been a Citizen for 7 years prior to his nomination; by having completed the age of 26; and by being possessed of a Property of 4,000 dollars, at least, or, in default of it, in the exercise of some useful art, profession, or business. He must not be a privileged Person, nor dependent on the Executive Power in respect of any Office, having a salary attached to it. 
VI. The duration of their Office shall be for 4 years; but one-half of their number shall be replaced by other Members at the expiration of every 2 years. For this purpose, the first Representatives shall, on being assembled, proceed immediately to draw, by lot, the names of those who are to vacate their seats at the conclusion of the first 2 years. These shall be succeeded by those who may be elected, according to the proper forms, by the Communities which had returned the former Members.
VII. The Chamber of Representatives shall have the exclusive right of originating all contributions, taxes, and imposts; and to the Senate shall be reserved the power of confirming, rejecting, or demurring to them. 
VII. The Chamber of Representatives, exclusively, shall be empowered, either ex oficio, or at the instance of any Citizen, to prosecute the 3 Principal Authorities, the Ministers of State, the Envoys to Foreign Courts, the Archbishops and Bishops, the Generals of the Army, the Governors and Superior Judges of the Provinces, and other Officers, of ranks not inferior to those just mentioned, for the crimes of treason, oppression, peculation, violation of the Constitution, or others, to which is attached the punishment either of death or infamy, agreeably to the Laws. 
IX. The Representatives shall be remunerated for their services, to such amount, and from such fund, as the Legislature shall appoint; the distribution of the money shall, however, belong to the Chamber of Representatives exclusively.

CHAPTER II.
<title> Senate.
X. The Senate shall consist of Provincial Senators, whose number shall be equal to those of the Provinces; of 3 Military Senators, not below the rank of Colonel; of a Bishop and 3 Ecclesiastics; of a Senator for each University ; and of the Director of the State, after the period of his government shall have expired. 
XI. No Person shall be elected as a Senator under the age of 30. He must also have been a Citizen 9 years previous to his election; possess a property of 8,000 dollars, or an income equivalent to it; or follow a profession qualifying him to be useful to society. 
XII. The Senators shall hold their Office for 12 years; and one third of their number shall be renewed every 4 years. The lot shall decide who are to go out at the end of the 1st and 2nd terms of 4 years. 
XIII. The Ex-Director shall continue to be a Member of the Senate, until he be replaced by his Successor in the Government. 
XIV. The Senators for the Provinces shall be elected in the following manner: every Municipality shall nominate, as Electors, a Citizen, entitled to a vote in his own right, (Capitular) and a landed Proprietor, each of them possessing a property of 10,000 dollars at least. These having repaired to some central point of the Province, to be fixed upon by the Executive Power, shall select 3 Individuals, of the Civil Class, of whom I at least shall reside out of the Province. The names of the 3 selected shall be transmitted to the Senate (the first time to the Congress), together with an authenticated Certificate of the Act of Election. The Senate, when it shall have received all the Returns, shall cause them to be printed and examined; and those Individuals who shall be found to have a majority of provincial suffrages, shall be Senators. If no majority result to either of them, the Congress for the first time, and hereafter the Senate, shall be authorized to choose from among the Persons selected. 
XV. The Military Senators shall be nominated by the Director of the State. 
XVI. The Bishop of the Diocese, where the Legislative Body assembles, shall be a Senator, for the first period. The Bishop, who is to succeed him as a Senator, shall afterwards be elected by the Bishops of the Territory, who transmit their votes to the Senate. the Bishops elected be afterwards shall to succeed him as a Senator, Senate. The Returns being printed and examined, he who as attained a majority shall be a Senator. If there be no majority, the Election shall be decided by the Senate. 
XVII. The Ecclesiastical Chapters, together with the Diocesan Prelate, the Priests attached to the Sanctuary of the Cathedral, and the Heads of Colleges (if Ecclesiastics), shall choose 3 Individuals out of the same Order, one of whom at least shall be of another Diocese. The Returns having been transmitted and published, together with the Certificates, the 3 who have obtained the majority of Ecclesiastical Suffrages, shall be Senators. If the suffrages be even, the election shall be determined by the Congress, or by the Senate. 
XVIII The Senate shall try, in open Court, the Individuals accused by the Chamber of Representatives. 
XIX. Two-thirds of the votes concurring shall constitute a sentence against the Party accused, but only to the extent of removing him from his Office, or declaring him unfit to obtain any other Appointment. 
XX. The Person convicted shall, notwithstanding, be liable to prosecution, trial, and punishment, conformably to the Law.

CHAPTER III.
<title> Attributes common to both Chambers.
XXI. Both Chambers shall assemble, for the 1st time, in this Capital, and thereafter at a place to be determined upon by themselves; and they shall hold their Sittings in the months of March, April, and May; and September, October, and November. 
XXII. Each Chamber shall be exclusively empowered to decide upon the Election of its Members, by a majority of 1 vote above the one-half of its Members. 
XXIII. It shall appoint its respective President, Vice-President, and Officers, fix the period for their remaining in Office, regulate the order of its proceedings, and provide for whatever may be calculated to facilitate its deliberations. 
XXIV. It shall not be lawful for either of the Chambers to deliberate, unless they be both assembled, in their respective place of sittings, and two-thirds, at least, of their Members be present; but a less number of either Chamber shall be competent to compel the attendance of its Absentees, in such manner, and under such penalties, as the Chamber shall appoint. 
XXV. Each Chamber shall keep a Diary of its proceedings, which shall, from time to time, be published, excepting such portions thereof as in their opinion ought not to be disclosed. The votes of approbation or dissent of the Members of either Chamber shall be entered in the Diary, if one-fifth of them should demand it. 
XXVI. The Senators and Representatives, during their attendance the Legislature, or whilst they are passing to, or returning from, the at same, shall not be arrested or prosecuted, except in the event of their being detected in the commission of some crime, punishable with death, infamy, or other severe penalty; information of which shall be given to the respective Chamber, together with a brief statement of the occurrence. 
XXVII. The Senators and Representatives shall not be molested any where, for their opinions, speeches, or acts, in either Chamber; but it shall be competent to each Chamber to punish its Members for disorderly conduct, and, by a majority of two-thirds, to expel any one of them from its Body. 
XXVIII. In the case specified in Article XXVI, or when any complaint in writing is preferred against any Senator or Representative, for an offence not falling exclusively under the cognizance of the Senate, either Chamber, after examining the merits of the evidence in a public sitting, may, by a majority of two-thirds of its Members, expel the party accused, and place him at the disposal of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, in order to his trial. 
XXIX. No Senator or Representative shall be employed by the Executive Power, without his own consent, and that of the Chamber to which he belongs. 
XXX. Either Chamber may compel the attendance before it of the Ministers of the Executive Power, with a view to obtain from them such information as it may deem necessary.

CHAPTER IV.
<title> Attributes of Congress.
XXXI. The Congress, exclusively, possesses the power to prepare the Laws to be observed in the Territory of the Union. 
XXXII. To decree War and Peace. 
XXXIII. To impose Taxes, and, should the exigencies of the State require it, to levy, for a period not exceeding 2 years, contributions proportionably equal upon the whole Territory. 
XXXIV. To fix, in pursuance of a proposal from the Executive Power, the permanent Force, by land and sea, necessary for the service of the State, in time of Peace; and to determine, itself, the number of Troops which shall garrison the place where it may hold its sittings.
XXXV. To order the construction and equipment of a National Marine. 
XXXVI. To contract Loans upon the security of the Revenue of the State. 
XXXVII. To regulate the proceedings of all Courts of Justice, and establish Tribunals inferior to the High Court of Judicature. 
XXXVIII. To create and abolish Offices of every description. 
XXXIX. To regulate internal and external Commerce. 
XL. To fix the Line of Demarcation of the Territory of the State, and determine the Boundaries of the Provinces. 
XLI. To establish new Ports on the Coasts of the Territory, whenever it shall be deemed necessary, and to raise Communities to the rank of Towns, Cities, or Provinces. 
XLII. To draw up uniform plans for Public Education, and provide means for the support of such Establishments. 
XLIII. To receive annually from the Executive Power a General Account of the Public Income, and to examine and decide upon it. 
XLIV. To secure exclusive privileges, for a limited time, to the Authors or Inventors of useful discoveries. 
XLV. To regulate the coinage, and the weights and measures.

CHAPTER V.
<title> Formation and sanction of the Laws. 
XLVI. Laws may be originated in either of the 2 Chambers composing the Legislative Power. 
XLVII. With the exception, however, of those which relate to the subjects specified in Article VII. 
XLVIII. Every Project of a Law shall be read in 3 several sittings; between each of which, 3 days, at least, shall intervene; and without which, it shall not be lawful to proceed to the discussion of it. 
XLIX. Projects of Law, and other Resolutions of the Legislative Body, in order to he valid, must have obtained a majority of I vote, at least, above the half of the suffrages in each of the Chambers, constitutionally assembled. 
L. When a Project of Law has been approved of in the Chamber in which it originated, it shall be sent to the other, in order that the latter, after discussing it in like manner as the former, may amend, approve, or reject it. 
LI. No Project of Law, rejected in either of the Chambers, can be again brought forward during the Sessions of the same Year. 
LII. The Projects of Law, constitutionally sanctioned by both Chambers, shall be communicated to the Director of the State. 
LIII. If he sign the Project, or, within the space of 15 days, do not return it, with his objections, it shall have the force of a Law. 
LIV. If he see cause for withholding his assent, he shall return the Project to the Chamber in which it was proposed, stating his objections.
LV. Upon its being reconsidered in both Chambers, and approved by a majority of two-thirds of the votes of each Chamber, the Project shall be held to have received its final sanction.

SECTION III.
<title> Executive Power.

CHAPTER I.
<title> Nature and Qualifications of this Power. 
LVI. The Supreme Executive Power of the Nation shall be exercised by the Person who may be elected to fill the Office of Director. 
LVII. No Person shall be elected as Director of the State, unless he be qualified, by being a Native and a Citizen of the Territory of the Union, by having resided in it for 6 years immediately previous to the Election, and by being, at least, 35 years of age. 
LVIII. Nor shall any Person be elected, who is a Member of the Senate, or of the Chamber of Representatives. 
LIX. Prior to his entering upon the duties of his Office, the Director-elect shall, in the presence of the 2 Chambers united, take the following Oath, before the President of the Senate:
"I, N. N. swear by God, our Lord, and by the holy Evangelists, that I will faithfully execute the Office of Director entrusted to me; that I will fulfill, and cause to be fulfilled, the Constitution of the State ; that I will protect the Catholic Religion, and preserve the integrity and independence of the Territory of the Union." 
LX. He shall hold the Office for the term of 5 years. 
LXI. In case of the incapacity, impeachment, or death, of the Director of the State, the Executive Power shall be administered provisionally by the President of the Senate, who shall, in the mean time, be suspended from his senatorial functions. 

CHAPTER II.
<title> Mode of electing the Director of the State.
LXII. The Director of the State shall be elected by the 2 Chambers united. 
LXIII. The President of the Senate shall preside at the Election, and the President of the Chamber of Representatives shall officiate as Vice-President on the occasion. 
LXIV. The votes shall be delivered in writing, and shall be signed by the Members, and published with their names. 
LXV. A majority of 1 vote beyond the half of each Chamber, shall decide the Election. 
LXVI. If, after 3 divisions, it should appear that no one has obtained the said majority, then the names of the 3 Individuals who have had the largest number shall be published, and they alone shall be voted for in the subsequent divisions. 
LXVII. Should neither of the 3 Individuals put in nomination, have gained the majority required by Article LXV, after 3 divisions, the one who shall have the smallest number of votes shall be excluded; and if there be an equality among the 3, or between 2 of them, the lot shall decide which of them is to be excluded, so that only 2 remain. 
LXVIII. For one of these a fresh Election shall take place. 
LXIX. If, after 3 divisions, neither of them has the requisite majority, the Director shall be chosen by lot between the 2. 
LXX. These several operations shall be carried on without intermission from the beginning of the Election. 
LXXI. The Election shall take place 30 days before the Director shall have completed his period of service: in case of the death of the Director, the election of his Successor shall commence within 15 days. 
LXXII. Whilst the Director-elect is preparing to take possession of his Post, he who exercises the Supreme Power shall continue at the head of the Government, but the 5 years' services of the Director-elect shall date from the day on which his Predecessor completed his term. 
LXXIII. The Director of the State shall not be considered as reelected, unless he obtain 1 vote beyond two-thirds of the suffrages of each Chamber.

CHAPTER III.
<title> Attributes of the Executive Power.
LXXIV. The Director of the State is the Supreme Chief of all the Land and Sea Forces. 
LXXV. He promulgates, and enforces the execution of, the Laws that have been sanctioned. 
LXXVI. He opens the Sessions of the Legislative Body in the Hall of the Senate, at the periods that the Chamber of Representatives is partially renewed, when lie makes his Report concerning the state of the Government, the improvements, or reforms, that have taken place, and on such other topics as he may deem worthy of being communicated to them; which Report shall be published. 
LXXVII. He convokes, extraordinarily, the Legislative Body, between the Sessions, when the interests of the Country render it necessary. 
LXXVIII. He is empowered to propose, in writing, to the Legislative Body of the 2 Chambers, such plans, measures, improvements, or reforms, as he may deem either necessary or expedient for the prosperity of the State. 
LXXIX. He publishes War, and Peace; he frames and issues orders to the Land and Sea Forces, for the defence of the State, or the attack of the Enemy. 
LXXX. He provides against the Invasion of Foreign Enemies, represses conspiracies, and quells popular tumults.
LXXXI. He alone appoints the Commanders of Armies and Fleets, and also the Ambassadors, Envoys, and Consuls, to Foreign Nations; and receives them from the latter. 
LXXXII. He appoints and removes his Ministers, who are responsible to the Law. 
LXXXIII. He can, with the knowledge and concurrence of two-thirds of the Senators, constitutionally present, negotiate and conclude Treaties with Foreign Nations ; but if they relate to the alienation or dismemberment of any portion of the Territory, the consent of two-thirds of the Chamber of Representatives is necessary. 
LXXXIV. He grants Letters of Citizenship, according to such forms, and upon such conditions, as the Law directs. 
LXXXV. He appoints to all Offices, which are not expressly excepted in this Constitution and the Laws. 
LXXXVI. He nominates the Archbishops and Bishops from 3 Individuals proposed to him by the Senate. 
LXXXVII. He presents to all Dignities, Canonries, Prebends, and Benefices, of the Cathedral, Collegiate, and Parochial Churches, conformably to the Laws. 
LXXXVIII. He has under his immediate inspection and authority, all the Establishments of, and matters relating to, Finance and Police; all the Public Institutions of the Nation, scientific as well as all others, which have been formed with, and are supported by, the Funds of the State; and the Mints, National Banks, Post-offices, Post-Stations, and Highways; subject to the Laws and Ordinances relating to them, or which the Legislative Body may hereafter enact. 
LXXXIX. He has the power to pardon a Criminal condemned to capital punishment, or to commute the sentence, after taking the opinion of the Tribunal in which the Criminal was tried, whenever powerful and obvious motives of equity shall suggest it, or when any those great or auspicious event shall render pardon suitable; save for offences excepted by the Law. 
XC. He either confirms or reverses, agreeably to the Ordinance, the Sentences against Military Delinquents, which have been pronounced by Military Tribunals. XCI. He shall, at stated periods, receive for his services a compensation, to be fixed by the Legislative Body, which shall neither be increased nor reduced during his Government.

SECTION IV.
<title> Judicial Power. 

ONLY CHAPTER.
<title> Supreme Court of Justice.
XCII. A High Court of Justice, composed of 7 Judges and 2 Fiscals, shall exercise the supreme judicial power of the State.
XCIII. No Person shall be a Member of it, unless he be a Lawyer by profession, have been 8 years in public practice, and be 40 years of age. 
XCIV. The Members of the High Court of Justice shall be appointed by the Director of the State, with the knowledge and consent of the Senate. 
XCV. The Members and Fiscals shall, by a majority of votes, elect the President of the Court every 5 years. 
XCVI. The High Court of Justice shall nominate its own Officers, to the limited number, and observing the forms, prescribed by the Law. 
XCVII. It shall take cognizance, exclusively, of all Causes relative to the Envoys and Consuls of Foreign Courts; of those in which any Province is a party, or which arise between 2 Provinces, or between Communities of the same Province, concerning Boundaries or other disputed rights; of those which relate to Contracts between the Supreme Government and private Individuals; and, lastly, of those against the Public Functionaries, referred to in Articles XXVI and XXVIII. 
XCVIII. It shall determine, in the last resort, all Causes arising out of Treaties concluded under the authority of the Government ; all offences committed against the Law of Nations; and all those in which the Law permits Appeals of second recourse, of nullity, or of notorious injustice. 
XCIX. The High Court, and the other Tribunals of Justice, shall hold their Sittings in public, and the votes of every Judge, concerning Decisions or Sentences of any kind, shall be delivered in the same public manner. 
C. It shall, from time to time, inform the Legislative Body, of whatever may be proper for the better administration of Justice; which shall continue to be regulated by the Laws now in force, so far as they are not at variance with this Constitution. 
CI. It shall, every 6 months, receive from the Courts of Justice, an exact statement of the Causes and points of Law which have been decided in them, and of those pending, their progress, period of duration, and causes of delay; together with the Diary of Proceedings, kept by the Clerks of each Court, in order that, whilst watching over the prompt administration of justice, it may provide the means for preventing any unnecessary procrastination. 
CII. The Individuals composing this Court shall continue in Office so long as their good conduct shall merit it, and it shall not be competent to the Executive Power to employ them in any other capacity, without their consent, and that of the Court itself. 
CIII. The Legislative Body shall assign to them a compensation for their services, which shall not be diminished whilst they remain in Office.

SECTION V.
<title> Declaration of Rights. 

CHAPTER I.
<title> Rights of the Nation.
CIV. The Nation has a right to reform its Constitution, whenever the general interest demands it, observing always, in so doing, the constitutional forms. 
CV. The Nation, in whom the Sovereignty originally resides, delegates the exercise of the high powers representing it, on condition of their being exercised in the manner directed by the Constitution; so that neither the Legislative shall lay claim to the Executive or Judicial Powers, nor the Executive disturb or interfere with that of the Legislative; nor the Judicial encroach upon those of the other two; in contravention of what the present Constitution has provided. 
CVI. The Corporations and Magistrates invested with the Legislative, Executive, or Judicial Authority, derive their power from tile Nation, and are responsible to it, in the manner prescribed by the Constitution. 
CVII. No Authority of the Country is superior to the Law; the Authorities command, adjudicate, or govern, by the Law; and it is pursuant to it that respect and obedience is due to them. 
CVIII. The Nation, in constitutionally delegating the exercise of its Sovereignty, reserves to itself the right of nominating its Representatives, and that of freely expressing its opinion through the medium of the Press.

CHAPTER II.
<title> Personal Rights.
CIX. All the Members of the State must be protected in the enjoyment of their rights, of existence, character, freedom, security, and property. No one can be deprived of either of them, except in conformity with the Laws. 
CX. All Men are equal in the eye of the Law, so that, whether it punish, command, or protect, it ought to be the same for all, and to favour equally the powerful and the weak, with a view to the preservation of their rights. 
CXI. The liberty to publish his ideas by means of the Press, being a right, alike valuable to man, and essential to the preservation of civil liberty in a State, the Regulations which Congress has provisionally approved in regard to it, shall be observed until the Legislature shall alter or modify them. 
CXII. The private actions of mankind, which in no wise disturb public order, nor prejudice a third party, are reserved solely to the Almighty, and are exempt from the authority of Magistrates. 
CXIII. No Inhabitant of the State shall be obliged to do what the Law does not direct, nor be deprived of that-which it does not prohibit.
CXIV. It is the interest, as well as the right, of all the Members of the State, to be tried by Judges that are as free, as independent, and as impartial, as the condition of human affairs will allow. The Legislative Body shall apply itself to the preparing, and carrying into effect, the institution of the Trial by Jury, so far as circumstances will permit. 
CXV. Every Citizen ought to be secure against arbitrary requisitions, and the unjust seizure of his Papers and Correspondence. The Law shall determine in which cases, and on what grounds, it may be justifiable to deprive him of the same. 
CXVI. It shall not be lawful for any Individual to be arrested, without evidence nearly conclusive, or without some striking appearances, of a crime, for which the Party might suffer corporal punishment, and which shall be set forth in the preliminary Process within 3 days; which term shall not be exceeded, if there exist no impediment, but if there be any, it shall be specified in the Process. 
CXVII. Prisons are only designed for the safe custody, not for the chastisement, of Delinquents. Every proceeding which, under the pretext of precaution, shall conduce to their mortification, beyond what is absolutely necessary, shall be punished agreeably to the Laws. 
CXVIII. It shall not be lawful for any Inhabitant of the State to be punished or imprisoned, unless the forms of legal process and judgment shall have been previously observed. 
CXIX. The house of a Citizen is a sanctuary which no one is competent to violate, without incurring guilt; and it can be entered by force only in case of his resistance to a legal mandate. 
CXX. The latter proceeding shall be carried into effect with due moderation, by the Judge himself personally. If any urgent cause prevent his so doing, he shall deliver to his Delegate an Order in writing, containing such particulars as may be necessary for his guidance; and a Copy thereof shall be delivered to the Individual apprehended, as well as to the Master of the house, if he apply for it. 
CXXI. The preceding dispositions relative to personal security shall not be suspended. 
CXXII. But if, on the occurrence of some very remote or extraordinary contingency, which shall endanger the public tranquility, or the security of the Country, it be found impossible to attend to what is prescribed in those dispositions, the Authorities who shall find themselves under the urgent necessity of disregarding them, shall immediately give an account of their conduct to the Legislative Body, whichshall examine the motives of the measure adopted, and the time of its duration. 
CXXIII. Property being sacred and inviolable, no Member of the State shall be deprived of it, or suffer any molestation in the enjoyment of it, without the consent of the Legislative Body, or a sentence conformably to the Laws.
CXXIV. When the interest of the State shall require that the Property of any Community or private Individual be applied to public purposes, the Proprietor shall receive adjust compensation for the same. 
CXXV. No one shall be compelled to furnish supplies of any kind for the use of the Armies, or to give up his house for the accommodation of any Military Body or Individual, except in consequence of an Order from some Civil Magistrate, agreeably to the Law; whatever injury the Proprietor may stiffer, in such case, shall be adequately compensated by the State. 
CXXVI. All the Members of the State have a right to lay their complaints before, and to be heard by, the First Authorities of the Country. 
CXXVII. No exclusive advantages, distinctions, or privileges, except such as are due to virtue or to talents, shall be granted to any Individual or Corporation; and as these are not transferable to Descendants, it shall be prohibited to concede any fresh titles of hereditary nobility. 
CXXVIII. The Indians being equal, in their station and rights, to the rest of the Citizens, shall enjoy the same privileges, and be Every personal tax or service imposed governed by the same Laws. upon them, under whatever pretext or denomination, shall be abolished. The Legislative Body shall effectually promote the prosperity of the Natives, by means of Laws calculated to ameliorate their condition, so as to raise them to a level with the other classes of the State. 
CXXIX. The traffic in Slaves is also constitutionally abolished, and their importation into the Territory of the State for ever prohibited.

SECTION VI.
<title> Reform of the Constitution.
CXXX. No motion for the reform of one or more Articles of the present Constitution shall be admitted to discussion, in either Chamber of the Legislative Power, unless it be supported by one-fourth of its Members. 
CXXXI. After the motion shall have been thus supported, and discussed in the usual form, it may be lawfully resolved, by two-thirds of the votes of each Chamber, "that the Article or Articles in question require to be reformed." 
CXXXII. This Resolution shall be communicated to the Executive Power, who shall return it to the Chamber in which it originated, together with his opinion, and the grounds of it, within 30 days. 
CXXXIII. If, in consequence of his dissent, the question be again taken into consideration in both Chambers, it shall then be necessary for three-fourths of each Chamber to concur in declaring the necessity of the reform; and, in this case, as well as in that of the assent of the Executive Power, they shall proceed immediately, by means of the number of votes mentioned in Article CXXXI, to confirm the Resolution. 
CXXXIV. The reform having been verified, it shall be transmitted to the Executive Power, in order to its publication. If he return it with amendments, its ultimate sanction shall require three fourths of the votes of each Chamber.

FINAL CHAPTER.
CXXXV. The Laws, Statutes, and Regulations now in force, shall continue to be observed, so far as they have not been altered by, or are not at variance with, the present Constitution, until the Legislature shall modify or reform them, in the manner which it shall think proper. 
CXXXVI. This Constitution shall be solemnly sworn to, throughout the Territory of the State. 
CXXXVII. No political, civil, military, or ecclesiastical Officer shall continue to hold his Appointment, unless he take the Oath to observe and uphold the Constitution. Those who shall be newly nominated, or promoted, to any Offices, or Military, or Literary Appointments, or who shall obtain any public Employment, or Office, shall take the same Oath. 
CXXXVIII. Whoever shall violate, or furnish the means of violating, the present Constitution, shall be considered as an Enemy of tile State, and be visited with the most rigorous punishments, not excepting death and banishment, according to the heinousness of his crime. 

<title> APPENDIX TO THE CONSTITUTION.
1. Until the Legislature can agree upon the most convenient mode of electing a Deputy for every 25,000 Inhabitants, or a fraction equal to 16,000, the Election required for the Chamber about to meet shortly, shall be effected on the basis and in the manner provided by the Provisional Regulation. 
2. When any Province has within its limits fewer than 3 Cabildos, if there be only 2, each of them shall, with a view to the nomination of Senators, choose 3 Electors, I of whom shall be a Person entitled to vote, (Capitular) and the other 2 Residents possessing the property specified in Article XIV of the Constitution. If the Province have within its precincts only I Cabildo, the latter shall choose 6 Electors, one half of them being Persons entitled to vote, and the other half Residents possessing the property above stated, who shall proceed to hold the election in the manner set forth in the said Article. 
3. The Legislature shall determine at what stage of the process, and in what manner, the publicity of the judgments, mentioned in Article XCIX, shall take place. 
4. The Congress, in framing the present Constitution, has been guided by principles of incontestable justice, in the exercise of the right belonging to the Country, now that it is free, to consolidate its liberty, to establish order, and to procure for itself the advantages of a Government, which, being constitutionally regulated, must, sooner than any other, tranquillize the whole Territory, and be productive of the enjoyment of a solid Peace in all the Provinces of the Union; but it being, nevertheless, unwilling to act in anywise inconsistent with the liberality of those principles, and its consideration for the rights of the Sister Provinces, which have not yet been able to become Parties to the framing and sanctioning of the Constitution, it has resolved to concede to all the Communities of the Territory of the State, so soon as they shall signify their concurrence thereto, through the medium of their Representatives, the power of proposing and obtaining, in the first Legislature, a revision of any of the Articles of the Constitution, upon the plan pursued in framing them ; motions to that effect, therefore. shall be admissible, if seconded by 2 Members, and shall pass if sup ported by 1 vote above two-thirds of each Chamber. 
5. Style of Address. The 3 High Powers, united, shall be addressed by the title of Sovereignty, and Sovereign Sir, both in writing and personally. 
6. The National Congress, composed of the 2 Chambers which form the Legislative Body, shall be addressed by the title of Most Serene Highness, and Most Serene Sir. 
7. The 2 Chambers of the Legislative, and the Supreme Executive and Judicial, Powers, shall respectively, both in writing and in person, be addressed by the title of Highness alone, and that of Sir, at the beginning of all Communications presented to them. 
8. Ceremonial with respect to Seats. On the opening of the Session of Congress by the Executive, when the one-half of the Chamber of Representatives is renewed, at which opening the High Court of Justice shall be present, the Director of the State, as presiding at the ceremony, shall sit on the right of the President of the Senate, who shall act as Vice-President upon the occasion ; both of them occupying the center of the most conspicuous situation in the Assembly. On their right shall be seated the President of the Chamber of Representatives, and on their left the President of the High Court. 
9. The right side of the Hall shall be occupied by the Senators, and the left by the Representatives. Below them shall sit the Members of the High Court. 
10. Insignia. The Senators and Representatives, during the discharge of their duty, shall wear the honorary badge of a Golden Shield, having in the center of it engraved the motto Law, encircled with 2 branches of olive and laurel. 
11. The Senators shall wear the badge suspended from the neck by a golden cord, and the Representatives by a silver one; and they may wear it both in and out of the Hall. 
12. The Members of the High Court shall appear in their robes, upon occasions of ceremony; and on ordinary occasions shall wear a Golden Shield, with the motto Justice, engraved in the center of it, encircled in the same manner as the preceding, and- suspended from the neck by a cord of gold and silver mixed.

