In the name of Almighty God, from whom all law proceeds, the Austrian people receive for their Christian, German Federal State on a corporative foundation the following constitution. 
Part I.-Fundamental Provisions<title>
Art. 1. Austria is a Federal State. 
Art. 2. The Federal State is organised on a corporative basis and consists of the Federal City of Vienna and the provinces of Burgenland, Carinthia, Lower Austria, Upper Austria, Salzburg, Styria, Tyrol and Vorarlberg. 
Art. 3.
(1) The colours of Austria are red, white and red. 
(2) The coat of arms of Austria consists of a detached double-headed black eagle, with a golden halo, golden claws and red tongue. Its breast is covered with a red shield with a silver cross-bar. 
(3) The official seal of the Federal State of Austria shows the coat of arms described in paragraph (2) surrounded by the inscription "Oesterreich" (Austria). 
Art. 4.
(1) The Federal territory comprises the territory of the City of Vienna and the territories of the provinces. 
(2) Any alteration of the Federal territory which is at the same time an alteration of the territory of a province, as also the alteration of provincial boundaries within the Federal territory, may only be effected-except in the case of treaties of peace-by means of constitutional laws of identical purport passed by the Federation and the provinces whose territory is being altered. These provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis to the territory of the City of Vienna. 
Art. 5.
(1) The Federal territory constitutes one uniform territory for the purposes of currency, economic matters and customs. 
(2) Inter-State customs boundaries may not be established within the territory of the Federation; other restrictions on trade may only be introduced by Federal laws. 
Art. 6.
(1) Vienna is the Federal capital and the seat of the supreme organs of the Federation. 
(2) While extraordinary conditions prevail the Federal President may remove the seat of the supreme organs of the Federation to another place in Federal territory. 
Art. 7. The German language is the language of the State. The rights granted to the linguistic minorities are not affected thereby. 
Art. 8. The generally acknowledged rules of international law are considered to be a component part of Federal law. 
Art. 9.
(1) The entire State administration may be exercised on the basis of the laws only. 
(2) Every administrative authority may, within its jurisdiction, enact ordinances for the detailed execution of the laws and in addition when it is specifically authorised to do so by a law. 
Art. 10.
(1) The supreme executive officials are: the Federal President, the Federal Government and the Federal Ministers, the President of the Audit office, the provincial Governments and their members and also the Burgomaster of Vienna. 
(2) The authorities specified in paragraph (1) and other public officials may be restricted by law from engaging in private business. 
Art. 11.
(1) Under the direction and supervision of the supreme authorities of the Federation and of the provinces, the administration is conducted in accordance with the provisions of the laws by appointed officials (of the Federation, the provinces and the autonomous bodies). So far as the constitution does not prescribe otherwise, they are bound by the instructions of their superiors and are responsible to the latter in respect of their official duties. A subordinate official may decline to obey an instruction if the latter has been given either by an official who is manifestly not competent or if the observance of the instruction would without doubt infringe the penal laws. 
(2) All officials who are entrusted with public administrative duties are under an obligation to maintain silence regarding all facts of which they obtain-knowledge exclusively through their official duties, provided the law does not prescribe otherwise (official secrecy). 
Art. 12. Authority over civil servants of the Federation is exercised by the Federation through its supreme officials; in the case of the Government servants employed at the Audit Office this supreme official is the President of the Audit Office. Authority over the civil servants of a province is exercised by the provincial Governor. 
Art. 13. All officials of the Federation, the provinces, the communes, the unions of communes and all other autonomous bodies are bound to afford each other mutual assistance within their legal spheres of competence. 
Art. 14.
(1) The Federation, the provinces, the communes and the other autonomous bodies, unless they are acting as incumbents of private rights, are liable for damages which are caused by means of illegal conduct to any individual whatever by persons acting as their agents either purposely or through gross negligence. 
(2) Persons acting as agents of one of the bodies mentioned in paragraph (1) are liable to it for the damages which they have caused directly to that body in the performance of their service or in respect of which it had to indemnify third parties. 
(3) The details are determined by a Federal law. This also fixes the extent to which special provisions differing, from the principle laid down in paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply to the postal, telegraph and telephone services. 
(4) If the bodies specified in paragraph (1) are acting as incumbents of private rights, they are liable under the provisions of civil law for the damages caused by the persons acting as their agents. 
Part II.--General Rights of Citizens<title>
Art. 15.
(1) There exists a general Austrian Federal citizenship and in each province a provincial citizenship. With Federal citizenship the provincial citizenship of that province is acquired in which the Federal citizen possesses the right of domicile (Heimatrecht). 
(2) A requisite for the grant of Federal citizenship is the assurance that legal domicile will be granted in a commune; this assurance can only be given by the commune with the consent of the provincial Government. 
(3) Every Federal citizen has in every province the same rights and duties as the citizens of such province. 
(4) Legal domicile in a commune may only be granted to Federal citizens; the provisions of paragraph (2) are not affected hereby. 
Art. 16.
(1) All Federal citizens are equal before the law. They may not be treated unequally in the laws unless objective grounds afford justification. In particular privileges of birth, position or class are excluded. 
(2) Women have the same rights and obligations as men, except when the law decrees otherwise. 
(3) Public offices are open equally to all loyal and patriotic Federal citizens who conform to the statutory requirements. 
(4) Public servants are guaranteed the unrestricted exercise of their political rights so far as this constitution does not contain exceptions. 
(5) The law may introduce restrictions in regard to the political or otherwise constitutionally guaranteed rights of persons who serve in the armed forces or professionally render services for the latter, and also of Government servants who serve in the public police forces. 
Art. 17. Freedom of movement in regard to person and property is guaranteed to all Federal citizens within the entire Federal territory. Exceptions are laid down by law. 
Art. 18.
(1) The emigration of Federal citizens can only be restricted by Federal law. 
(2) The Federation grants all Federal citizens protection vis-a-vis foreign countries. 
Art. 19.
(1) Personal liberty is guaranteed. Encroachment upon or deprivation of personal liberty by public authority is only permissible in virtue of laws. 
(2) A person may only be arrested on the authority of a court order stating the reasons for the measure. In police proceedings an order of arrest issued by the legally competent authorities has the same validity as a court order. Orders of arrest must be served on the arrested person within a maximum period of 24 hours. 
(3) Whereas public officials authorised to effect arrests may, in the cases provided by law, take a person into custody, they must within 48 hours, either release such person or deliver him to the competent authorities. The competent authorities are those whose duty it is according to law to take further action. 
Art. 20. No Federal citizen may be surrendered to a foreign Government for prosecution or punishment. 
Art. 21. Nobody may be punished for conduct which does not constitute an offence punishable by law and which was not previously defined as such. 
Art. 22.
(1) The home of every Federal citizen is his sanctuary. 
(2) A domiciliary search, that is, the search of a dwelling or other premises belonging to the household, may, as a rule, only be carried out on the authority of a court order with reasons attached. The order must be served on the persons concerned within 24 hours at the latest. 
(3) For the purpose of criminal proceedings the Public Prosecutor or the police authorities may, in cases where it is dangerous to delay, order a domiciliary search without a court order. The official delegated to undertake such search shall be provided with a written authorisation which he must show to the person concerned. 
(4) For purposes of criminal proceedings the police authorities may, on their own authority, make a domiciliary search if an order to appear or a warrant of arrest has been issued, if anyone has been taken in the act, is being openly pursued or is designated by public rumour as suspected of a criminal act, or is found in possession of articles which indicate participation in such act. 
(5) Domiciliary searches for the purpose of criminal proceedings in administrative matters as well as for police and fiscal supervision may only be made in the cases stipulated by law. As regards authorisation and the proof thereof the provisions of paragraph (3) apply. 
(6) In the cases of paragraphs (3) to (5) a certificate that a search of the house has been made, together with the reasons therefor, must on demand be given to the interested person within 24 hours. 
Art. 23. The privacy of letters as well as of the postal, telegraph, and telephone services is inviolable. Exceptions shall be stipulated by law. 
Art. 24. Federal citizens have, within the limits of the law, the right to assemble and to form associations. 
Art. 25. The right to address requests and complaints to the competent authorities is available to every Federal citizen. This right may only, however, be exercised under a corporate name by juridical persons or by legally recognised associations of individuals. 
Art. 26.
(1) Every Federal citizen has the right to express his opinion freely by word, writing, print, picture or otherwise within the limitations stipulated by law. 
(2) The following may be specifically decreed by law:-
<list>
(a) In order to prevent disturbances of the public peace, order and safety or violations of the penal laws, a previous censorship of the press, as well as the theatres, wireless, cinemas and similar public performances, the authorities being empowered to prohibit such performances. 
(b) Measures to combat immorality or gross violations of decency. 
(c) Measures for the protection of youth. 
(d) Measures for the safeguarding of other interests of the people and the State. 
</list>
Art. 27.
(1) All inhabitants of Austria who have reached the age at which they can choose their religion shall enjoy full liberty of belief and conscience, as well as freedom of domestic and public worship, provided that it is not incompatible with public order or morals. 
(2) The religious confession may not prejudice the duties of citizenship. The enjoyment of the civil and citizenship rights as well as the admission to public positions, offices and dignities is independent of creed. In regard to teachers, exceptions from this principle may be stipulated by law. 
(3) Nobody can be forced to perform a religious act or to participate in a religious ceremony. This, however, does not affect obligations arising out of parental, educational or any other legally established rights, nor does it apply to the obligation to be present at church ceremonies for considerations of public service. 
Art. 28.
(1) The adherents of a religious creed which is not legally recognised in Austria as a religious association may unite for the duly organsied practice and other exercise of their creed. Such association is subject to the governmental admission of the religious confession as a religious community. Through such admission the religious community acquires civil standing in law and State protection for the exercise of its religion, but also becomes subject to State supervision. 
(2) The details are settled by law. 
(3) The premises and conditions under which an admitted religious community can be recognised as a religious association are likewise fixed by law. 
Art. 29.
(1) The Catholic Church and the other legally recognised churches and religious associations enjoy public legal character. 
(2) Every legally recognised church and religious association enjoys on behalf of its members the exclusive right to exercise its religion publicly and in common; it regulates and administers its domestic affairs independently; it remains in the possession and enjoyment of its institutions, endowments and funds for its cultural, educational and charitable purposes. Its property and other pecuniary rights are guaranteed. The foregoing is without prejudice to the provisions of article 30 to apply the laws in force for all. 
(3) Every legally recognised church and religious association is authorised to levy dues which serve towards the fulfilment of their church and religious duties. For the collection of these dues and other payments from their members State assistance shall be granted provided that they are imposed in agreement with the Government or are payable under other legal titles. 
Art. 30.
(1) The affairs of the legally recognised churches and religious associations which also affect Government interests are the object of special regulations. 
(2) In this connexion the various churches and religious associations may, according to their individual character and general importance within the State, be granted still further rights than those specified in article 29. 
(3) As regards the Catholic Church the arrangements shall in principle be made by agreement between the Federation and the Holy See. 
(4) Articles 1, 2, 5 (1), paragraphs (1) to (3), 6 (1), paragraphs (1) and (2), 10 (1), paragraph (1), 13 (1) and (4), 14, sentence 1, with paragraph 1 of the additional protocol thereto, 15 (1) and 16 (1) of the concordat between the Holy See and the Republic of Austria signed on June 5th, 1933, shall, from the date of its publication, have the force of constitutional laws. 
(5) In regard to the other legally recognised churches or religious associations the arrangements shall be made by law after due agreement with them. 
Art. 31.
(1) The State shall foster and promote science and art. 
(2) Science and its precepts are free. The duties of a public office are not affected thereby. 
(3) All Federal citizens as well as every Austrian juridical person, is entitled to found schools and educational institutions and to teach and provide instruction provided that they comply with statutory requirements. 
(4) Teaching imparted at home is not subject to such restrictions. 
(5) Every legally recognised church and religious association has the right to impart religious instruction to its members in the schools and to exercise direct supervision over such teaching. 
(6) The supreme direction and supervision in all school and educational matters is vested in the State, without prejudice to the rights granted by article 30. In particular the Government have the duty to see that children are educated in a religious and moral manner and that they acquire the basis of learning necessary to become efficient men and women and good citizens. 
Art. 32.
(1) Every Federal citizen may freely choose his profession. 
(2) The professional corporations are enabled by law, independently to regulate, under State supervision, matters pertaining to their own professions. 
(3) The training for and the exercising of a profession are subject to the laws and the statutes which the professional corporations, established under public law, enact on the basis of the laws. 
Art. 33.
(1) Property is inviolable. Expropriation against the will of the owner can only take place in the cases and in the manner prescribed by law. 
(2) Every Federal citizen can acquire real estate of every kind and dispose freely of the same. Exceptions can be stipulated by law to safeguard public interests. 
(3) Every liability or service encumbering real property and arising from a title of divided estate is redeemable. In the future no real estate may be burdened with such irredeemable encumbrances. 
Part III.-The Federation and the Provinces<title>
Art. 34.
(1) The Federation is competent to enact and execute legislation on the following matters, provided that execution is not, according to law, a matter for autonomous bodies within their own sphere of jurisdiction under the supervision of the Federation: 
<list>
(i) The Federal constitution; election of the Federal President; appointment of the Federal Cultural Council and of the Federal Economic Council; the organisation, establishment and duties of the corporative administration in the free professions and the public service, but in other professions only as regards their centralisation; the participation of public officers in private business; referenda on the basis of the Federal constitution; constitutional and administrative jurisdiction; tokens of the Federation's sovereignty; decorations of the Federation; protection of titles and uniforms; citizenship. 
(ii) Foreign Affairs, including political and commercial representation abroad, and especially the conclusion of all international treaties; the demarcation of boundaries; trade in goods and livestock with foreign countries; customs matters. 
(iii) Entry into and exit from Federal territory; immigration and emigration; passports; deportation, expulsion, banishment and extradition from Federal territory as well as the transit of persons being extradited. 
(iv) Federal finance; disposal of Federal property; raising or conversion of Federal loans; the Federal budget; Federal accounts; monopolies. 
(v) Money, credit, stock exchange, bank and savings bank matters; weights and measures, standards and the stamping of metals. 
(vi) Civil law, including the law concerning co-operative societies and other commercial associations and unions; penal law to be applied by courts; special provisions of administrative criminal law in the matters specified in this article; procedure to be observed by the courts and other judicial authorities; judicial administration; public organisations for the settlement of disputes outside of court, provided that these institutions do not fall under article 36, paragraph (1) No. (viii), and that their competence is not limited to matters in which legislation appertains to the provinces; arbitration agreements and arbitral procedure in private litigation; organisations for the protection of society against criminals, vagrants or other dangerous persons, such as workhouses or similar establishments; copyright law matters relating to the press; private insurance; expropriations for sanitary purposes, and other expropriations, provided they do not affect matters pertaining to the independent competence of the provinces; matters concerning notaries, lawyers and related professions. 
(vii) The maintenance of public tranquillity, order and safety, with the exception of the local police; the right of association and assembly; matters relating to civil status, including registration and change of name; police control of foreigners and the latter's registration; matters pertaining to arms, ammunition, explosives and shooting; matters relating to bookmakers and totalisators, and the combating of unlicensed betting. 
(viii) Trade matters, including commerce and industry; public agencies and private business representation; combating of unfair competition; patents and the protection of samples, trade-marks and other indications on goods; matters concerning patent agents, engineers and civilian technical experts; fairs; public warehouses, public weighing and measuring establishments; measures for the regulation of production and commercial intercourse extending beyond the sphere of interest of a province. 
(ix) Railways, navigation, floating and air traffic; mechanically propelled vehicles; matters pertaining to main roads declared by Federal law to be Federal roads on account of their importance as regards through traffic; river and shipping police; post, telegraph, and telephone matters; broadcasting; foreign tourist traffic promotion, as far as the latter relates to the entire Federal territory. 
(x) Mining, forestry, including pasturage; water rights; the regulation and maintenance of waterways for the purpose of draining off floods without damage or for navigation and floating; the canalisation of streams; the construction and maintenance of waterways; matters relating to electricity; to steam boilers and power-plants; surveying. 
(xi) The law governing labour and the protection of workers and employees, with the exception of those engaged in agriculture and silviculture; social insurance. 
(xii) Matters relating to health with the exception of burials and funerals and communal sanitary and life-saving services; midwifery training schools; sanatoria and nursing establishments managed by the Federation; the sanitary supervision of the other sanitoria and nursing establishments, resorts and medicinal springs; veterinary matters; the inspection of cattle and meat; matters connected with food-stuffs including their examination. 
(xiii) The protection of plants against diseases and vermin which endanger the existence of entire branches of agricultural or silvicultural production. 
(xiv) General matters pertaining to science and art and matters pertaining to religious worship; scientific and technical archives and library services in Federal offices and institutions; matters pertaining to artistic and scientific collections, establishments and institutions belonging to the Federation; matters pertaining to the Federal theatres; the protection of monuments of cultural importance; the census and other statistics, provided that they do not only serve the interests of one single province; endowments and funds, provided that the same are not merely for the benefit of citizens or inhabitants of one single province. 
(xv) Matters relating to the Federal police and the Federal gendarmerie; the establishment and organisation of other bodies of guards, including their armament and the right to make use of weapons. 
(xvi) Military matters, including measures for finding employment for ex-soldiers in the public service; matters pertaining to war damages and the care of war veterans and their surviving dependants; the care of war graves; in time of war or subsequently thereto, measures appearing necessary to ensure the uniform control of economy, and especially the supply of the necessities of life to the people. 
(xvii) The creation of Federal authorities and other Federal offices; the regulations affecting civil servants in the employment of the Federation; the service regulations governing persons in the employment of endowed institutions, foundations, establishments and enterprises, under the administration of the Federation; the service regulations affecting persons employed by the central offices of the corporative administration. 
</list>
(2) The provincial Legislatures may be empowered in the case of Federal laws arising out of paragraph (1) to enact regulations to carry out specific provisions. The terms of article 39, paragraph (2), shall be applied mutatis mutandis in this case. The execution of any complementary laws issued in such circumstances lies within the competence of the Federation, but the ordinances giving them effect, so far as they refer to the complementary laws of the provincial Legislature, require previous agreement with the provincial Governments concerned. 
(3) Within the limits of the Federal laws regarding water rights and electricity the provinces may be allowed to issue decrees (decisions or orders) in regard to water and electricity matters. 
(4) Arbitral boards may be appointed by Federal law to decide in matters of social insurance. As a rule such boards shall be established at the seat of the provincial Government for whose territory it has jurisdiction. The members of such board shall be civil servants versed in law and judges. If necessary, besides the above-mentioned members, assessors may participate in the proceedings. The members (assessors) are not bound by any instructions in carrying out such duties. The decisions of the arbitral boards cannot be cancelled or amended by administrative procedure. The details, especially the organisation, competence and procedure of the arbitral boards, will be regulated by Federal law. 
Art. 35. Administrative procedure, the general rules of administrative criminal law, administrative criminal procedure and execution in administrative matters are regulated by Federal law, and, so far as it is considered that the enactment of uniform rules is necessary, such also applies to matters in which legislation is within the competence of the provinces, especially in matters of taxation. The ordinances for the execution of these Federal laws shall be enacted by the Federation provided that the laws prescribe nothing to the contrary. The application of these laws and the ordinances for their execution is within the competence of the Federation or of the provinces, according to whether the executive action relating to the matter forming the object of the proceedings is within the competence of the Federation or of the provinces. 
Art. 36.
(1) The Federation is competent to enact legislation in the following matters so far as it relates to principles, and the provinces to enact laws to carry out the same, and to execute such legislation, provided that the said powers are not by law entrusted to the competence of the autonomous bodies who exercise their duties under supervision of the provinces: 
<list>
(i) Poor relief, sanatoria and nursing establishments; resorts and mineral springs, provided they do not fall under article 34, paragraph (1), No (xii). 
(ii) The law governing labour and the protection of workers and employees so far as agricultural and silvicultural workers are concerned. 
(iii) Agrarian reform in the domain of agriculture and silviculture. 
(iv) Protection of plants against diseases and vermin, so far as it does not fall under the provisions of article 34, paragraph (1), No. (xiii). 
(v) Road police provided that they do not deal with Federal roads, and therefore fall under article 34, paragraph (1). No. (ix). 
(vi) Deportation and expulsion from one province to another. 
(vii) Right of domicile. 
(viii) The establishment, organisation and duties of the corporative administration in the provinces in so far as these do not refer to the free professions and the public service and therefore fall under article 34, paragraph (1), No. (i). 
(ix) The regulations affecting civil servants in the employment of a Province; the service regulations governing persons in the employment of communes and unions of communes; the service regulations affecting persons employed by the corporative administration in the provinces. 
</list>
(2) In matters of agrarian reform (paragraph (1), No. (iv)), the decision rests with the provincial court and in the supreme instance with senates composed of a chairman and judges with civil service officers and experts as members; the senate which acts as supreme instance is established at the competent Federal Ministry. The establishment, duties and procedure of these senates, as well as the principles concerning the setting up of further authorities which shall have jurisdiction in matters pertaining to agrarian reform will be regulated by Federal law. These senates and these authorities can be called upon to exercise executive powers also in matters pertaining to agriculture which do not fall under the heading of agrarian reform, furthermore, in all matters which stand in close connection with and are closely related to agrarian reform; this authorisation is granted by Federal law if the matter in question falls under the Federal legislation; by provincial law if it falls under provincial legislation. 
Art. 37.
(1) Legislation relating to school and educational matters is vested:
<list_1>
(i) In the Federation exclusively in all matters concerning: 
<list_2>
(a) Universities of every kind; 
(b) High schools and normal schools; 
(c) Medium grade art, trade, commercial, agricultural and silvicultural schools and all professional trade schools; 
(d) Service and salary matters pertaining to all Federal teachers; 
(e) The supervision of the schools mentioned under (a) and (c). 
</list_2>
(ii) Legislation pertaining to principles rests with the Federation, the carrying out of these principles with the provinces, in matters relating to: 
<list_3>
(a) Other school and educational questions, with the exception of the lower grade agricultural schools which fall within the competence of the provincial legislatures; 
(b) Supervision of the schools mentioned under No. (i) (b) and No. (ii) (a); 
(c) Service and salary matters regarding public teachers at elementary and grammar schools and other schools of the provinces and communes; 
(d) Organisation of the school authorities established by articles 121 and 144. 
</list_3>
</list_1>
(2) Execution in school and educational matters rests with the Federation, with the following restrictions: 
<list>
(a) In matters pertaining to the establishment and maintenance of elementary and grammar schools and in those concerning the appointment of teachers mentioned in paragraph (1) No. (ii) (c), the Provinces are granted the right of participation; 
(b) For decisions of the school authorities which involve a charge on a province not provided by law, an agreement has to be reached with the province; 
(c) The execution as regards the lower grade agricultural schools and the trade and agricultural continuation schools falls within the competence of the provinces provided that the provincial laws do not entrust such execution to the school or other Federal authorities or advantage is not taken of the provisions of point (e); 
(d) In matters pertaining to public education the city of Vienna, under the supreme supervision of the Federation, may be granted by law the executive powers relating to institutions and establishments for public education; 
(e) The extent to which self-administrative bodies may exercise executive powers is determined by law. 
</list>
(3) The right of supreme management and supervision in all school and educational questions vested in the State under article 31, paragraph (6), is a Federal matter. 
Art. 38. The competence of the Federation and the provinces in the sphere of taxation is defined in a special Federal constitutional law (Financial Constitutional Law). 
Art. 39.
(1) In so far as the Federation has only the right to legislate in matters of principle, it must limit itself to laying down the general features of the matter in question. The implementing legislation of the provinces is obliged only to conform to the basic features laid down by the Federal laws, otherwise it may act in its discretion and its competence extends also to matters concerning which the Federal law does not prescribe the fundamental features. 
(2) The Federal law establishing the fundamental features can fix a period for the enactment of the implementing legislation. This period may only be less than 6 months or longer than a year if the Council of the Provinces, when giving its opinion, which in this case is a compulsory opinion (article 61) has not objected to such manner of fixing the term. Should a Province fail to observe the time-limit stipulated in the Federal law establishing the fundamental features, the competence to enact the implementing legislation shall pass from the province in question to the 
Federal State. As soon as the province has enacted the implementing legislation, the Federal implementing law shall cease to have force. 
(3) As long as the Federation does not avail itself of the right to legislate concerning principles, the provincial Legislatures can regulate the matters at their discretion. As soon, however, as the Federation has laid down the fundamental features, the provincial laws, have, within a period to be fixed by Federal law, to be adapted to the fundamental legislation. 
(4) If it is desired to render an executive act of a province, in the matters in which the Federation is competent to legislate with regard to the fundamental features, effective for several provinces, the provinces concerned shall first reach a mutual agreement. If a mutual agreement has been reached within 6 months from the time the question arose, their competence devolves, at the request of any province, or of an interested party, upon the competent Federal Ministry. The details are regulated by the Federal law establishing the fundamental features. 
(5) In matters of fundamental legislation the Federation has the right to see that the provisions enacted by it are observed. 
Art. 40.
(1) So far as the constitution does not explicitly declare the legislation, or the legislation and the execution, of a matter to be a Federal concern, the question remains within the independent competence of the provinces. 
(2) The Federation is authorised to entrust the direction of local police matters, i.e., police matters which immediately concern the interests of a commune and which can be attended to within the latter's territory by its own officials, to the competent local Federal police authority or to another Federal organ instead of to the commune. The Federation may also supervise the manner in which the commune handles these matters and may correct observed deficiencies by instructions to the provincial Governor (article 117). For such purpose agents of the Federation may be despatched to the communes; the provincial Governor shall be notified thereof in every individual case. 
(3) The provisions of provincial laws relating to theatres, cinemas, public performances, shows and amusements must, within the jurisdictional districts of the Federal police authorities, delegate to these authorities at least the supervision over performances except when technical equipment, building and fire protection matters are concerned and also grant to the latter authority to concur in the issuing in the first instance of such licences as may be contemplated in such laws. 
(4) In the local jurisdiction of Federal police authorities, the executive powers relating to road police matters is vested in the first instance in these authorities. 
(5) So far as executive acts are concerned with the construction of buildings which are the property of the Federation and which serve public purposes, such as the provision of accommodation for Federal authorities and offices or for public institutions-including schools and hospitals-or which serve as barracks for members of the armed forces or for other Federal employees, such acts fall under the immediate competence of the Federal administration, and the final competence lies with the Federal Minister. The executive powers relating to the fixing of the building line and the height and the treatment by the building authorities of repairs which relate to the external appearance of such buildings are, however, vested in the province. 
(6) The provinces are authorised to enact, within the sphere of their legislation, the necessary provisions to govern the matter in the realm of civil and criminal law. 
Art. 41.
(1) The Federal State may, by Federal law, transfer its competence to legislate or to enact fundamental legislation in regard to a specific matter to one or more provinces. 
(2) The provinces may transfer their competence to enact legislation in a specific matter to the Federation. This shall be effective for all the provinces if so decided by the Council of the Provinces in the presence of at least one-half of the members who are entitled to vote and with a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. 
(3) The provincial laws enacted pursuant to paragraph (1) may be amended or abrogated by Federal laws, and the Federal laws enacted pursuant to paragraph (2) may be amended or abrogated by provincial laws, at the earliest, one year after the coming into effect of the first law dealing with the matter. 
(4) The provisions of this constitution relating to competence to exercise executive powers are not affected by acts pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2). 
Art. 42.
(1) The provisions of articles 34 to 40 regarding the incumbents of the legislative and executive power do not affect the status of the Federation and the provinces in legal matters which come under the law applicable to private parties. 
(2) As regards these legal relations, the Federation may be placed in a less favourable position by provincial legislation than the province itself. 
Art. 43.
(1) Provinces are obliged to take measures which are necessary, within the limits of their independent competence, to carry out international treaties; if a province fails to comply punctually with this obligation, the competence to undertake such measures, and in particular to enact the necessary laws, devolves upon the Federation. 
(2) In the execution of treaties with foreign States the Federation enjoys supervising rights even in those which fall within the independent competence of the provinces. In such matters the Federation has the same rights in relation to the provinces as in matters of indirect Federal administration (article 116). 
PART IV.-FEDERAL LEGISLATION<title>
Section I.-The Organs of Federal Legislation<title>
Art. 44. Federal legislation is exercised by the Federal Diet (the deciding organ) after preliminary consideration of the draft laws by the State Council, the Federal Council of Culture, the Federal Economic Council and the Council of the Provinces (the advisory organs). 
A.-The Advisory Organs<title> 
Art. 45. The advisory organs specified in articles 46 to 49 are competent to give the opinions required of them by this constitution and to fulfil such other duties as devolve on them under this constitution. 
1.-The State Council<title> 
Art. 46.
(1) The Federal President shall appoint to the State Council for a period of 10 years Federal citizens of merit and character who, from their past conduct and services, may be expected to have full understanding of the needs and tasks of the State. 
(2) Appointments to the State Council do not require any previous proposal by the Federal Government but require the counter signature of the Federal Chancellor. 
(3) In the case of Government officials on active service the term of membership in the State Council can be limited to the period of employment which they hold at the time of appointment to the State Council. Otherwise the law laying down the rules of procedure (article 57, paragraph (3)) shall decide in what cases membership of the State Council shall terminate prior to the expiration of the 10 years' term. 
(4) Reappointment after expiration of the 10 years' term is admissible. 
(5) The number of members of the State Council (State Councillors) may not be over 50 or under 40. 
2.-The Federal Council of Culture<title>
Art. 47.-(1) The Federal Council of Culture consists of 30 to 40 representatives of legally recognised Churches and religious associations, of education, learning, science and art. 
(2) Any Federal citizen who has reached the age of 26 and is not excluded from membership by the Federal law contemplated in paragraph (4) may be a member of the Federal Council of Culture. 
(3) In regulating the composition of the Federal Council of Culture particular care shall be taken that among the representatives of education parents are duly taken into consideration. 
(4) The appointment to membership of the Federal Council of Culture (Federal Councillors of Culture) shall be regulated by Federal law according to principles which will guarantee that the members of the Council are loyal patriots. 
3.-The Federal Economic Council<title>
Art. 48.
(1) The Federal Economic Council consists of 70 to 80 representatives delegated by the professional corporations. 
(2) Any Federal citizen who has reached the age of 26 and who is not excluded from membership by the Federal law contemplated in paragraph (3) may be a member of the Federal Economic Council. 
(3) The delegation of members to the Federal Economic Council (Federal Economic Councillors) shall be regulated by Federal law according to principles which will guarantee that the member of the Federal Economic Council are loyal patriots. 
(4) The said law shall provide that the following main professional corporations shall delegate members to the Council:
<list>
Agriculture and forestry. 
Industry and mining. 
Trade. 
Commerce and business. 
Finance, credit and insurance. 
The free professions. 
The Public Service. 
</list>
(5) The number of representatives which each of the aforementioned main professional corporations may delegate shall be fixed according to the number of individuals (independent and dependent) belonging to such corporations; but each main professional corporation shall have at least 3 representatives. 
4.-The Council of the Provinces<title>
Art. 49.
(1) Each province shall delegate to the Council of Provinces its Governor and the member of the provincial Government who is in charge of the finances of the province; the city of Vienna shall delegate its burgomaster and another representative nominated by the burgomaster, who must be well-informed regarding the city's finances. 
(2) If the provincial Governor is personally in charge of the finances of his province, he shall determine who else shall be delegated to the Council of Provinces. 
(3) If a member of the Council of Provinces is temporarily prevented from exercising membership, he may empower the other representative of the province (or of the city of Vienna) to vote in the Council of Provinces on his behalf. If a member is permanently prevented the provincial Governor shall delegate another member of the provincial Government; in Vienna the burgomaster shall appoint the new member. 
B.-The Federal Diet<title>
Art. 50.
(1) The Federal Diet consists of 20 deputies of the State Council, 10 deputies of the Federal Council of Culture, 20 deputies of the Federal Economic Council and 9 members of the Council of Provinces. 
(2) The deputies of the State Council, of the Federal Council of Culture and of the Federal Economic Council are elected by these bodies from among their own membership according to the provisions of the law regarding the rules of procedure. The presidents of these bodies must be among the members so delegated. The member of the Council of Provinces who is appointed to represent his province (or the city of Vienna) in the Federal Diet is designated for each province (or the city of Vienna) by the latter's Governor (or the burgomaster of Vienna). 
Art. 51. The Federal Diet is competent to decide: 
(1) Regarding Bills presented by the Federal Government concerning laws in the material sense; 
(2) Regarding Bills presented by the Federal Government relative to-
<list>
(a) the Federal Budget; 
(b) the floating or conversion of Federal loans; 
(c) the disposal of Federal property. 
</list>
(3) Regarding Bills presented by the Federal Government relative to treaties which involve changes of laws or such as oblige the Federation to enact laws. 
(4) Regarding motions of the Court of Audit for the approval of the Federal accounts. 
(5) Regarding reports of the Court of Audit. 
C.-The Federal Assembly<title>
Art. 52. The State Council, the Federal Council of Culture, the Federal Economic Council and the Council of Provinces meet as a Federal Assembly in joint public session held at the seat of the Federal Diet in order to nominate three candidates for the Federal presidency, to administer the oath to the elected Federal President, to decide upon a declaration of war, and to exercise such further powers as are vested in the Federal Assembly by the present constitution. 
Art. 53.
(1) The Federal Assembly is convoked by the Federal President unless it is otherwise provided by this constitution. The President (Vice-President) of the Federal Diet takes the chair. 
(2) The rules of procedure of the Federal Diet will be applied mutatis mutandis in the Federal Assembly. 
Art. 54.
(1) The decisions of the Federal Assembly shall be authenticated by its chairman and countersigned by the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) The three names put forward by the Federal Assembly for the election of the Federal President, and also decisions of the Federal Assembly relative to a declaration of war, shall be published officially by the Federal Chancellor. 
Section 2.-Detailed Provisions<title>
Art. 55.
(1) The period during which the Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council shall function will be 6 years from the day of the first meeting, but in any case until the day on which the new representative bodies assemble. 
(2) The Federal President can dissolve the Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council. On dissolution their activities shall cease. The Federal Government shall appoint the new body in such time as to enable it to meet at the latest on the 100th day after the dissolution. 
(3) After having been newly appointed, the Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council shall be convoked by the Federal President. 
Art. 56.
(1) Upon the proposal and with the countersignature of the Federal Chancellor the Federal President shall appoint the chairman of the Federal Council and two substitutes from that body. 
(2) The Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council shall elect from their midst the chairman and two substitutes. These elections require confirmation by the Federal President. The confirmation is effected upon the proposal and with the countersignature of the Federal Chancellor. 
(3) The provinces hold the chairmanship of the Council of Provinces for 6 months in turn, in alphabetical order. The Governor (or burgomaster) of the Province (or the city of Vienna) which is called to chairmanship acts as chairman; in the cases set forth in article 49, paragraph (3), the member of the provincial Government who is designated as his substitute shall be chairman. The appointment of the substitute chairman is regulated by the rules of procedure of the Council of Provinces. 
(4) The President of the Federal Diet is the chairman of the State Council. The Vice-Presidents are: first Vice-President, the chairman of the Federal Economic Council; the second Vice-President, the chairman of the Federal Council of Culture; and third Vice-President, one of the 9 members delegated to the Federal Diet by the Council of Provinces. 
Art. 57.
(1) The President of the Federal Diet, the chairman of the State Council and the chairman of the Council of Provinces shall convoke these bodies to sessions. The same applies to the chairmen of the Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council, unless the provisions of article 55, paragraph (3), apply. 
(2) Such convocation has to take place without delay if the Federal Government so request. 
(3) The law regarding rules of procedure shall establish the principles according to which the organs of Federal legislation specified in article 44 shall adopt their own rules of procedure.
Art. 58. The office work of the advisory organs of Federal legislation as well as of the Federal Diet and the Federal Assembly shall be performed by employees assigned by the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) The remuneration of the President and the Vice-President of the Federal Diet, and the amount of the session fees for all the other members of the Federal legislative organs, shall be determined by Federal law. 
Art. 59.
(1) The meetings of the Federal Diet and of the Federal Assembly shall be public unless the exclusion of the public is decided. 
(2) The meetings of the advisory organs of Federal legislation are not public. 
(3) True reports of the proceedings in public meetings of the Federal Diet and its committees as well as of the Federal Assembly shall remain free from responsibility in so far as their publication has been made in accordance with the rules of procedure. The further publication of the contents, which by official verdict was declared punishable, of a seized publication or one declared forfeited, does not become admissible by the fact that these contents formed the subject of discussion in the Federal Diet or the Federal Assembly. 
Art. 60.
(1) For a decision of the advisory organs of Federal legislation, the Federal Diet and the Federal Assembly, the presence of at least one-third of the members and an absolute majority of the votes given is required unless the constitution provides otherwise. 
(2) As regards Federal constitutional laws and the approval of treaties by which a Federal constitutional law is altered or the Federation is obliged to enact a Federal constitutional law, the Federal Diet can only decide in the presence of at least one-half of the members and with a majority of two-thirds of the votes given. Federal constitutional laws must be specifically designated as such (Federal constitutional law). 
Section 3.-The Course of Federal Legislation<title> 
Art. 61.
(1) The Federal Government must refer the drafts of the Bills mentioned in article 51, number (1), to the advisory organs of Federal legislation through the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) The State Council is obliged to give, within such time as the Federal Government may stipulate, an opinion on these Bills and to notify the Federal Chancellor accordingly. With regard to drafts which the Federal Government declares to be exclusively or chiefly of cultural importance, this obligation rests with the Federal Council of Culture, and with regard to drafts which the Federal Government declares to be exclusively or chiefly of economic importance, with the Federal Economic Council (obligatory opinions). 
(3) The Federal Government may refer, through the Federal Chancellor, Bills which are both of cultural and economic importance to the Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council for an obligatory opinion, and may stipulate a time-limit within which such opinion shall be communicated to the Federal Chancellor. 
(4) The Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council may not decline to give an obligatory opinion on the ground that from the nature and contents of the Bill the other consultative organ of Federal legislation is competent, or that the premises of paragraph (3) do not exist. 
(5) The advisory organs of Federal legislation which, according to paragraph (2) or (3), are not compelled to give an opinion, may pass, within the period stipulated by the Federal Government, a voluntary opinion and communicate it to the Federal Chancellor (voluntary opinion). 
(6) In giving an opinion within the meaning of this article (giving a compulsory or voluntary opinion) the State Council shall express the view whether the draft complies with the requirements of the sovereignty of the State and the public welfare as well as with the requirements of expedient execution of the law. The Federal Council of Culture and the Federal 
Economic Council shall give their opinions from the standpoints of cultural and economic interests respectively. The Council of Provinces shall express its view from the standpoint of the interests of the provinces. 
Art. 62.
(1) After receipt of the opinions contemplated in article 61 or after the expiration of the prescribed time-limit the Federal Government can introduce its Bill to the Federal Diet through the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) The Federal Government shall fix the time within which the Federal Diet shall make its decision. 
(3) In the Federal Diet the Bill will be explained and substantiated by a rapporteur. A counter-report is admissible. No further discussion shall take place. The Federal Diet shall decide by vote its acceptance without alteration or its rejection of the Bill. 
(4) The Federal Government can, before the voting, at any time withdraw its Bill or introduce such amendments thereto as in their opinion do not affect its nature. 
Art. 63. The Bills specified in article 51, numbers (2) to (5), are not subject to an opinion on the part of the advisory organs of Federal legislation. The Federal Government submit the Bills mentioned in numbers (2) and (3), and the President of the Court of Audit those in numbers (4) and (5), directly to the Federal Diet. The Federal Diet has the right of unrestricted debate, of making eventual amendments and of deciding regarding the Bills specified in article 51, numbers (2), (4) and (5); in regard to the Bills mentioned in number (3) of that article it has merely the right of coming to a decision. Article 62, paragraph (4), applies also to Bills of the Federal Government. 
Art. 64. The President of the Federal Diet must immediately notify the Federal Chancellor concerning all decisions of the Federal Diet in connexion with Bills mentioned in article 51. He shall also notify to the President of the Court of Audit decisions which refer to Bills specified under numbers (4) and (5). 
Art. 65.
(1) The people are called upon to vote if the Federal Government decide: 
<list>
(a) to submit to a referendum a rejected Bill concerning a law in the material sense; 
(b) to ask the people of the Federal State whether or not they agree with the draft of a specific law; and 
(c) to submit a specific question pertaining to Federal legislation to the people for their decision as a matter of principle. 
</list>
(2) All Federal citizens are entitled to vote who have reached the age of 24 and are not excluded from the franchise by the Federal law contemplated in paragraph (7). 
(3) The vote is "yes" or "no." 
(4) The absolute majority of all the valid votes cast decides. 
(5) The referendum is ordered by the Federal President. 
(6) The Federal Government shall authenticate and publish without further procedure a Bill or draft (paragraph (1) (a) and (b)) which has been approved by the people of the Federation. If the Federal Diet rejects in the case of paragraph (1) (c) a Bill corresponding to the result of the popular referendum, the Federal Government may settle the said question in the sense decided by the referendum by means of an ordinance altering the law. 
(7) The details shall be provided by Federal law. 
Art. 66.
(1) The Federal President certifies by his signature to the fact that the Federal laws have been enacted in accordance with the constitution. 
(2) The Federal .Chancellor presents the laws for authentication. 
(3) The authentication must be countersigned by the Federal Chancellor and the competent Federal Minister. 
Art. 67.
(1) The Federal laws and the treaties indicated in article 51, number (3), shall be published in the Bundesgesetzblatt by the Federal Chancellor with due reference to the decision of the Federal Diet, and Federal laws which are based on a referendum, with reference to the result of such referendum. 
(2) The laws and treaties indicated in paragraph (1) become binding as from the end of the day on which the number of the Bundesgesetzblatt containing the promulgation has been published and issued; exceptions to this rule must be specifically stipulated and must conform to the provisions of article 21. Unless anything to the contrary is specifically decreed, the validity of the law extends to the entire Federal territory. 
(3) In the case of treaties the publication may be limited to making known the German text, provided that the latter is to be considered authentic. 
Section 4.-Participation of the Organs of Federal Legislation in the Executive Powers of the Federation<title>
Art. 68.
(1) The international treaties mentioned in article 51, number (3), require for their validity the approval of the Federal Diet. The Federal Government may, however, by decree provisionally place in operation for a maximum period of 12 months the material provisions of such treaties, provided that they relate to matters of commerce and trade, as soon as the drafts of such treaties are signed by the representatives of the contracting States. The Federal Government may revoke decrees passed in virtue of such authorisation so long as the Federal Diet has not decided regarding the Bill introduced by the Federal Government; if the Federal Diet rejects the Bill the decree shall be revoked within an appropriate time. 
(2) Political treaties which do not involve a change of law need for their validity the consent of the State Council or of a committee to be chosen by the latter. 
Art. 69.
(1) At the latest 10 weeks prior to the end of the fiscal year the Federal Government must submit to the Federal Diet a draft of the budget pertaining to the expenditure and receipts of the Federation for the coming fiscal year. If the Federal Diet fails to arrive at a decision regarding the Bill within 6 weeks, the latter shall be considered as having been accepted by the Federal Diet and can be authenticated and published as a Federal law. 
(2) Federal expenditure which is not prescribed in financial law or in a special law requires, before payment can be made, the approval of the Federal Diet; such approval must be applied for by the Federal Minister for Finance. If delay would be dangerous such Federal expenditure may be made without such consent provided it does not exceed one million Schillinge; the approval of the Federal Diet must subsequently be applied for. 
Section 5.-The Status of the Members of the Organs of the Federal Legislation<title>
Art. 70. The members of the State Council, the Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council and the Council of Provinces are not bound by any instructions in the performance of their duties in these advisory bodies of Federal legislation, in the Federal Diet or in the Federal Assembly. 
Art. 71.
(1) Disciplinary power over the members of the organs of Federal legislation is exercised by their president (chairman) or by the disciplinary board established for all organs of Federal legislation. 
(2) The composition of the disciplinary board and its authority are regulated by the law regarding the rules of procedure. 
(3) If a member of an advisory organ of Federal legislation by his behaviour disturbs the orderly progress of business or outrages the usages or decency of a meeting of the body in question or of a meeting of the Federal Diet or the Federal Assembly, the president (chairman) may hold him responsible. 
(4) The extent of the disciplinary powers of the president (chairman) is fixed by the law regarding the rules of procedure. Apart from other means of enforcing disciplinary authority, the president (chairman) shall at all events be granted power to exclude a member from meetings with the legal consequence that the individual so excluded loses his session fee. 
(5) If such behaviour constitutes a violation of the law which may form the object of official prosecution, the authorities are not prevented from instituting such prosecution. 
(6) If the behaviour can form the subject of a private complaint, such is likewise admissible, unless the prospective plaintiff is himself a member of an organ of Federal legislation. In the latter case the complaint may only be lodged with the disciplinary board. 
(7) The law regarding rules of procedure must authorise the disciplinary board to pronounce loss of membership in specially serious cases. 
Art. 72.
(1) Nobody may be a member of two or more advisory bodies of the Federal legislature at the same time. 
(2) Persons who serve in the army or who render professional services for the latter, and Government employees who are connected with the Public Safety Services can only be called into the Federal State Council. 
PART V.-THE EXECUTIVE POWERS OF THE FEDERATION<title>
Section 1.-Administration<title>
A.-The Federal President<title> 
Art. 73.
(1) The Federal President is elected by a secret vote of the burgomasters of all the communes in the Federal territory on the basis of three names put forward by the Federal Assembly. 
(2) In the three names the Federal Assembly can only include citizens who have passed the age of 35. These three individuals are selected by several ballots in which each member of the Federal Assembly may in each case only propose one person; in the last ballot the relative majority decides. 
(3) To elect the President the burgomasters assemble in the Federal capital, Vienna. Of the three individuals designated in the nomination the one is elected who in the first and only ballot receives the largest number of valid votes. The result of the vote shall be officially published by the Federal Chancellor. 
(4) Details shall be settled by a Federal law. 
(5) The Federal President shall hold his office for seven years. Re-election is admissible. 
Art. 74.
(1) The Federal President may not during his term of office be a member of any legislative or executive organ and may. not exercise any other profession. 
(2) The title of "Federal President" is protected by law, and may not, even with an affix or in conjunction with other designations, be borne by anyone else. Past holders of the office of Federal President may use the honorary title of "Former Federal President." 
Art. 75. The Federal President, on taking over his office, shall take the following oath in the presence of the Federal Assembly: 
"I swear that I will devote all my strength to the welfare of the Austrian People, will observe the constitution and all the laws of Austria, will conscientiously perform my duties and will act with justice to everyone. So help me God!" 
Art. 76.
(1) An official prosecution of the Federal President is only admissible with the consent of the Federal Assembly. 
(2) A motion for the prosecution of the Federal President must be lodged by the competent authorities with the Federal Diet; the latter shall decide whether the matter shall be referred to the Federal Assembly. If the Federal Diet decides in the affirmative, the Federal Chancellor must immediately convoke the Federal Assembly. 
(3) Whether and in what form the Federal President desires to give testimony lies within his own discretion. 
Art. 77.
(1) If the Federal President is prevented from discharging his duties or if the office of the President becomes permanently vacant, his obligations devolve on the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) In the event of the office of the President becoming permanently vacant the Federal Chancellor must without delay convoke the Federal Assembly in order that the latter may nominate three individuals for the election of a Federal President, and administer the oath to the newly-elected President. 
Art. 78.
(1) The Federal President represents the Federation in external matters, receives and accredits the credentials of Envoys, approves the appointment of foreign consuls, appoints the consular representatives of the Federation abroad and concludes international treaties. 
(2) Furthermore, in addition to the powers bestowed on him by other provisions of this constitution, the following powers are vested in the Federal President:-
<list>(a) The appointment of the Government employees who serve under the authority of the Federation, including officers and other Federal officials, and the bestowal of official titles upon them. 
(b) The creation and bestowal of professional titles. 
(c) The grant of general amnesties for acts liable to judicial punishment. 
(d) In individual cases: the pardon of individuals legally convicted by the courts, the mitigation and commutation of sentences pronounced by the courts; the revision of legal consequences and the annulment of sentences as an act of grace, and, further, the quashing of criminal proceedings in the case of punishable actions which involve an official prosecution. 
(e) The declaration of legitimacy in the case of illegitimate children, at the request of the parents. 
</list>
(3) The extent to which the Federal President has further authority to grant honours, extraordinary allowances, increases of salary or maintenance, the right to make or confirm appointments and other powers in staff matters, is fixed by law. 
Art. 79.
(1) The Federal President may transfer to the competent members of the Federal Government the right vested in him to appoint State employees of definite categories. 
(2) The Federal President may empower the Federal Government or the competent members thereof to conclude certain categories of international treaties not covered by the provisions of article 51, No. (3), or of article 68, paragraph (2). 
Art. 80.
(1) All orders and acts of the Federal President are, unless the constitution provides otherwise, effected at the instance of the Federal Government or of the Federal Minister authorised thereby. The extent to which the Federal Government or the competent Federal Minister is bound by proposal from other quarters is determined by law. 
(2) All orders and acts of the Federal President, unless the constitution provides otherwise, require for their validity the countersignature of the Federal Chancellor or of the competent Federal Minister. Responsibility is undertaken through this countersignature. 
(3) The appointment of State employees to the office of the Federal President requires neither a proposal from the Federal Government nor countersignature. 
B.-The Federal Government<title>
Art. 81.
(1) The Federal Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor and the other Federal Ministers are entrusted with the conduct of the supreme administration of the Federation, in so far as this is not reserved to the Federal President. They form collectively the Federal Government under the leadership of the Federal Chancellor. 
(2) When the Federal Chancellor is prevented from exercising the duties of his office he is substituted in his entire sphere of jurisdiction by the Vice-Chancellor. If the Federal Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor are simultaneously so prevented, the Federal President shall entrust a member of the Federal Government to act for the Federal Chancellor. 
Art. 82.
(1) The Federal Chancellor and, on his proposition, the other members of the Federal Government are appointed by the Federal President. For the dismissal of the Federal Chancellor, or the entire Federal Government, no proposal and countersignature are required; the dismissal of individual members of the Federal Government is effected at the instance of the Federal Chancellor. The countersignature for the appointment of the Federal Chancellor or of the entire Federal Government is given by the newly appointed Federal Chancellor. 
(2) If members of an advisory organ of Federal legislation, of a Provincial Diet, Provincial Government, or Communal council are appointed Federal Ministers, their former activities remain in suspense so long as they hold the office of Minister. The relevant laws provide for their substitute for the period in question. 
Art. 83.
(1) If the Federal Government goes out of office the Federal President, until a new Federal Government is formed, entrusts members of the resigning Government, Under-Secretaries of State, or senior officials of the Federal Departments with the conduct of the administration, and one of them with the Presidency of the temporary Federal Government. 
(2) The provisions of paragraph (1) also apply, mutatis mutandis, when individual members resign from the Federal Government. 
Art. 84.
(1) The members of the Federal Government, before assuming office, shall take an oath of the constitution, the observation of the laws and the conscientious fulfilment of their duties; this oath shall be administered by the Federal President. 
(2) The letters of appointment of the Federal Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor and the other Federal Ministers shall be signed by the Federal President on the date on which they take the oath and countersigned by the newly appointed 
Federal Chancellor. 
(3) These provisions also apply mutatis mutandis to the cases referred to in article 83. 
Art. 85.
(1) In the event of the temporary incapacity of a Federal Minister, the Federal President shall entrust one of the Federal Ministers, a Secretary of State or a senior official of a Federal office to act for him. This substitute shall carry the same responsibility as a Federal Minister (article 88). 
(2) Paragraph 1 shall also apply if a Federal Minister is temporarily prevented from discharging only part of his duties. 
(3) In administrative acts of minor importance Federal Ministers may cause themselves to be represented by their Under-Secretaries of State or officials. The extent of the latter's powers of representation is decreed by the Federal Minister. The responsibility of the Federal Minister is not affected thereby. 
Art. 86. The Federal President must relieve the Federal Government or its individual members of office in the cases stipulated by law or if they so desire. 
Art. 87. The members of the Federal Government and such substitutes as they may delegate are entitled to participate in all meetings of the organs of Federal Legislation and their committees. They must, upon request, always be heard. 
Art. 88.
(1) The members of the Federal Government are responsible for any violation of the law committed in the exercise of their office (article 173, paragraph (2) (a)). 
(2) For a decision with which an impeachment in accordance with article 173, paragraph (2) (a), is brought, the presence of more than half of the members of the Federal Diet and a two-thirds majority of the votes cast are required. 
Art. 89. The official prosecution of a member of the Federal Government on account of a punishable offence which does not call for an official prosecution, and the summoning of such a member to give evidence, are only permissible with the consent of the Federal President. 
Art. 90.
(1) The Federal Chancery and the other Federal Ministries and their subordinate offices are competent to attend to the business of Federal administration. 
(2) The number of Federal Ministries and their spheres of jurisdiction shall be determined by decree of the Federal President. 
Art. 91.
(1) The Federal Chancery is directed by the Federal Chancellor, and each of the Federal Ministries by a Federal Minister. 
(2) The Federal Chancellor and the other Federal Ministers may, as an exception, also be entrusted with the direction of other Federal Ministries. 
(3) In special cases Federal Ministers may be appointed who are not entrusted with the direction of a Federal Ministry. 
(4) The Federal President may entrust to particular Federal Ministers the technical conduct of certain matters falling within the competence of the Federal Chancery, notwithstanding that these matters continue to appertain to the competence of the Federal Chancery; such Federal Ministers have in these matters the status of a competent Federal Minister. 
Art. 92.
(1) Under-Secretaries of State may be attached to the Federal Ministers to act in their place to the extent that the Federal President may deem appropriate; these shall be appointed and relieved from office in the same manner as the Federal Ministers. 
(2) An Under-Secretary of State is subordinate to the Federal Minister and is bound by his instructions. 
Art. 93. The Federal Chancellor decides the main lines of  policy. Within these main lines each Federal Minister directs independently the branch of administration entrusted to him. 
Art. 94.
(1) The Federal Ministers must submit to the Federal Government, for their deliberation and decision, all Bills and all matters specified by the constitution or by the law, as well as differences of opinion concerning questions which affect the competence of several Federal Ministries. 
(2) The Federal Government may, however, authorise the Federal Minister in whose competence the matter principally falls to exercise the executive powers devolving by law in the Federal Government, provided such powers are not constitutionally reserved to the latter. 
C.-The Armed Forces<title>
Art. 95.
(1) It is the duty of the armed forces to defend the frontiers of the Federal State. 
(2) When its collaboration is claimed by the legally constituted civil authorities, the armed forces are destined to protect the constitutional institutions and maintain peace and security within the country in general and to render help in natural catastrophes and accidents of exceptional extent. 
(3) Federal law shall specify the authorities and organs which may directly claim the collaboration of the armed forces for the purposes mentioned in paragraph (2). 
(4) Spontaneous military intervention for the purposes indicated in paragraph (2) is only permissible either if the effective action of the competent authorities is crippled for any reasons or where an actual assault has to be repulsed or a violent resistance suppressed. 
Art. 96. Under the Federal President, who is Commander-in-Chief, the competent Federal Minister shall exercise command over the armed forces and dispose of them. 
Art. 97. The extent to which the provinces, the communes and the unions of communes shall co-operate in recruiting, maintaining and quartering the armed forces and in contributing to their further requirements shall be determined by Federal law. 
Section 2.-Jurisdiction<title>
98.
(1) All jurisdiction emanates from the Federation. 
(2) Judgments and sentences are promulgated and drawn up in the name of the Federal State of Austria. 
Art. 99. Justice is separated from administration in all instances. 
Art. 100.
(1) The constitution and competence of the courts are determined by Federal law. 
(2) No one may be withheld from his legal judge. 
(3) Exceptional courts are only permissible in the cases previously stipulated by law. 
Art. 101.
(1) In the execution of their judicial office all judges are independent. 
(2) A judge is in the exercise of his judicial office when he is performing all judicial business appertaining to him according to law, with the exception of administrative judicial functions which are not reserved by the provisions of the law for boards or commissions. 
Art. 102.
(1) Professional judges shall be appointed in accordance with the proposal of the Federal Government, either by the Federal President, or with the latter's authority, by the competent Federal Minister; the Federal Government or the Federal Minister must obtain proposals regarding the appointments in accordance with the provisions of the judicial constitution. 
(2) The proposal to be submitted to the competent Federal Minister and to be referred by the latter to the Federal Government if there are sufficient candidates, must contain at least three names but, if more than one post is to be filled, at least twice as many names as there are judges to be appointed. 
(3) The judicial constitution will stipulate an age-limit, after reaching which a judge must be placed on the permanent retired list. 
(4) Apart from the above, judges may only be removed from their office, transferred to another post against their will or retired in the cases prescribed by law in virtue of a legal decision. These provisions, however, do not apply to transfers and retirements necessitated by changes in the constitution of the courts. In such a case the period within which judges may be transferred or retired without the formalities otherwise prescribed shall be decreed by law. 
(5) The temporary removal of judges from office may only take place on an order of the head of the court or of the superior court authorities if the matter is simultaneously referred to the competent court. 
Art. 103. The business shall be divided among the judges of a court beforehand, for a period to be determined by the judicial constitution. 
Art. 104.
(1) The courts have no authority to pass on the validity of laws and ordinances which have been duly promulgated. 
(2) If the Supreme Court has doubts concerning the constitutionality of a law which forms the premise for its judgment, it shall interrupt the proceedings and file a motion for the abrogation of the law in question with the Federal Constitutional Court (article 170, paragraph (1) (b)). 
(3) If a court has doubts concerning the constitutionality of an ordinance which forms the premise for its judgment, it shall interrupt the proceedings and file a motion for the abrogation of the ordinance in question with the Federal Constitutional Court (article 169, paragraph (1) (b)). 
Art. 105.
(1) Proceedings in civil and criminal matters before the court which gives judgment are oral and public. Exceptions will be determined by law. 
(2) In criminal cases proceedings are initiated by the prosecution. 
Art. 106. In criminal proceedings before the regular civil courts assessors shall participate in the administration of justice if the punishment to be imposed exceeds a degree of severity to be determined by law. 
Art. 107.
(1) The supreme instance in civil and criminal matters is the Supreme Court, provided that nothing to the contrary is stipulated by law. 
(2) Members of the Federal Government, a provincial Government, an advisory organ of legislation, a Provincial Diet or a communal council may not be members of the Supreme Court. 
PART VI.-LEGISLATION OF THE PROVINCES<title>
Art. 108.
(1) The legislation of the provinces is performed by the provincial Diets. 
(2) The provincial Diets consist of representatives of legally recognised churches and religious associations, the school and educational system, science and art and of professional corporations of the provinces. 
(3) Any Federal citizen who has reached the age of 26 and is not excluded from membership by the provincial law contemplated in paragraph (4) may be a member of a provincial Diet. Persons serving in the armed forces or professionally rendering service to the latter, and also Government employees engaged in the public police services. may not be members of a provincial Diet. 
(4) The number of members of the Diets of the various provinces, their apportionment among the cultural associations specified in paragraph (2) and the main professional corporations indicated in article 48, paragraph (4), and also the manner in which the members of the provincial Diets are designated, shall be determined by provincial law under observation of the principles established in article 47, paragraphs (3) and (4), for the Federal Council of Culture, and in article 48, paragraphs (3) and (5), for the Federal Economic Council; with the proviso that each main corporation must receive at least one representative. 
(5) The provincial Diet shall elect from among its members the president and two vice-presidents. 
Art. 109.
(1) The provincial Diet shall hold meetings for the purpose of giving its opinion; the public shall be excluded from such meetings. In addition it holds meetings for the purposes of consultation and of passing decisions, which meetings are public provided that the Diet has not passed a resolution excluding the public. The meetings of the committees are not public. 
(2) The provincial Government must refer drafts of laws, in the material sense of the word, to the provincial Diet as the advisory body. The Diet is obliged to pass, within the period stipulated by the provincial Government, an opinion on these drafts and to communicate the same to the provincial Government. 
(3) After receipt of the opinion or after expiration of the stipulated time, the provincial Government can introduce the Bill in the provincial Diet; the Government shall fix the period within which the Diet must arrive at its decision. If the latter does not come to a decision within such period the provincial Governor may, on his own responsibility, place the provisions of the Bill in force by decree. The provisions of article 111 shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
(4) In the provincial Diet the Bill shall be explained and substantiated by a rapporteur. A counter-report is admissible. There shall be no further discussion. The provincial Diet shall decide by vote the acceptance of the Bill unchanged or its rejection. 
(5) Prior to the voting the provincial Government may at any time withdraw their Bill or make changes in it which do not, in their opinion, affect the character of the Bill. 
(6) Bills of the provincial Government which do not concern laws in the material sense of the word shall be dealt with in the consultative and deliberative meetings. 
(7) The provisions of article 59, paragraph (3), and articles 70, 71 and 87 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the provincial Diets and their members. 
(8) The payment of the members of the provincial Diets shall be regulated by provincial law. 
Art. 110. The enactment of a provincial law requires a decision of the provincial Diet, certification and countersignature according to the terms of the provincial constitution and promulgation by the provincial Governor in the provincial gazette of laws. 
Art. 111.
(1) Prior to their promulgation and immediately after being passed by the provincial Diet, all resolutions of the provincial Diet as to laws, including those relating to matters of taxation, must be notified by the provincial Governor to the Federal Chancellor's Office and to the Federal Ministry whose competence is chiefly concerned with such law. 
(2) A decision of a provincial Diet as to a law may only be promulgated if the Federal Chancellor has given his consent. This consent is considered as granted should the Federal Chancellor not notify the provincial Governor, within 6 weeks from the day on which the resolution reached the Federal Chancellor's Office, that consent is refused. 
(3) In provincial laws provision can also be made for the co-operation of Federal organs in the execution of the provincial laws. 
Art. 112.
(1) The provincial constitution may not conflict with the Federal constitution. 
(2) A provincial constitutional law can be passed only if one-half of the members of the provincial Diet are present and by a majority of two-thirds of the votes given. 
Art. 113.
(1) Every provincial Diet may be dissolved by the Federal President at the instance of the Federal Government after hearing the views of the State Council and the Council of Provinces. 
(2) In the event of dissolution the procedure for the installation of a new provincial Diet shall be initiated immediately. 
PART VII-ADMINISTRATION IN THE PROVINCES<title> 
Art. 114.
(1) The provincial Governor is competent to represent the provinces. 
(2) The administration in the provinces, so far as it is not attended to by Federal authorities (article 120) or according to the laws by autonomous bodies under the supervision of the Federation of the province, devolves, in matters within the executive competence of the Federation, on the provincial Governor, in matters within the executive competence of the province, on the provincial Government, and in both cases on the provincial authorities subordinate to the provincial Governor. 
(3) The provincial Government consists of the provincial Governor, the provincial Vice-Governor and at the most five additional members (provincial councillors). 
(4) The provincial Governor is appointed by the Federal President on the basis of a submission of three names by the provincial Diet. The appointment must be countersigned by the Federal Chancellor. The provincial Governor may be removed by the Federal President at the instance of the Federal Chancellor and with the latter's countersignature. The Federal President must remove the provincial Governor if the provincial Diet so demands. For a resolution of the provincial Diet demanding the removal of the provincial Governor, the presence of at least one-half of the members of the Diet and a majority of two-thirds of the votes given are required. 
(5) The Vice-Governor and the provincial councillors are appointed by the provincial Governor. They may be removed by the provincial Governor. They must be removed by the provincial Governor if the provincial Diet so demands. For a resolution of the provincial Diet demanding such removal the presence of at least one-half of the members of the Diet and a majority of two-thirds of the votes given are required. 
(6) Only a person who is at least 26 years old and eligible for the provincial Diet can be appointed a member of a provincial Government (provincial Governor, Vice-Governor or provincial Councillor). The members of the provincial Government need not be taken from the provincial Diet. If, however, they are taken from the latter they must resign their membership therein for such time as they belong to the provincial Government. The provincial Governor and the other members of the provincial Government may not be members of the State Council, the Federal Council of Culture or the Federal Economic Council. 
(7) The Vice-Governor is competent to represent the provincial Governor in the latter's entire sphere of competence. His appointment requires the consent of the Federal Chancellor. The consent may be revoked. The provincial Governor shall entrust his substitute as well as other members of the provincial Government with the direction of certain groups of provincial executive business. 
(8) Before entering into office the provincial Governor shall take an oath on the Federal and the provincial constitutions in the presence of the Federal President and the other members of the provincial Government in the presence of the provincial Governor. 
(9) The provincial Governor and the other members of the provincial Government are responsible to the provincial Diet for all culpable violations of the law caused by their official administration. For a resolution of the provincial Diet by which an impeachment in accordance with article 173, paragraph (2) (b), is brought, the presence of more than one-half of the members of the provincial Diet and a majority of two-thirds of the votes given are required. 
(10) An official prosecution of the provincial Governor on account of a criminal act not subject to automatic prosecution, as well as a summons to appear as a witness, is only permissible with the consent of the Federal Chancellor, and such prosecution or summons of another member of the provincial Government only with the consent of the provincial Governor. 
Art. 115.
(1) The administrative officials (offices) in the provinces are provincial officials (offices) provided that administration is not exercised by the Federation's own authorities in the sense of article 120, or by autonomous bodies. 
(2) The provincial administration is competent to assist the provincial Governor in the latter's entire field of duties as well as to assist the provincial Government. For the direction of the internal service of this office the provincial Governor shall appoint as Government director an administrative official with legal training, in accordance with the provisions regarding qualifications for carrying out political duties. This Government director shall also be an auxiliary organ of the provincial Governor in matters pertaining to the indirect Federal administration (article 116). His appointment requires the consent of the Federal Chancellor. It can be revoked. 
(3) The details concerning the organisation and routine of the provincial administration are decreed by Federal law. The Bill relating to this Federal law may be submitted for decision to the Federal Diet only if the Council of the Provinces has passed an opinion approving the Bill; this is a compulsory opinion on the part of the Council of Provinces. 
(4) Subordinate to the provincial Governor, as head of the provincial administration, the district administrations and other provincial officials and offices as well as the communes and other autonomous bodies attend to administration in the provinces in accordance with the provisions of the law in so far as this is not done by the Federation's own authorities. 
(5) The employees of the Federation's offices are Government employees under the authority of the Federation; the employees of provincial offices are Government employees under the authority of the provinces (article 34, paragraph (1), No. (xvii), and article 36, paragraph (1), No. (x)); and the employees of the communes and other autonomous bodies are employees of the said bodies. 
(6) The appointment of the district commissioners and the entrusting of an official of the provincial administration with the direction of matters of public safety require the consent of the Federal Chancellor. It can be revoked. The appointment of Government employees under the authority of the provinces to official posts which correspond to the existing posts of the two highest service classes likewise requires the consent of the 
Federal Chancellor. 
Art. 116. The Federal administration is exercised within the sphere of the provinces by the provincial Governor and his subordinate Provincial authorities (indirect Federal administration), provided that it is not exercised by the Federation's own authorities (direct Federal administration) or according to law by autonomous bodies under the supervision of the Federation. In so far as executive powers in matters which fall under the indirect Federal administration are vested in Federal authorities, especially Federal police authorities, the same Federal authorities are subordinate in such matters to the provincial Governor and must follow his instructions (article 11, paragraph (1)). Whether and to what extent such Federal authorities shall be entrusted with executive duties, shall be determined by Federal laws enacted according to article 34. In cases in which the Federal police authorities have to perform executive acts in matters pertaining to the independent competence of the provinces, the right to give instructions is vested in the provincial Governor as mouthpiece of the province. 
Art. 117.
(1) In matters of indirect Federal administration the provincial Governor is bound by the instructions of the Federal Government and of the individual Federal Ministers (article 11, paragraph (1)) and is obliged to use for the carrying out of these instructions such powers as are at his disposal in his capacity as organ of the autonomous competence of the province.
(2) The provincial Governor can decree that certain categories of matters pertaining to indirect Federal administration, in view of their essential relationship with matters within the autonomous competence of the province, shall be carried out in his name by members of the provincial Government. In these matters the relevant members of the provincial Government are bound by the instructions of the provincial Governor in the same way as the latter is bound by the instructions of the Federal Government or of the individual Federal Ministers. 
(3) Instructions of the Federal Government or of the individual Federal Ministers which are issued in accordance with paragraph (1), must also, in the cases mentioned in paragraph (2), be addressed to the provincial Governor. The latter, if he does not himself conduct the matter in question of indirect Federal administration, is obliged immediately to pass on, in writing and without alteration, such instruction to the competent member of the provincial Government; this has to be done to supervise the execution of the instruction. If the instruction is not complied with, although the provincial Governor has taken the necessary steps, the Federal Chancellor may demand of the provincial Governor that he withdraw from the said member of the provincial Government the direction of matters of indirect Federal administration and in future no longer entrust to such member any further matters without the 
Federal Chancellor's consent. 
(4) The stages of appeal in matters of indirect Federal administration end with the provincial Governor in cases in which the latter decides, in accordance with the administrative regulations, as the authority in matters of appeal. 
Art. 118.
(1) The provincial Governor is responsible to the Federation for the direction of the indirect Federal administration (article 114, paragraph (4)). 
(2) The provincial Governor, when prevented from exercising his duties, shall be substituted by the Vice-Governor also in matters in the sphere of indirect Federal administration. If it is presumed that such substitution will last for a considerable period, the Federal Chancellor must be notified by the provincial Governor or Vice-Governor. 
Art. 119.
(1) The provisions of article 116 do not apply to arrangements for dealing with the business of the Federation specified in article 42. 
(2) Federal Ministers entrusted with the administration of Federal property may delegate such business to the provincial Governor and to the authorities in the province subordinate to the latter. Such delegation may be revoked wholly or partially at any time. The payment which the Federation must make for the expenses which arise through such service will be determined by law. 
Art. 120.
(1) The following matters, within the limits of the competence determined by the constitution, may be dealt with directly by Federal authorities: 
<list_1>
(a) boundary delimitation; 
(b) trade in goods and cattle with foreign countries; 
(c) customs; 
(d) Federal finance; 
(e) monopolies; 
(f) weights, measures, standards and stamping marks; 
(g) technical research; 
(h) justice; 
(i) patents, protection of models, trade marks and other indications on goods; 
(k) posts, telegraphs, telephones and wireless; 
(l) mining; 
(m) canalisation of mountain streams; 
(n) regulation and conservation of the Danube, March and Thaya; 
(o) construction and maintenance of waterways; 
(p) labour legislation, protection of workmen and employees; 
(q) social insurance; 
(r) surveying; 
(s) scientific and technical records and library services in offices and institutions of the Federation and matters pertaining to art and scientific collections, institutions and establishments of the Federation; 
(t) matters relating to the Federal police and Federal gendarmerie; 
(u) military matters; 
(v) relief for war veterans and their dependants; and 
(w) if required by circumstances: 
<list_2>
(i) entry into and exit from Federal territory; 
(ii) deportation, removal, expulsion and extradition from Federal territory, together with the transit of persons being extradited; 
(iii) passport matters, police registration, arms, ammunition and explosives; 
(iv) maintenance of public peace, order and security, except local police; 
(v) press matters; and 
(vi) matters pertaining to associations and meetings, and the police control of aliens. 
</list_2>
</list_1>
(2) To deal with matters other than those specified in paragraph (1) Federal authorities may be established with the consent of the Governments of the provinces concerned. 
(3) Within the area of competence of a Federal police authority disposing of a Federal police force no other territorial corporation may establish or maintain a guard force. The dissolution of such forces, whose establishment or maintenance is contrary to this provision, falls within the competence of the Federation. 
(4) The competent Federal Minister shall order the establishment of Federal police authorities; the definition of their local sphere of competence and, in administrative areas in which, under the Federal laws enacted in accordance with article 34, provision is made for the exercise of executive functions by Federal police authorities, the definition of their technical sphere of competence and furthermore the issue of special service regulations for their organs. In so far as such authority is entrusted with the performance of duties in matters which fall within the independent competence of the province, such order may be enacted only if the performance of these duties has been transferred to the Federal police authorities by a law of the province in question. The cancellation of the provincial law entails the abrogation of the decree. 
(5) If, owing to the endangerment of public peace and order, special measures are called for in particular communes, the competent Federal Minister may, for the period of such danger, designate Federal officials to attend to these measures. 
Art. 121.
(1) In school, educational and cultural matters, with the exception of university affairs, the executive powers in the provinces are vested, in subordination to the competent Federal Minister, in school authorities (provincial, district, communal and continuation school boards), in which persons who have a legitimate interest in school and educational matters shall be represented. The provincial and district school boards are direct Federal authorities. The Governor of the province shall be the chairman of the provincial school board. His competence is determined by law; he appoints a substitute and may revoke the appointment. The District Commissioner shall be the chairman of the district school board, and the Burgomaster shall be the chairman of the communal school-board. On the provincial and district school board, the province, and on the communal school board the commune, has to be duly represented. 
(2) The chairman must suspend temporarily the carrying out of resolutions which in his opinion conflict with the law, and apply for instructions from the superior school authorities. 
(3) Instructions from the superior to the subordinate school authorities shall be addressed to the latter's chairman. He must follow these instructions (article 11, paragraph (1)) without asking for a decision. If instructions from superior school authorities are not complied with, the latter themselves are empowered to carry out the provisions forming the subject of the instruction. Orders of the subordinate authorities which are contrary to instructions shall be declared void by the superior school authorities. 
(4) Executive action in matters of popular education in the provinces is taken by the organ entrusted with the same in direct subordination to the chairman of the provincial school-board. 
(5) The competent Federal Minister, either personally or through officials of his Federal Ministry, may satisfy himself from time to time regarding the conditions and results of the secondary and primary educational institutions which are not under the direct administration of the Federal Ministry. Observations made by the ministerial authority shall be notified to the chairman of the provincial school board (city school board for Vienna). 
Art. 122. Agreements between the various provinces may only be made in matters within their independent competence, and shall be brought to the knowledge of the Federal Government immediately. 
PART VIII.-ADMINISTRATIVE DISTRICTS, COMMUNES AND UNIONS OF COMMUNES<title> 
Art. 123.
(1) The administrative sub-divisions of the provinces are the administrative districts and the communes. 
(2) The boundaries of the administrative districts, judicial districts and communes may not overlap; changes of the boundaries of communes by which the boundaries of judicial districts are affected require, without prejudice to the observance of the respective provincial laws, the consent of the Federal Government. Territorial changes in the administrative districts are decreed by ordinances of the provincial Government, with the consent of the Federal Government; territorial changes in the judicial districts by ordinances of the Federal Government, with the consent of the provincial Government. 
(3) The communes are subordinate to the administrative districts and the latter to the provinces. 
(4) By provincial law communes may, for specific purposes, be grouped into unions of communes and subordinated directly to the provincial Government. 
(5) Provisions relating to the union of several communes for joint management may also be decreed by provincial law. 
(6) Every piece of ground must belong to some commune. 
Art. 124. Towns with more than 30,000 inhabitants may, by provincial law, be endowed with municipal rights whereby they are entrusted with the district administration (towns directly under the provinces). 
Art. 125. The communes are independent economic corporations; within the limits of the law they have the right to manage their own affairs independently, to collect taxes, to possess, acquire and dispose of property of every kind, and also to operate commercial enterprises which serve the general interests of the inhabitants of the commune. 
Art. 126.
(1) The organs of the communes are the communal assembly and the Burgomaster. By provincial law the Burgomaster may be provided with a communal council which, at the most, consists of 5 members (communal councillors). These communal councillors (town councillors) are elected by the communal assembly from among its members (representatives of the commune). Their sphere of competence is determined by provincial law. 
(2) Subordinate to the Burgomaster is the communal office. The heads of communal offices in communes of more than 10,000 inhabitants must be administrative officials with legal experience; their appointment requires the consent of the provincial Government; this consent may be revoked. 
Art. 127.
(1) In communes in which the structure of the population renders it feasible, the communal assembly shall consist of representatives of the legally recognised churches and religious associations, representatives of the scholastic, educational and cultural systems, science and art, as well as representatives of the professional corporations in the commune. 
(2) For communes in which the structure of the population  does not permit of such composition of the communal assembly, the provincial legislation shall decree the formation of the communal assembly in the nearest possible way to the provisions of paragraph (1). 
(3) The employees of a commune, its institutions and enterprises, as well as persons who serve in the armed forces or render professional services to the latter, and further Government employees who are engaged in the public safety services, cannot be members of a communal assembly. 
(4) The communal assembly may appoint from its members committees to attend to certain branches of the administration. 
Art. 128.
(1) The competence of the commune is: 
<list>
(a) that proper to itself; 
(b) that delegated to it by the Federation or by the province. 
</list>
(2) The commune's own sphere of competence comprehends the rights set forth in article 125 and in addition thereto those matters which by Federal or provincial law have been assigned to the commune's own competence. Within its own competence the commune may, while observing the Federal and provincial laws, give orders and make provision according to its unrestricted determination. 
(3) The sphere of competence delegated to the commune, that is its obligation to co-operate with the Federal or provincial executive, is determined by Federal or provincial laws. 
Art. 129. The communes are guaranteed the administration in the first instance of the following matters: 
<list>
(1) care of the safety of person and property (local police); 
(2) assistance and rescue; 
(3) maintenance of the roads, paths, squares and bridges of the commune; 
(4) local street police; 
(5) rural guards and police; 
(6) control of markets and food-stuffs; 
(7) sanitary police; and 
(8) control of buildings and fire matters. 
</list>
Art. 130.
(1) The communal assembly elects the Burgomaster. The election is not confined to the members. of the assembly, but the person elected must be eligible to be a member and must have reached the age of 26. As a result of the election the person elected becomes a member of the communal assembly. 
(2) The election of Burgomasters of towns directly subordinate to the provinces requires confirmation by the provincial Governor, and the election of the other Burgomasters requires confirmation by the district commissioner. These confirmations can be revoked. The Burgomasters and deputy Burgomasters of towns directly subordinate to the province take a pledge before the provincial Governor and the Burgomasters and deputy Burgomasters of the other communes take a pledge before the district commissioner, before entering upon the duties of their office, to the effect that they will observe the Federal and provincial constitutions. 
Art. 131. The Burgomaster is responsible for his official acts to the commune, and for the competence delegated to him to the Federation and the province. 
Art. 132.
(1) The communes are subject to State supervision. 
(2) State supervision consists, in matters of the commune's own competence, in the right to decide on appeals and in the obligation to see that, in the interest of the public welfare, the communes do not transgress their competence and violate the laws. 
(3) In matters pertaining to the delegated competence the Burgomaster conducts the administration in the manner prescribed by law. He is bound by the instructions of the Federal and provincial organs (article 11, paragraph (1)) and in order to carry them out he is obliged also to use such of his powers as are at his disposal in his capacity as organ of the commune's own sphere of competence. The superior authority may wholly or partially entrust its own organs with business belonging to the delegated competence. If this becomes necessary through the fault of the Burgomaster the costs shall be borne by the latter, and if through the fault of the commune, the costs shall be borne by the commune. 
(4) The communal assembly may be dissolved. Until the new assembly and the Burgomaster are appointed, provision must be made for the continuation of the commune's administration. 
(5) The exercise of State supervision over the communes is vested in the provinces and only in the Federation in so far as it relates to the withdrawal of the competence delegated by the Federation, the dissolution of communal assemblies for the purpose of safeguarding the interests of the Federation, the annulment of administrative acts of communal organs by which the latter competence has been exceeded to the detriment of the Federation, or the violation or defective application of laws in matters pertaining to the indirect Federal administration.
Art. 133. The provisions of articles 125 131 and 132 apply also mutatis mutandis to unions of communes. 
Art. 134. The towns directly under provinces are directly subordinate to the provincial Government and in regard to the competence delegated to them by the Federation, they are directly subordinate to the provincial Governor. 
Art. 135. The detailed provisions relating to the communes and unions of communes are determined, within the limits of this division, by provincial legislation. 
PART IX.-LEGISLATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE CITY OF VIENNA (directly under the Federation)<title>
Art. 136. The city of Vienna, which is directly subordinate to the Federation, is a territorial corporation enjoying special rights. It comprises in itself the competencies which under the present constitution are vested in a town directly under a province and in a province itself. 
Art. 137.
(1) The organs of the city of Vienna are: 
<list>
(a) a Burgomaster, and a Vice-Burgomaster as his substitute; 
(b) as representatives of the city the Vienna House of Burghers; 
(c) the district commissioners and the supervising officials for special matters of the administration (article 142, paragraph (2)); 
(d) special collegiate administrative boards (article 143); 
(e) the district superintendents; and 
(f) the district representatives. 
</list>
(2) All the authorities (offices) which are occupied in the administration of the city of Vienna, in so far as they are not Federal authorities (offices), together constitute the corporation. For the direction of the entire domestic service of the corporation the Burgomaster shall appoint as director of the corporation a legally trained administrative official who must have the qualifications required for the civil service. The director of the corporation is also the assistant of the Burgomaster in matters pertaining to the indirect Federal administration (article 116). This appointment requires the consent of the Federal Chancellor. It can be revoked. 
Art. 138.
(1) The Burgomaster is appointed by the Federal President on the basis of a submission of 3 names made by the Vienna House of Burghers. The appointment shall be countersigned by the Federal Chancellor. The Burgomaster can be removed by the Federal President at the instance of the Federal Chancellor and with the latter's countersignature. The Federal President must remove the Burgomaster if the Vienna House of Burghers so demands. For a decision of the Vienna House of Burghers demanding the removal of the Burgomaster the presence of at least one-half of the members and a majority of two-thirds of the votes given are required. 
(2) Before entering upon his duties the Burgomaster shall take an oath on the Federal constitution and the charter of Vienna before the Federal President. 
(3) The Burgomaster (Vice-Burgomaster) is responsible to the Vienna House of Burghers for culpable violations of the law caused in the exercise of his office. For a decision of the Vienna House of Burghers bringing an impeachment, according to article 173, paragraph (2) (b), the presence of more than one-half of the members and a majority of two-thirds of the votes given are required. 
Art. 139.
(1) The authorities (offices) of the public administration in the city of Vienna are, in so far as this administration is not conducted by the Federation's own authorities (Federal offices) or by autonomous bodies within the meaning of article 116, authorities (offices) of the city of Vienna (municipal offices). 
(2) The employees of the municipal offices of the city of Vienna are Government employees under the authority of the city of Vienna; the employees of the autonomous bodies are employees of these bodies. Authority over the Government employees in the municipal offices is exercised by the city of Vienna through the Burgomaster. 
(3) The Burgomaster shall appoint and remove the Vice-Burgomaster; the appointment of the first Vice-Burgomaster requires the consent of the Federal Chancellor; it can be revoked. 
(4) The appointment of the district commissioners and the entrusting of the direction of the public safety service to an official of the corporation require the consent of the Federal Chancellor. It can be revoked. The appointment of Government servants who are under the authority of the city of Vienna to posts which correspond to the two highest now existing service ranks, likewise requires the consent of the 
Federal Chancellor. 
Art. 140.
(1) The Vienna House of Burghers consists of representatives of the legally recognised churches and religious associations, the school and educational system, science and art, as well as representatives of the professional corporations of the city. The number of representatives designated by each of these groups is determined by the city charter. Article 47, paragraphs (3) and (4), and article 48, paragraphs (3) to (5), shall apply mutatis mutandis, article 48, paragraph (5), with the proviso that each main professional group shall in the first place alike designate one representative.
(2) Article 108, paragraph (3), shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Vienna House of Burghers. The chairmanship of the Vienna House of Burghers is determined by the city charter. 
Art. 141.
(1) The city of Vienna possesses legislative powers equal to those which this constitution bestows on a province. The competence of the city of Vienna to enact laws relative to taxation is determined by the Financial Constitutional Law. 
(2) The legislative powers are exercised by the Vienna House of Burghers. Each law passed by the Vienna House of Burghers requires the consent of the Burgomaster. 
Art. 142.
(1) In matters within the competence of communes as well as in those within the independent competence of provinces the administration is conducted by organs determined by the city charter; they act in subordination to the Burgomaster as supreme executive organ. 
(2) In matters within the delegated competence of communes, as well as that of district administration, the administration is conducted, in so far as the Federation's own authorities are not competent by the district commissioners, and for specific matters which concern more than one district, by special senior officials. Appeal in such matters goes to the Burgomaster even when the administration in the first instance is carried out by the Federation's own authorities. 
(3) If, in a matter pertaining to the indirect Federal administration or the independent competence of a province, the first decision lies with the provincial authorities, the right to decide or to act rests with the Burgomaster. 
(4) In matters pertaining to the indirect Federal administration the Burgomaster is bound by the instructions of the Federal Government and of the various Federal Ministers (article 11, paragraph (1)), and in order to carry them out he is obliged also to use such resources as are at his command in his capacity of organ of the city's own competence. 
Art. 143. In matters relating to building and taxation the decision in the supreme instance may be delegated to special boards. The composition and competence of these boards as well as their appointment shall be determined by a law of the city of Vienna. 
Art. 144. For the area of the city of Vienna a City School Council shall be established as a direct Federal authority which shall combine the competence which otherwise appertains to a district school board and a provincial school board; the Burgomaster shall be the chairman. Article 121 shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
Art. 145. In so far as this part of the constitution does not provide otherwise, the provisions of this constitution relating to the legal status of the provinces and their organs, the dissolution of provincial Diets, the procedure of legislation and administration in the provinces, the towns directly under the provinces and the control of the acts of the provincial organs in regard to legislation and administration by the Federal Constitutional Court shall apply mutatis mutandis to the city of Vienna. 
Art. 146. Within the limits of the provisions of this part of the constitution the legal rights of the city of Vienna are governed by the city charter, which shall be enacted as constitutional law of the city of Vienna. Article 112 shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
PART X.-EMERGENCY POWERS OF ADMINISTRATION<title>
Art. 147.
(1) If, for the maintenance of public safety and order, the protection of important economic interests of the people or the finances of the Federation, and especially to safeguard the Federal budget, the immediate enactment of measures which according to the constitution require a decision on the part of the Federal Diet becomes necessary, but an immediate resolution of the Diet is not to be expected under the existing circumstances, the Federal Government on its own responsibility may take such measures by way of provisional decrees altering the law (emergency power of the Federal Government). In such a decree special Federal organs may also be entrusted with the execution of Federal matters for which other organs are otherwise competent. 
(2) The decrees specified in paragraph (1) may not contain any modification of the provisions of constitutional laws. 
(3) The Federal Government may not avail itself of these emergency powers for the purpose of placing in operation a Bill which the Federal Diet has rejected, unless the Federal president has ordered the dissolution of the Federal Council of Culture and the Federal Economic Council. 
(4) Every decree enacted in virtue of the emergency powers of the Federal Government must be specifically designated as an emergency decree of the Federal Government. 
(5) Every emergency decree of the Federal Government must be notified to the Federal Diet without delay by the Federal Government. The decree must be cancelled immediately by the Federal Government if the Federal Diet, at a meeting at which at least one-half of the members are present and with a two-thirds majority of the votes given, demands its repeal. In such event no further decree of similar content may be enacted with the same object. If a decree has been abrogated in accordance with the foregoing provisions, the legal provisions which were repealed by such decree shall again acquire force as from the date of abrogation. 
(6) Any decree enacted according to paragraph (1) shall become void after the expiration of 3 years at the latest. It may, however, be re-enacted if the legal conditions for its enactment exist. 
(7) The conditions under which the Federal Government may temporarily and locally limit, in whole or in part, the validity of articles 19, 22, 23, 24 and 26, and the extent to which in such cases restrictive police ordinances containing provisions which modify the law within certain legal spheres, can be enacted, shall be determined by Federal law. 
Art. 148.
(1) If the Federal State or one of its parts is directly threatened with danger and if, in order to avert such danger, the immediate enactment of measures of the nature indicated in article 147, paragraph (1), becomes necessary, but if under the existing circumstances neither an immediate decision on the part of the Federal Diet is to be expected nor can the necessary measures be taken in virtue of the emergency powers of the Federal Government, the Federal President may, at the instance of the Federal Government, take these measures on his own and the Government's responsibility by provisional decrees in modification of laws (emergency powers of the Federal President). Such an emergency decree of the Federal President requires the countersignature of the Federal Government. Article 147, paragraph (3), shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
(2) The decrees specified in paragraph (1) can also amend individual provisions of constitution laws, but cannot make amendments which constitute a complete change of the constitution. Furthermore, these decrees may neither affect the form of the State nor may they contain provisions affecting the existence of the Federal Court and its competence to examine laws and decrees, or hindering that Court in the said examination; also they may not contain provisions constituting an amendment of court decisions. 
(3) The decrees enacted in virtue of the Federal President's emergency powers must be specifically designated as emergency decrees of the Federal President. 
(4) The provisions of paragraphs (5) and (6) of article 147 shall also apply to decrees enacted in virtue of the emergency powers of the Federal President. 
(5) The Federal President-upon the proposal and with the countersignature of the Federal Government, may by decree upon his own and the Government's responsibility postpone a reconstitution of the advisory organs of the Federal legislation as well as a reconstitution of provincial Diets, communal assemblies and representatives of other autonomous bodies, and may prolong the period of membership of these organs if there is danger that the circumstances connected with such reconstitution would cause a disturbance of peace and order menacing economic life. If these exceptional conditions persist, a repetition is admissible. By these measures the term of office of the above-mentioned organs may in no case be extended beyond one-half. 
(6) If the Federal Diet does not pass a resolution relative to a Bill of the Federal Government within the time fixed by the latter (article 62, paragraph (2)), the Federal President, at the instance of the Federal Government and upon his own and the Government's responsibility, may by decree enact the provisions contained in such Bill. Such decree requires the countersignature of the Federal Government. The provisions of article 147, paragraphs (5) and (6), shall not apply in this case. 
(7) If in any province the premises for the maintenance of order in the provincial finances no longer exist, and the provincial Diet fails to take any effective counter-measures, the Federal President, upon the proposal of the Federal Government and within the latter's countersignature, may by emergency decree take in lieu of the provincial Diet measures for the re-establishment of order in the provincial finances. These measures may relate to savings in the expenditure on the staff and material requirements of the provincial administration and to taxation matters. The provincial Diet, without the consent of the Federal Government, may not nullify such a decree before one year has elapsed. The Federal Government may by means of special commissioners supervise the observance of such decrees. 
PART XI.-CONTROL OF ACCOUNTS<title>
Art. 149.
(1) The finances of the Federation, the provinces, the communes and other corporations shall be controlled by the Audit Department in accordance with the provisions of this part of the constitution. 
(2) The Audit Department acts as an organ of the Federal Diet and of the provincial Diets; in regard to the city of Vienna, as an organ of the Vienna House of Burghers. 
Art. 150.
(1) The Audit Department consists of a President and the requisite officials and assistants. 
(2) The President of the Audit Department is appointed by the Federal President. There is no proposal or countersignature on the part of the Federal Government. Before entering upon his duties, the President of the Audit Department shall be sworn by the Federal President on the constitutions of the Federation and the provinces, the observance of other laws and the conscientious fulfilment of the duties of his office. 
(3) The President of the Audit Department may neither be a member of an advisory organ of Federal legislation nor of a provincial Diet or communal assembly, nor may he be a member of the Federal Government or of a provincial Government, nor Burgomaster or Vice-Burgomaster of the city of 
Vienna. 
Art. 151.
(1) The President of the Audit Department, as regards responsibility for the administration of his office in accordance with articles 155 to 158, stands in the same position as the members of the Federal Government and as regards responsibility for the administration of his office in accordance with articles 159 and 160, in the same position as the members of the respective provincial Government. As regards the administration of his office in accordance with article 161, responsibility depends upon whether the Audit Department is acting as an organ of the Federal Diet or of the provincial Diet (the Vienna House of Burghers). 
(2) The President of the Audit Department may upon the proposal of the Federal Diet, be relieved from office by the Federal President. The office of the President of the Audit Department expires with the close of the year in which he reaches the age of 70. 
Art. 152.
(1) In the event of the President of the Audit Department being prevented from attending to his duties, he shall be substituted by the next senior official of the Audit Department. The said official shall also direct the business of the President when the latter's post is vacant. 
(2) The provisions of article 151 shall apply to the official of the Audit Department who acts as the President's substitute or is in charge of the latter's duties. 
Art. 153.
(1) The Federal President shall appoint the officials of the Audit Department upon the proposal and with the countersignature of the President of that department; the same applies to the conferment of official titles, honours and decorations to officials of the Audit Department. The Federal President may, however, empower the President of the Audit Department to appoint officials of certain categories. 
(2) The President of the Audit Department shall appoint the auxiliary staff. 
Art. 154. No member of the Audit Department may participate in the management or direction of an enterprise which has to render account to the Federation or to a Province, or which stands in any relationship to the Federation or any province as regards subsidy or contract. 
Art. 155.
(1) The Audit Department shall scrutinise all the financial transactions of the Federation, including the finances of the indirect Federal administration, and, further, the finances of endowments, funds and institutions which are administered by organs of the Federation. It may also be entrusted with the scrutiny of the finances of endowments, funds and institutions administered by persons appointed thereto by executive organs of the Federation, and of enterprises in which the Federation is financially interested. When scrutinising the finances of such an enterprise the Audit Department may also examine the finances of undertakings in which such enterprise is interested. The fiduciary administration of Federal property, the guaranteeing to an enterprise of a profit or the bearing of its responsibility for losses sustained, the furnishing of a loan as working capital for an undertaking or the granting of a subsidy for such purposes, are likewise to be considered as financial participation. 
(2) The Audit Department shall compile the final Federal accounts and submit the same to the Federal Diet. 
(3) All documents relating to fiscal debts, in so far as they constitute an obligation on the part of the Federation, shall be confirmed by the countersignature of the President of the Audit Department in respect of their legality and arithemetical accuracy. 
Art. 156. The Audit Department must at the request of the Federal Government or of a Federal Minister submit special cases within its competence (article 155, paragraph (1)) to scrutiny and report the result to the applicant authority. 
Art. 157. If differences of opinion arise between the Audit Department and the Federal Government or a Federal Minister concerning the interpretation of the legal provisions which govern the competence of the Audit Department, the Federal Court shall give its decision, in camera, upon the appeal of the Federal Government or the Audit Department. The procedure shall be settled by Federal law. 
Art. 158.
(1) The Audit Department may report to the Federal Diet on its activities as a whole or on specific instances. Before being submitted to the Federal Diet, such report must be communicated to the Federal Chancellor. The Federal Government may, within 3 weeks, make observations on such a report; these the Audit Department must at the Government's request, submit to the Federal Diet simultaneously with the report. With the consent of the Federal Government, however, the report may be laid before the Federal Diet before the expiration of the above-mentioned period of 3 weeks. After submission to the Federal Diet the report must be published. 
(2) The Federal Diet must within 6 weeks pass a resolution concerning each report submitted by the Audit Department. 
Art. 159.
(1) The Audit Department shall scrutinise the financial matters which fall within the independent competence of the provinces, as well as the finances of the endowments, funds and institutions administered by organs of the provinces. The audit shall cover arithmetical accuracy, compliance with the regulations in force, and the economic soundness and expediency of the administration. The audit shall not, however, extend to the decisions of the constitutionally competent representative bodies governing financial administration. In the performance of these duties the provisions of articles 156 to 158 shall apply mutatis mutandis. The rights which, under article 156, are vested in the Federal Government or in a Federal Minister are, as regards the financial administration of a province vested in the provincial Government. 
(2) For the purposes of the audit prescribed in paragraph (1), the provincial Governments must submit the final annual accounts to the Audit Department. 
(3) The Audit Department must check the final accounts by examination in situ of the books and other vouchers relating to the financial administration, and must communicate the results of its investigation to the provincial Government. The provincial Government shall submit to the provincial Diet the complete report on the outcome of the examination along with the final accounts of the province. 
(4) Enterprises which are exploited exclusively by a province are subject to investigation by the Audit Department in the same way as the rest of the financial administration of the province. In regard to enterprises in which the province has a financial interest or for which it undertakes liability for losses, the Audit Department may, at the request of the provincial Government, examine the province's activities as partner or guarantor and shall report the outcome to the provincial Government. 
(5) The Audit Department shall also inform the Federal Government of the result of its investigations. 
(6) Matters which on account of their reference to business secrets are to be treated as confidential may not be made public by reports of the Audit Department. 
(7) The terms of this article shall also apply to the examination of the financial administration of the Federal capital of Vienna, with the proviso that the Vienna House of Burghers shall take the place of the provincial Diet, and the Burgomaster that of the provincial Government. 
(8) By provincial law (law of the city of Vienna) it may be decreed that all documents relating to fiscal debts, in so far as they serve as proof of an obligation on the part of the province (city of Vienna), shall be confirmed by the countersignature of the President of the Audit Department in respect of their legality and of their correctness from an accounting point of view. 
Art. 160.
(1) The finances of communes with at least 20,000 inhabitants and of the endowments, funds and institutions administered by organs of such communes, are subject to examination by the Audit Department. The audit shall cover arithmetical accuracy, compliance with the regulations in force, and also the economic soundness and expediency of the administration. The Audit Department shall carry out this examination as an organ of the competent provincial Diet. 
(2) These communes are obliged to submit their final accounts annually to the Audit Department. 
(3) The Audit Department has the right of inspection in situ of the books and other vouchers connected with the administration, to examine the finances as a whole or as regards certain parts thereof. Without prejudice to its duty of examination on the basis of the foregoing provisions, the Audit Department, at the request of the competent provincial Government, must submit to particular examination matters falling within its competence and relating to the communes specified in paragraph (1), and communicate the result to the provincial Government. 
(4) The results of its examination shall be submitted by the Audit Department to the Burgomaster for communication to the communal assembly and for eventual comments, which must be made within 3 weeks. After the expiration of this period, the Audit Department shall submit the results of its investigation, together with such comments as may have been made, to the provincial Government, which shall communicate it to the provincial Diet. 
(5) Enterprises which are exploited exclusively by a commune are subject to investigation by the Audit Department in the same way as the rest of the financial administration of the commune. In regard to enterprises in which a commune has a financial interest or for which it undertakes liability for losses, the Audit Department may, at the request of the competent provincial Government, examine the activities of the commune as a partner or guarantor in such enterprises; the result of the audit shall be reported to the provincial Government. Article 159, paragraph (6), shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
(6) At the request of the competent provincial Government, accompanied by reasons, the Audit Department must also examine in particular cases the finances of communes with less than 20,000 inhabitants and report the result of this audit to the provincial Government. The question whether and to what extent in such cases the province or commune must reimburse to the Federation the costs of such audit shall be determined by Federal law. 
(7) The Audit Department must also communicate the results of its investigations to the Federal Government. 
Art. 161.
(1) The Audit Department may be entrusted by Federal law with the auditing of the finances of the institutions responsible for social insurance, as well as of the finances of public corporations holding Federal funds, or funds placed at their disposal out of public funds for the promotion of purposes of the public administration; this auditing shall apply to arithmetical accuracy and to the utilisation of the funds in accordance with direction and purpose. 
(2) By provincial law the Audit Department may be entrusted with a similar examination of the utilisation of provincial funds. 
Art. 162. Detailed provisions regarding the work of the Audit Department shall be laid down by Federal law. 
PART XII.-THE FEDERAL COURT<title>
Art. 163. The Federal Court is competent to safeguard the constitutionality of the legislation and the legality of the administration. 
Art. 164.
(1) The Federal Court shall pronounce upon the legality of decisions (awards and decrees) of the administrative authorities. There is no illegality if the administrative authorities were entitled on the basis of the provisions of the law to act at their discretion, and have used their discretion in the sense of the law. 
(2) A complaint against the decision of an administrative authority, on the ground of illegality may be lodged by: 
<list>
(i) any person who asserts that his constitutionally guaranteed or other rights have been infringed by the decision; and 
(ii) in matters coming under the heading of article 36 and in those which under article 37 fall within the executive sphere of the provinces, the Federal Minister whose competence is affected by the decision. 
</list>
(3) A complaint in accordance with paragraph (2), No. (i), may only be lodged if the course of appeal has been exhausted. If the final instance to which the complainant was legally entitled to appeal did not pronounce on the appeal within 6 months it shall be considered equivalent to a negative decision of the last instance. The said period can be shortened by law. A complaint under paragraph (2), No. (ii), is possible only against a decision which can no longer be appealed against in the regular course of appeals. 
(4) The conditions under which complaints, in cases other than those indicated in paragraph (2), against decisions of administrative authorities on account of illegality are admissible, shall be determined by the Federal and provincial laws relating to the different branches of the administration. 
(5) The following are excluded from the competence of the Federal Court, unless a violation of constitutionally guaranteed rights is alleged:
<list>
(i) disciplinary matters concerning employees of the Federation, the provinces, the communes, and the unions of communes, as well as matters concerning the court of honour for officers; this applies to a complaint against a disciplinary verdict (decision of the court of honour) as well as to one relating to claims derived from the alleged illegality of such a verdict (decision); 
(ii) patent matters; 
(iii) matters regarding which, on final appeal, judgment lies with a board, if, under the Federal or provincial law governing the composition of such a board, at least one judge is numbered amongst its members, and the other members are not bound in the exercise of their office by any instructions, the decisions of the authority cannot be cancelled or modified administratively and if, notwithstanding these circumstances, an appeal to the Federal Court is not expressly declared to be admissible; and 
(iv) matters in regard to which the decision of an administrative authority can be appealed against to the regular courts. 
</list>
Art. 165. The Federal Court decides regarding complaints relating to pecuniary claims of the Federation, the provinces, the communes, and the unions of communes, against each other, in so far as the decision does not rest with the regular courts or the administrative authorities. 
Art. 166. As regards the interpretation of administrative regulations of fundamental importance the Federal Minister or the provincial Government whose competence is affected by the interpretation may apply to the Federal Court for a legal opinion. Such opinion is binding for the administration. 
Art. 167.
(1) In the cases referred to in article 164, paragraph (2), the Federal Court must declare the contested decision to be annulled if it decides that the complaint should not be rejected or dismissed as unfounded. 
(2) On account of an illegality which merely consists of a violation of the rules of procedure, a decision may be annulled only if the administrative authority, had it complied with the rules of procedure, might have arrived at another conclusion. 
(3) If the decision of an administrative authority is annulled the said authority is compelled with all the legal means at its command, immediately to adjust the case at issue to the legal opinion of the Federal Court. 
(4) In the cases referred to in article 164, paragraph (3), second sentence, as well as in article 165, the Federal Court must decide the case as such and if necessary fix the period within which the claim must be satisfied. 
Art. 168. The Federal Court shall decide in accordance with the Federal law indicated in article 180, on conflicts of competence: 
<list>
(a) between courts and administrative authorities; 
(b) between courts, in so far as the decision of such conflict of competence has not by law been vested in a regular court, and especially between the Federal Court itself and another court; and 
(c) between the provinces inter se as well as between a province and the Federation. 
</list>
Art. 169.
(1) The Federal Court shall pronounce as follows on the validity of decrees of the Federal and provincial authorities: 
<list>
(a) on the application of the Federal Government, provided the decree of a provincial authority is concerned, and upon the application of a provincial Government, provided the decree of a Federal authority is concerned; 
(b) on the application of a court, if the decree forms the premise for a judgment of the court; and 
(c) of its own motion if the decree forms the premise for a decision of the Federal Court itself. 
</list>
(2) The application must demand that the entire decree or certain portions thereof be annulled as being contrary to the law. If a court has doubts regarding a decree or provisions thereof, which are no longer in force, the application must request that the Federal Court shall establish that the decree, or the provision thereof, was contrary to the law. The Federal Court is also qualified to give such a verdict if it has of its own motion examined the legality of a decree, or provision thereof, and has come to the conclusion that it is contrary to the law. 
(3) If the Federal Court finds that a decree, or a certain portion thereof, is contrary to the law, such ruling must immediately be published, if it relates to the decree of a Federal authority, by the competent Federal Minister in the Bundesgesetzblatt,and if it relates to the decree of a provincial authority, by the competent provincial Governor in the Landesgesetzblatt. 
(4) The revocation of a decree, or of such portions thereof as have been declared contrary to law, takes effect as from the day of its publication; if, however, the Federal Court has fixed a respite, as from the expiration of such respite, the respite may not exceed 3 months. 
(5) The revoked decree (or provisions thereof) shall no longer be applied to the case which prompted a court to lodge the application or prompted the Federal Court to initiate the proceedings of its own accord. 
Art. 170.
(1) The Federal Court shall decide upon the constitutionality of a Federal or provincial law as follows: 
<list>
(a) upon the application of the Federal Government, if a provincial law is at issue, and upon the application of a provincial Government, if a Federal law is at issue; 
(b) upon the application of the Supreme Court, if the law forms .the premise for a decision of the said Court; and 
(c) of its own accord, if the law constitutes a premise for a decision of the Federal Court itself. 
</list>
(2) The application must demand that the law in its entirety, or certain portions thereof, be revoked as unconstitutional. 
(3) If the Federal Court finds that a law, or certain portions thereof, are unconstitutional, such ruling must immediately be published, if it relates to a Federal law, by the Federal Chancellor in the Bundesgesetzblatt, and if it relates to a provincial law, by the competent provincial Governor in the Landesgesetzblatt. 
(4) The revocation of a law, or of such portions thereof as have been declared unconstitutional, takes effect as from the day of publication; if, however, the Federal Court has fixed a respite, as from the expiration of such respite; this respite may not exceed 6 months. 
(5) The revoked law (or portion thereof) shall no longer be applied to the case which prompted the Supreme Court to lodge the application or prompted the Federal Court to initiate the proceedings of its own accord. 
(6) If through a finding of the Federal Court a law, or a part thereof, is revoked as unconstitutional, the provisions of law which had been repealed by the law declared by the Federal Court to be unconstitutional again acquire force from the day on which the revocation entered into force, unless the finding determines otherwise. It shall also be stated in the publication of the revocation which provisions of law, if any, again acquire force. 
Art. 171. The Federal Court shall further, upon the application of the Federal Government or of a provincial Government, determine whether a legislative or executive act falls within the competence of the Federation or of the provinces. 
Art. 172. The Federal Court passes judgment, according to the laws: 
<list>
(a) on complaints against the appointment (nomination. designation) of the members of the advisory organs of Federal legislation, the provincial Diets, communal assemblies, and of the representatives of other autonomous bodies; 
(b) on contestations relative to the appointment (election) of organs who according to Federal or provincial laws are to be appointed by one of the organs indicated under (a); 
(c) on contestations relative to the result of referenda; and 
(d) on motions for declaring membership of the bodies indicated under (a) as forfeited and on complaints against administrative decisions which contain such a finding. 
Art. 173.
(1) The Federal Court decides regarding charges by which the constitutional responsibility of the organs mentioned in paragraph (2) for culpable violations of the law resulting from official action on their part is alleged. 
(2) The charges may be brought: 
<list>
(a) against the members of the Federal Government and the organs having the same standing as regards responsibility, in respect of infringement of the law: by resolution of the Federal Diet; 
(b) against the members of a provincial Government (Burgomaster and Vice-
Burgomaster of the city of Vienna) and the organs having, under the present constitution or the provincial constitution, the same standing as regards responsibility, in respect of infringement of the law: by resolution of the competent provincial Government (the Vienna House of Burghers).
</list> 
(3) The convicting sentence of the Federal Court shall pronounce loss of office, and, in particularly aggravating circumstances, temporary loss of political rights also. In minor infringements of the law the Federal Court may limit itself to establishing the existence of an infringement of law. 
(4) The Federal President may only avail himself of the right conferred on him by article 78, paragraph (2) (d), at the request of the representative body which voted the charge, and this only with the consent of the accused. 
Art. 174. A charge against the persons mentioned in article 173 may also be brought in respect of acts prosecutable in the criminal courts which are connected with the activities of the accused as an official person. In this case the Federal Court is alone competent; any investigations pending before the ordinary criminal courts shall be transferred to it. The Federal Court may in such cases apply provisions of penal law in addition to those of article 173, paragraph (3). 
Art. 175. The Federal Court shall decide regarding violations of international law in accordance with the terms of a special Federal law.
Art. 176.
(1) Findings by which the Federal Court in accordance with article 167, paragraph (4). decides in a matter, as well as findings relating to costs and to fines for frivolous conduct or contravention of regulations, shall be carried into effect by the regular courts. 
(2) The execution of the findings in the matters referred to in articles 168 to 174 devolves on the Federal President. It shall be carried out according to his instructions by such Federal or provincial organs as he may select, and if necessary also with the assistance of the armed forces. The motion for the execution of such findings shall be addressed by the Federal Court to the Federal President. The above instructions of the Federal President do not, in cases concerning execution of a finding against the Federation or Federal organs require countersignature under article 80, paragraph (2). 
Art. 177.
(1) The Federal Court consists of a President, a Vice-President and the necessary number of other members (Presidents of chambers and councillors). 
(2) The President, the Vice-President, and the other members of the Federal Court are appointed by the Federal President on the proposal of the Federal Government. 
(3) All members of the Federal Court must be graduates in law and political science and must already have served for at least 10 years in a professional post for which the completion of these studies is prescribed. At least one-third of the members must have the qualifications for a judge, and at least one-fourth shall be taken from professional posts in the provinces, if possible from the administrative service of the provinces. 
(4) Members of the Federal Government, a provincial Government of an advisory organ of Federal legislation, a provincial Diet, a communal assembly, or the representatives of a union of communes, may not belong to the Federal Court. 
(5) With the exception of the members (substitutes) appointed according to article 179, paragraph (2), the members of the Federal Court shall be professional judges. The provisions of article 101 and article 102, paragraph (4), shall apply to them. By Federal law an age-limit will be laid down, after attaining which the members of the Federal Court must be placed in permanent retirement. 
Art. 178.-(1) The Federal Court shall pronounce its judgments in chambers; the cases in which decisions of the plenary assembly shall be applied for are determined in the Federal law contemplated in article 180. 
(2) Each chamber which has to pass judgment on a complaint in a matter relating to the provincial administration, or on a complaint against a province, commune, or union of communes, shall, as a rule, contain one member who was occupied professionally in the province in question. 
Art. 179.
(1) In the assignment of business of the Federal Court one chamber shall be designated to deal with all legal matters in regard to which appeal has been made to the Federal Court in virtue of articles 168 to 175 (Constitutional chamber).
(2) The Constitutional chamber shall be reinforced by 4 additional members. These members and their substitutes are appointed by the Federal President on the basis of a submission of 3 names which, as regards 2 members and their substitutes, is made by the State Council, and as regards the other 2 members and their substitutes, by the Council of Provinces. There shall be no proposal on the part of the Federal Government, or countersignature. The provisions of article 177, paragraph (3), first sentence, and also of paragraphs (4) and (5), second sentence, shall apply to these members and their substitutes. Administrative officials who are appointed members of the Federal Court or substitutes as provided above must, in so far and so long as they are not retired, be suspended from duty. The term of office of such a member (substitute) ends when on the attainment of the age-limit fixed by Federal law for the professional judges of the Federal Court. If such a member (substitute) fails without sufficient excuse to comply with 3 consecutive summonses to attend a session of the constitutional chamber, the latter, after having heard him, must establish the said fact, which shall entail the loss of membership or of the capacity to act as substitute. 
(3) For a finding of the Federal Court whereby a law, or portions thereof, is cancelled as being unconstitutional, a majority of two-third of the votes is required. 
Art. 180. The detailed provisions for the establishment and procedure of the Federal Court are contained in a Federal law. 
PART XIII.-FINAL PROVISIONS<title>
Art. 181. In addition to the present constitution the following shall count as constitutional laws:-
<list>
Section V of Part III of the Treaty of St. Germain of 10th September, 1919, (Staatsgesetzblatt, No. 303 of 1920). 
The Finance Constitutional Law (Bundesgesetzblatt, No. 61, of 1931).
</list> 
Art. 182. 
(1) The transition to the new order created by the present constitution shall be governed by a special constitutional law (Federal Constitutional Law regarding the transition to the corporative constitution). 
(2) The Federal Constitutional Law relative to the transition to the corporative constitution shall determine the date on which the provisions of this constitution come into effect. 