Guided and steeped in the exceptionally important duties of the regent, We have forged an identity for Our hitherto existing government with arrangements that certify Our continuous endeavor to advance the collective well-being of Our subjects. In order to build a firmer foundation for this, We already gave Our Kingdom a constitution in the year 1808, appropriate for the external and internal relations at the time, in which We already introduced an Estates assembly and incorporated it as a fundamental component of our Kingdom.The monumental and unprecedented world events that did not leave a single German State untouched, and during which the people of Bavaria immediately demonstrated themselves to be great both while suffering under the pressure and while surviving in battle had hardly reached their goal in the Act of the Wiener Congress when We began to seek to fulfill the requirements of Our State.We sought with an unwavering gaze to achieve Our goal, Our work only being interrupted by the events at that time. The preliminary works arranged to this end in the year 1814 and the decree from the 2nd of February 1817 attest to the firm determination We already possessed at an earlier date. The present act is, after advanced mature and multilateral consulting, and after the examination of Our State council, the work of Our both free and determined desire. Our people will find in its contents the strongest guarantee of Our disposition towards the country of Our Fatherland. 
Freedom of conscience, and the conscientious separation and protection of that which is of the State and that which is of the Church. 
Freedom of opinion, with lawful restrictions against misuse. 
The same rights of all natives to all degrees of State service and to all designations of merit. 
The same call to the duty and honor of carrying weapons. 
Equality of laws and before the laws. 
Evenhandedness and persistence in the administration of justice. 
Equality in the allocation and the obligation of services. 
Order throughout all parts of the State housekeeping, legal protection of State credit, and assured usage of the means designated to be employed for that cause. 
The revitalization of the community body through the refurnishing of the administration of matters concerning their well-being to those closest to them. 
A union of Estates emerging from all classes of citizens residentiary in the State, with the rights of council, of approval, of consent, of requests and of registering complaints regarding the violation of constitutional rights, convening in a public assembly in order to strengthen the wisdom of council without weakening the power of the government. 
Finally a protection of the constitution, securing the State against arbitrary changes, but not hindering the amelioration process after evaluating experiences. 
Bavaria! These are the main features of the constitution given to you out of Our free resolution. See in it the principles of a King who only finds happiness in his heart and renown for his throne in the felicity of his Fatherland and love for his people! 
We declare the following regulations to be the constitution of the Kingdom of Bavaria: 

Part I 
<title>General Regulations 
Article 1. The Kingdom of Bavaria, in the unity of the entirety of all its old and new regional parts, is a sovereign monarchical State according to the regulations of the present constitutional charter. 
Article 2. For the entire Kingdom there shall be a common Estates assembly, separated into two chambers. 

Part II 
<title>Of the King and the Succession to the Throne, and of the Regent of the Kingdom 
Article 1. The King is the head of State and unifies in himself all the rights and powers of the State, and shall exercise them under the fixed regulations of the present constitutional charter that he himself has given. 
His person is sacred and inviolable. 
Article 2. The crown is inheritable in the male line of the house of the King, according to the right of the first born and agnatic linear succession. 
Article 3. In order for a man to be able to succeed to the throne, the requirement is a legitimate birth out of the marriage of two persons of equal status, whose wedlock is completed with the consent of the King. 
Article 4. The male line has priority over the female descendants, and the princesses are barred from taking on governmental positions as long as there still exists either a male heir from the house of the King who is able to succeed to the throne, or a prince who has been qualified for succession to the throne through an inheritance-brotherhood. 
Article 5. After complete elimination of the male line and lacking an inheritance-brotherhood which has been completed with another princely house in the German Federation for this circumstance, the heirship shall fall to the female descendants according to the order of succession fixed for the male line. This shall occur in such a way that at the time of the passing of the last ruling King, the next living Bavarian princess or her descendant shall be called to the throne, regardless of gender, and as if this heir were a prince of the original male line of the Bavarian house, according to the right of the first born and linear order of succession. 
If descendants of the first rank of both genders are born into the new house of the King, the priority of the male gender over the female shall again come into effect. 
Article 6. If, after the elimination of the male line, the Bavarian crown should fall to the regent of a greater monarchy, who could or would not take up residence in the Kingdom of Bavaria, the crown shall fall to the second born prince of this house, and in this line the same regulations regarding succession should come into effect as are denoted above. 
If the crown should fall, however, to the wife of such a greater non-resident monarch, she shall indeed become Queen, however she must appoint a Vice-King, who shall take up his residence in the capital city of the Kingdom, and the crown shall fall to her second born prince after her passing. 
Article 7. The princes and princesses of the house of the King shall be of age upon the end of their 18th year. 
Article 8. All other relations of the members of the house of the King shall comply with the regulations of the pragmatic Family Law. 
Article 9. The alternate means of administration of the Kingdom shall come into effect: 
<list>
A. During the time in which the successor to the throne is under age; 
B. If the successor to the throne is prevented from exercising the rights and powers of the government for a substantial length of time and has not made a decision regarding provisions for such an occurrence, and is unable to make such a decision.
</list> 
Article 10. The monarch is free to choose an alternate administrator from the princes of the house who are of age, who shall act as regent for the duration of the time in which his successor is under age. Lacking such a provisionary decision, the administration of the Kingdom shall fall to the next agnate of age, according to the fixed order of succession. 
If the prince to whom the administration falls according to the above regulation is himself still under age, or if he is otherwise prevented to take over the regency, the administration shall fall to the next agnate after him. 
Article 11. If the Monarch should be hindered from exercising the rights and powers of the government for any reason and this hindrance should last for longer than a year, and he himself has not made a decision regarding provisions for such a circumstance, nor can he, the same lawful regency shall occur as would if the successor to the crown were under age. This shall take place with the approval of the Estates, who shall be notified of the cause of the hindrance. 
Article 12. If the King should appoint an alternate administrator in case of his successor being under age according to Article 10, the charter written on the subject shall be presented to the entire State ministry for inspection and public notification. The minister who is assigned the duties related to the house of the King shall keep the document in the house archive until the passing of the Monarch. The administrator of the Kingdom shall be informed of the charter containing the information regarding his appointment at the same time. 
Article 13. If no agnate capable of taking over the administration of the Kingdom exists, but the Monarch leaves behind a widowed Queen, the administration of the Kingdom shall fall to the Queen. 
Lacking a capable agnate and Queen, the officer of the crown appointed by the last Monarch shall take over the administration. If the last King did not make a decision regarding this matter, the administration shall fall to the first officer of the crown for whom no legal hindrance exists. 
Article 14. In any case, a widowed Queen shall be entitled to educate her children under the supervision of the administrator of the Kingdom, according to the detailed regulations regarding such a case included in the Family-Law. 
Article 15. In the cases identified in Article 9 A and B, the government shall be run in the name of the under-aged successor or of the Monarch hindered from exercising the rights and powers of the government. 
All orders shall be issued in his name and under the customary seal of the King. All coins shall be embossed with his portrait, crest, and title. 
The regent shall sign as: “the Administrator of the Kingdom of Bavaria.” 
Article 16. The prince of the house, the widowed Queen or the officer of the crown to whom the administration of the Kingdom is assigned must call for an Estates assembly immediately after entrance upon the regency. He must swear the following oath in their midst, with both the State minister and the members of the State council present: 
“I swear to govern the State as is appropriate according to the constitution and the laws of the Kingdom, to maintain the integrity of the Kingdom and the rights of the crown, and to faithfully turn over to the King the power that has been trusted to me; may God and His holy Gospel truly help me.” 
about which a special record shall be written. 
Article 17. The regent shall exercise all rights of the government during his administration of the Kingdom, with the exception of the rights that have been excluded through the constitution. 
Article 18. All empty offices, with the exception of judiciary positions, can only be filled provisionally during the administration of the alternative regent. The administrator of the Kingdom can neither divest property of the crown nor reaward fiefdoms that have become property of the Kingdom nor introduce new offices. 
Article 19. The council of the regency shall consist of the entire State ministry, and the administrator of the Kingdom is bound to take its advice on all important matters. 
Article 20. The administrator of the Kingdom shall live in the residence of the King for the duration of his regency, and shall be financially supported in such by the State. Also, in addition to that he shall be allocated two-hundred-thousand gulden yearly for his own disposal in the form of monthly installments from the State treasury. 
Article 21. The regency shall last in the two cases noted in Article 9 for the following: in the case of the first, until the King is of age, and in the second, until the hindrance ceases. 
Article 22. After the regency of the alternative administrator has ended and the newly entering King has sworn the ceremonial oath (Part X Article 1), all negotiations of the former regency shall be closed, and the King's entrance into the government shall be ceremonially announced in the residence and in the entire Kingdom. 

Part III 
<title>Of the Property of the State
Article 1. The whole area of the Kingdom of Bavaria forms one singular, indivisible, unsaleable mass consisting of all components of land, people, authorities, goods and properties, seigniorages, and pensions, along with all accessories. 
Also all new acquisitions of immobile property from private titles shall come into the inheritance of the male line and shall be seen as incorporated into the mass of the Kingdom, if they are acquired by the main or auxiliary line and if the first acquirer did not dispose of them during his lifetime. 
Article 2. The following belong to the unsaleable property of the State that may not be brought into the inventory of a private estate if the property of the State and of a private estate is to be sorted: 
<list>
1. All archives and filings, 
2. All public establishments and buildings with their accessories, 
3. All guns and cannons, ammunition, all military storerooms and anything necessary for the armed forces, 
4. All facilities of the court chapels and court offices with all of their contents that have been defined as necessary for the requirements or the splendor of the court, and which have been entrusted to the supervision of the court staff or the court directors, 
5. Everything that serves as facilities or as adornments for both the regular and summer residences, 
6. The treasures of the house and anything that has been incorporated into it by a bequeather, 
7. All collections for the arts and sciences including: libraries, physical, natural, and coin collections, antiques, statues, observatories with their instruments, paintings and copper engraving collections, as well as any other items that have been designated for public use or for the promotion of the arts and sciences, 
8. All available supplies of cash and capital in the State treasury or of natural produce in offices, including all endowments to State income, 
9. Everything acquired by the funds of the State. 
</list>
Article 3. All components of State goods and property are unsaleable in perpetuity, as was decided in the pragmatic law from the 20th of October 1804. The regulations that still apply despite changing relations shall be carried over to the present constitutional charter. These regulations are subject to the modifications following below. 
Above all, all rights of sovereignty of the primogeniture shall remain undivided and imprescriptible, without exception. 
Article 4. Under the term sale in regards to State goods or property shall be understood not only each real sale, but also every gift exchanged between the living or anything given through a last will, the awarding of new fiefdoms, or the weight of a permanent burden, pledge or dedication lightened by the acceptance of a sum of money. 
Also, no citizen of the State may be allowed to be freed from paying public burdens. 
Article 5. The fiefdoms, State domains, and pensions that have already been awarded as compensation for service to the State are excluded from the above prohibitions. 
Also, the King shall always be free to reaward fiefdoms that have again become property of the Kingdom. 
In order to compensate for great and determined services to the State, other State domains or pensions may be awarded, but only with the approval of the Estates. They shall adopt the property of being a fiefdom of the crown only inheritable in the male line. 
Entitlements to goods and property that will again become property of the State in the future, pensions, and rights cannot be awarded just as offices and honors cannot. 
Article 6. The following should further not be understood to be prohibited from selling: 
<list>
1. All State deeds of the monarch related to goods and property either originating from the royal family or belonging to the State that are conducted within the boundaries of the governing rights to which he is entitled, and for the purpose of State welfare in regards to either foreigners or subjects in the country. 
2. This applies especially if he is trading individual goods, property, or income for either the obtainment or securing of other goods, property, pensions, or rights in order to end a pending legal dispute, or if he is giving property to a neighboring State for purposes of border rectification and if it is traded for a commensurate replacement. 
3. This also applies especially to what is traded for other material items or rights or the same value. 
4. This also applies especially to all individual sales or modifications that are found to be good for the advancing State economy, promoting the culture of the country, contribute in some other way to the welfare of the State, or are in the best interest of the State successor and help to abolish a detrimental self-administration. These sales or modifications must be related to State goods or property, correspond to and follow recently enacted prescriptions, and be in line with the basic principles of the country.
</list> 
Article 7. In all of these cases (Article 6), however, the State income may not be reduced, rather as a replacement either dominical pensions should be collected, if possible in the form of crops, or the purchasing money should be used for new purchases, or as temporary aid for a fund to pay off debt, or be used in some other way with the intent of improving the welfare of the State. 
The monarch can make purposeful modifications and improvements in regards to the assets termed saleable (Article 2) in accordance with the time and circumstances. 

Part IV 
<title> Of General Rights and Duties 
Article 1. For the full enjoyment of all citizenly, public, and private rights in Bavaria, native status is required. This can be acquired either through birth or through naturalization, according to the detailed regulations of the edict concerning native status. 
Article 2. The rights of citizens of the State of Bavaria rely on the condition of native status, and shall be lost if native status is lost. 
Article 3. In addition to this, the following shall also be required in order to obtain all citizenly rights: 
<list>
A. The state of being legally of age; 
B. Residency in the Kingdom, either through the possession of taxed property, pensions, or rights, or through the practicing of a taxed trade, or through entering a public office.
</list> 
Article 4. Offices of the crown, high-level offices of the court, State civil service positions and high-level military positions, as well as church offices or benefices can only be conferred to those born into the State or those naturalized in accordance with the regulations in the constitution. 
Article 5. Every citizen of Bavaria can attain any civil, military, or church office or benefice, with no differences in treatment according to class or other distinctions. 
Article 6. Within the area of the Kingdom no serfdom may be practiced, in accordance with the detailed regulations of the edict from the 3rd of August 1808. 
Article 7. All unmeasured soccages shall be measured and shall also become detachable. 
Article 8. The State guarantees every resident security for his person, his property and his rights. 
From no one may his proper judge be withdrawn. 
No one may be pursued or imprisoned except in cases defined by the law and in lawful form. 
No one may be forced to relinquish his private property for public purposes, except after a formal decision made by the assembled State council, and after advanced reimbursement, as was decided in the ordinance from the 14th of August 1815. 
Article 9. Every resident shall be guaranteed complete freedom of conscience, therefore no one may be forbidden from worshipping in the confines of his own home, regardless of the religion to which he professes himself. 
The three Christian church associations present in the Kingdom shall enjoy the same civil and political rights. 
The holders of non-Christian beliefs shall indeed also have complete freedom of conscience, however, they shall only obtain the portion of civil rights of the State that are guaranteed to them through the organic edicts concerning their incorporation into the State community. 
For all religious chapters, without exception, both the property of their foundations and their property used for the enjoyment of their pensions shall be completely secured, according to the original charters concerning foundations and legal assets, regardless of whether they are designated for religious purposes, education, or charity. 
The religious powers may not be impeded in their proper sphere, and the secular government may not interfere with purely religious matters such as the teaching of religion and conscience. This shall be true until the highest protection and oversight right becomes effective, according to which no ordinances or laws regarding the powers of the Church may be promulgated or implemented without prior inspection and placet by the King. 
The churches and the clergy shall be held to the laws of the State and the secular courts in their civil activities and relationships as well as in regards to the assets belonging to them. Also, they cannot appeal for exemption from public State burdens. 
The remaining detailed regulations regarding the rights to expression in relations of the residents of the Kingdom and the relationship between religion and the churchly communities are attached to the present constitutional charter and contained in the special edicts. 
Article 10. All of the assets of the foundations of the Church used for the three purposes of religious institutions, education, or charity shall also be placed under the special State security. Under no pretense may their financial assets be collected. Nothing may be sold or used for anything besides the three aforementioned purposes without the agreement of those involved, and when concerning universal foundations the agreement of the Estates of the Kingdom is additionally required. 
Article 11. The freedoms of the press and of the book trade are secured according to the regulations of an enacted special edict concerning this matter. 
Article 12. Every citizen of Bavaria has the same obligation to military service and to the armed forces according to the laws existing for such cases. 
Article 13. The contribution to State burdens shall be the same for all citizens of the Kingdom. No exception shall be made for any Estate (viz. social class), and no regard shall be held for formerly existing special exemptions.
Article 14. Citizens of Bavaria are permitted to emigrate to another State so long as they can demonstrate that the State in question wants to take them as subjects and they have performed their lawful duties to their present home country. If such is the case, they may also participate in the military service of their new home country. 
As long as they remain in a subject-union, however, they may neither accept a salary nor honors from a foreign power without the express permission of the monarch. 

Part V 
<title> Of Special Rights and Benefits 
Article 1. The officers of the crown shall be awarded the fiefdoms of the crown, as they have the highest honors of the Kingdom. These fiefdoms shall belong to them either for the duration of their lifetime, or they shall be passed down by the right of the first born and agnatic linear inheritance. The officers of the crown are members of the first chamber in the Estates assembly by virtue of having honors of the Kingdom. 
Article 2. The princes and counts who were formerly of the Estates of the Kingdom shall be guaranteed all rights and benefits mentioned in the special edicts defining their relations. 
Article 3. The nobility of the Kingdom of Bavaria who were formerly immediately subordinate to the Bavarian Highness shall enjoy the rights deemed appropriate in the kingly declaration and guaranteed to them through the constitutional edicts. 
Article 4. All of the rest of the nobility of the Kingdom shall retain their rights as landlords, as shall all landowners, according to the legal regulations on the matter. 
Apropos, these persons also have the following benefits to enjoy: 
<list>
1. The exclusive right to be able to exercise their landlordly jurisdiction, 
2. The right to establish a family majorat for landed property, 
3. The right to a jurisdiction separate from the district court in civil and criminal cases, 
4. The right to have their own seal under the restrictions of the laws regarding hypothecary, and finally 
5. The distinction that the sons of the nobility shall enter as cadets when conscribing to the military.
</list>
Article 5. Some of these benefits are shared by the clergy, ordained collegiate councilors, and high officers belonging to the same category as this. 
The clergy shall enjoy the same right to a jurisdiction separate from the district court in civil and criminal cases, and besides this collegiate councilors and high officers shall also enjoy the right to have their own seal and the higher distinction when conscribing to the military. 
Article 6. The duty relations and pension requirements of State servants and public officers comply with the regulations of the pragmatic laws regarding service. 

Part VI 
<title> Of the Estates Assembly 
Article 1. The two chambers of the general assembly of the Estates of the Kingdom are: 
<list>
A. The chamber of the Kingdom councilors, and 
B. The chamber of the assemblymen. 
</list>
Article 2. The chamber of the Kingdom councilors is comprised of: 
<list>
1. The princes who are of age and of the house of the King, 
2. The Kingdom’s officers of the crown, 
3. The two archbishops, 
4. The heads of the former princely and countly families of the Estates of the Kingdom as hereditary councilors, as long as they remain in possession of their lordship of a formerly kingdomly Estate located in the Kingdom, 
5. A bishop appointed by the King and a president of the protestant general consistory, and 
6. Persons who the King specially appoints for either hereditary or lifelong positions as members of this chamber due to great services to the State, the family they were born into, or their assets. 
</list>
Article 3. The King shall only award the right to inheritance to noble possessors of property who hold all citizenly rights in the Kingdom and have landed assets that have been registered with a fiefdom or majorat organization and compound at least three hundred gulden in property and dominical taxes and for which agnatic linear inheritance according to the right of the first born has been established. 
The honors of a hereditary councilor of the Kingdom shall only follow the inheritor of the property on which the majorat of the original councilor is founded. 
Article 4. The number of councilors of the Kingdom who are appointed for the term of their lives cannot exceed one-third of the number of those whose appointment is hereditary. 
Article 5. The councilors of the Kingdom shall be admitted to the first chamber when they are of age, however, the princes of the house of the King shall only receive a voice at the age of twenty-one, and the remaining councilors of the Kingdom shall only receive a voice at the age of twenty-five.
Article 6. The chamber of the councilors of the Kingdom can only be opened if at least half of all of the members are present. 
Article 7. The second chamber of the Estates assembly is comprised of: 
<list>
A. The possessors of property who exercise a landlordly jurisdiction and do not have a seat and voice in the first chamber, 
B. Assemblymen from the universities, 
C. Clergymen of the catholic and protestant churches, 
D. Assemblymen from the cities and market-towns, 
E. Possessors of property not pertaining to A.
</list>
Article 8. The number of members shall on the whole conform to the number of families in the Kingdom in the ratio of one assemblyman for every 7,000 families. 
Article 9. From the number designated in that manner:
<list>
A. The class of noble possessors of property shall provide one-eighth, 
B. The class of the clergy of the catholic and protestant churches shall provide one-eighth, 
C. The class from the cities and market-towns shall provide one-fourth, 
D. The class of the remaining possessors of property who do not exercise a landlordly jurisdiction shall provide twofourths of the assemblymen, and 
E. Each of the three universities shall provide one member.
</list>
Article 10. The number of assemblymen from each class shall be distributed among the individual governmental districts according to the regulations of the attached special edicts regarding the Estates assembly. 
Article 11. In each governmental district each class shall elect the number of assemblymen designated for itself according to the prescribed regulations regarding election in the abovementioned edicts. They shall be elected for the six-year duration of the assembly. The positions that are emptied during that time shall be filled by those who come next in the order of number of votes received. 
Article 12. Every member of the chamber of assemblymen must be an independent citizen (without consideration for class or service relations) who has reached his thirty-first birthday and possesses the free enjoyment of property and assets located in a relevant area or city that ensures his independent livelihood, and which has been designated as adequate in the edicts through the fixed quantity of annual taxes paid. 
He must identify himself with one of the three Christian religions and may never have undergone a special investigation due to a crime or misdemeanor without having been completely acquitted. 
Article 13. Every six years a new election of assemblymen shall be conducted, but otherwise only in the event that the chamber is dissolved by the King. 
Members who have left or resigned are reelectable. 
Article 14. The resignation of an already appointed member shall occur in the course of the duration of the assembly if: 
<list>
1. He ceases to hold the possession, the court trade, or the religious benefice that substantiated his election for the relevant governmental area or class for any reason whatsoever without replacing such in the same area, city, or class. 
2. The member loses one of the above (Article 12) essentially necessary attributes for passive electability during that time. 
</list>
In these cases the chamber of assemblymen must decide their course of action based on the notification and after the questioning of those involved. 
Article 15. In order for the assembly of the chamber of assemblymen to be valid the attendance of at least two-thirds of the elected members is required. 
Article 16. The chamber of the councilors of the Kingdom shall be called together, opened, and closed at the same time as the chamber of assemblymen. 
Article 17. No member of the first or second chamber may let himself be represented by a delegate during an assembly. 
Article 18. The proposals regarding State burdens shall first be handled in the chamber of assemblymen and shall then be brought to the chamber of the councilors of the Kingdom through them. 
All other matters can be submitted to either chamber first according to the decision of the King. 
Article 19. No matter concerning spheres related universally to all of the Estates of the Kingdom can be deliberated on in one chamber alone with the expectation of the effect of a valid agreement of the Estates. 

Part VII 
<title> Of the Spheres of the Estates Assembly 
Article 1. The two chambers can only discuss matters that belong in their own spheres (which are described in greater detail in Articles 2 through 19). 
Article 2. Without the council and the agreement of the Estates of the Kingdom, no general new law pertaining to personal freedom or the property of the citizens of the State may be enacted, nor may an existing law be changed, authentically elucidated or abolished. 
Article 3. The King shall acquire the agreement of the Estates for the collection of all direct taxes, as well as for the collection of new indirect burdens, or for the increasing or changing of existing ones. 
Article 4. Due to this, the Estates shall be provided with the exact overview of the State requirements as well as the whole record of the State revenue (budget) after their opening. They shall then verify it through a committee and only then begin to discuss the taxes to be collected. 
Article 5. The direct taxes required for covering the proper, consistent, and easily foreseeable State expenses including a necessary reserve fund shall be approved each time for the duration of six years. 
However, in order to avoid any delay in State housekeeping, in the State year in which the first Estates assembly is to be convened, the collected State burdens from the previous State year shall be again collected. 
Article 6. One year before the expiration of the term for which the expenses have been fixed (thus after the course of six years), the King shall submit a new budget to the Estates for the six years to follow that term. 
Article 7. In the event that the King is hindered in his ability to assemble the Estates in this last year of the properly approved tax budget due to extraordinary foreign relations, he shall be granted the power to continue with the last agreed upon tax budget for half a year. 
Article 8. In cases of extraordinary and unforeseen requirements and inadequacy of the existing State income to cover such requirements, the necessary extraordinary burdens shall be submitted for the approval of the Estates.
Article 9. The Estates may not connect approval of taxes with any condition whatsoever. 
Article 10. The Estates of the Kingdom shall be provided with a precise presentation regarding the use of State income at each and every Estates assembly. 
Article 11. The entire State debt shall be placed under the care of the Estates. 
For each new State debt through which the currently existing debt mass in the capital sum or the annual interest yield is increased, the approval of the Estates of the Kingdom is required. 
Article 12. Such an augmentation of State debt may only occur for urgent and extraordinary requirements of the State that the subjects cannot contest in disapproval of the great cost to them (whether related to the ordinary or extraordinary dues), and if the dues are honorably used for the true good and gain of the country. 
Article 13. A debt repayment plan shall be submitted to the Estates, and without their consent no change may be made to the plan already accepted by them, nor may income designated for debt repayment be used for any other purpose. 
Article 14. Both chambers must appoint a commissary from among themselves who is to note all negotiations and take care that the fixed norms are observed in the collaborative debt repayment commission. 
Article 15. In extraordinary cases in which impending foreign dangers urgently necessitate the borrowing of capital, and the convening of the Estates is made impossible by foreign relations, these commissaries shall be entitled to the power to grant the preliminary approval of the Estates for the borrowing of funds. 
As soon as the convening of the Estates is made possible, all negotiations regarding this borrowing of capital shall be submitted to them to be recorded in the State debt index. 
Article 16. At each assembly, the Estates shall be provided with an exact presentation of the condition of the State debt repayment treasury. 
Article 17. The Estates have the right to approval regarding the selling or use of the substance of common trusts for purposes departing from their original functions. 
Article 18. Similarly, their approval is required for the awarding of State domains or State pensions for the rewarding of great and particular services to the State. 
Article 19. The Estates have the right to bring the King their collective wishes and proposals in the appropriate form when related to matters belonging in their spheres. 
Article 20. Each individual assemblyman has the right to bring his wishes and proposals to his chamber, who shall decide through a majority of voices whether these shall be taken up for closer consideration, and in the affirmative case they shall be brought to the related committee for scrutiny and evaluation. 
The decisions made regarding such proposals in one chamber must be shared with the other chamber, and only after the approval of the other chamber can they be submitted to the King. 
Article 21. Each individual citizen as well as every community can bring complaints regarding violations of constitutional rights to the Estates assembly (to either of the two chambers, to be specific). The chamber shall evaluate the complaint through the committee designated for this purpose, and if the committee finds it appropriate, it shall be taken up for debate. 
If the chamber finds the complaint to be founded through a majority of voices, it shall share the drafted proposal for the King with the other chamber, who shall give the King a joint presentation with the original chamber if it approves of the proposal.
Article 22. The King shall call the Estates together at least once every three years. 
The King shall open and close the assembly either by his own person or through a delegate empowered specifically for this purpose. 
The sessions of such an assembly may not last longer than two months, as a rule, and in their sessions the Estates are required to discuss all matters brought to them by the King before any other items. 
Article 23. The King shall always have the right to lengthen or adjourn the sessions of the Estates, or to dissolve the entire assembly. 
In case of dissolution of the entire assembly, a new election of the chamber of assemblymen must be conducted within three months. 
Article 24. The State ministers can attend the sessions of both chambers, even if they are not members. 
Article 25. Each member of the Estates assembly must perform the following oath: 
“I swear loyalty to the King, obedience to the laws, observation and upholding of the State constitution, and in the Estates assembly to counsel according to my inner convictions only for the general well-being and best of the whole country without consideration for specific peoples or classes. May God and his holy Gospel truly help me.” 
Article 26. No member of the Estates assembly can be arrested during the course of a session without the consent of the chamber concerned. There is, however, an exception for the case of seizure after a freshly committed crime. 
Article 27. No member of the Estates assembly can be made to explain the use of his voice that he brought forth in his chamber, except when following the rules of procedure and if he is asked by the assembly itself. 
Article 28. A matter about which the two chambers do not agree cannot be brought back for discussion during the course of the same session. 
Article 29. The decisions of the King regarding the proposals of the Estates of the Kingdom shall not follow the submission of each individual proposal; rather they shall follow after all negotiated matters simultaneously at the time of the closing of the assembly. 
Article 30. The King shall sanction all laws and shall enact them with his signature, after the examination of the State council and following the advice and approval of the devoted and the true, i.e. the Estates of the Kingdom. 
Article 31. When the assembly of the Estates of the Kingdom is adjourned, formally closed or dissolved, the chambers can no longer legally deliberate, and any further negotiation is illegitimate. 

Part VIII 
<title> Of the Administration of Justice 
Article 1. The control of jurisdiction begins with the King. It shall be managed under his supervision through an appropriate number of offices and high courts in an instance order decided through law. 
Article 2. All courts are obligated to attach the reasons for their rulings to all verdicts. 
Article 3. All courts are independent inside of the boundaries of their official powers, and judges can only dismissed or displaced from their positions and stripped of the salary associated with their positions through adjudication.
Article 4. The King can grant clemency in criminal cases, and he can soften the penalty or excuse the crime, but under no circumstance can he impede a pending litigation or an investigation already under way. 
Article 5. The financial administration of the King shall subject itself to the jurisdiction of the courts of the King in all disputes related to their relationship to private law. 
Article 6. Property and asset confiscation shall not occur under any circumstance except desertion. 
Article 7. The same civil and criminal code of law shall be in force throughout the entire Kingdom. 

Part IX 
<title> Of the Form of the Military 
Article 1. Every citizen of Bavaria is obligated to cooperate with the laws relating to the military in order to defend his home country. 
The clergy are exempted from the obligation to carry weapons. 
Article 2. The State shall have a standing army for its defense. It shall be supplemented through common military conscription and properly maintained even in times of peace. 
Article 3. In addition to this army there shall also be reserve battalions and a militia. 
Article 4. The reserve battalions are designated to strengthen the standing army, and share all duties, honors and benefits with the standing army when the reserves are needed. In times of peace the entirety of the reserve battalions shall remain in their place of residence, free of all military compulsions, with the exception of the time required for practicing with weapons. In these times they shall be subject to civil jurisdiction and civil law, without being hindered in their ability to marry or change their place of residence.
Article 5. The militia can join into military activity in times of war in order to support the army already strengthened by the reserve battalions when specially called by the King, however they must remain within the borders of the Kingdom. 
In order for this mass to be used most advantageously it shall be split into two branches, the second understood to be for individuals who are less capable of mobilization, and who shall not be used outside of their area under any circumstance. 
In times of peace the militia shall work for the preservation of inner security as long as it is necessary and the troops designated for this preservation are not sufficient. 
Article 6. The army shall act against foreign enemies, but within the country they shall only act when military power is formally called upon by the competent civil authority. 
Article 7. Military persons shall be under military jurisdiction regarding crimes or misdemeanors when conducting official military business, however in common or mixed legal matters they shall be subject to civil courts. 

Part IX 
<title> Of the Protection of the Constitution 
Article 1. Upon entrance into the government the King shall swear the following oath in a formal assembly of the State minister, the members of the State council and a deputation of the Estates, during a time in which they are already assembled. 
“I swear to govern according to the Constitution and the laws of the Kingdom. May God and His holy Gospel truly help me.” 
A document shall be written about this act, and it shall be deposited in the archive of the Kingdom and an authenticated copy shall be given to the Estates assembly. 
Article 2. In relation to the preservation of the constitution, the regent of the Kingdom shall perform the oath prescribed in Part II, Article 16. 
All princes of the house of the King shall also perform an oath swearing strict observation of the constitution as soon as they are of age. 
Article 3. When becoming residents and when making the common obeisance to the country all State citizens are obligated to take the following oath: 
“I swear loyalty to the King, obedience to the laws and observation of the State constitution. May God and His holy Gospel truly help me.” 
All State servants are also required to take the above oath upon their appointment. 
Article 4. The State ministers of the King and all State servants are responsible for the strict observance of the constitution. 
Article 5. The Estates have the right to bring complaints to the King regarding violations of the constitution by the State ministries of the King or other State authorities. They shall bring the complaints as a collective claim, and the King shall either remedy the violation on the spot, or if a doubt should manifest itself, he shall have the State council or the highest judiciary investigate the nature of the matter and subsequently make a decision. 
Article 6. If the Estates find themselves called upon by their duties to make a formal accusation against a higher State officer due to a deliberate violation of the constitution, the details of the accusation shall be precisely identified and evaluated by a special committee in each chamber. 
If both of the chambers agree on their decision regarding the accusation, they shall bring it to the King with their sources in the prescribed form. 
The King shall then give the decision over to the highest judiciary, who, in the case of a necessary or voluntary appeal shall assemble a different senate, even in the second instance. The Estates shall be informed of the final verdict. 
Article 7. Neither changes to the regulations of the constitutional charter nor additions can be made without the approval of the Estates. 
Proposals for changes and additions can only originate from the King, and only when he has brought them to the Estates can they be discussed. 
For a decision regarding this highly important matter to be valid, the presence of at least three-fourths of the members attending the assembly is required for each chamber, as well as a majority of two-thirds of the voices.