In the name of God. THE National Convention, ratifying the solemn resolutions of the Deliberative Assembly and of the other meetings which have sanctioned the independence, the sovereignty, and the liberty of Bolivia, decrees the following political Constitution.
<preamble> 

<title>The Public Rights of the Bolivians.

ART. I. Every man is born free in Bolivia; every man recovers his liberty on touching its territory. Slavery does not exist, and cannot exist, within it. 
II. At the age of 21 years Bolivians are capable of exercising political and civil rights. The laws establish the exceptions and the cases wherein the exercise thereof is suspended or forfeited. 
III. The Apostolic Roman Catholic religion is the religion of Bolivia. The law protects and guarantees its exclusive worship, and prohibits the exercise of any other; nevertheless acknowledging the principle that there is no human power over consciences. 
IV. No man can be detained, arrested, imprisoned, or condemned to punishment, except in the cases, according to the forms, and by the tribunals established by the laws promulgated previously to the act for which he is to be detained, arrested, imprisoned, or condemned. 
V. The punishment of death is imposed only on traitors, parricides, and assassins, saving the provision in Article XCY of this Constitution. 
VI. Every man enjoys in Bolivia the right of petition and of the free manifestation of his sentiments by the press or otherwise, without other limits than those established by the laws; and these shall have no power ever to subject the press to previous censure. 
VII. No man can be condemned civilly or criminally, without having been summoned, heard, and tried according to the laws. 
VIII. Every man may enter the territory of Bolivia, remain there, and depart freely, taking away his goods, subject to the tithe dues, and the fulfillment of the police and customs' laws. 
IX. No punishment is transcendental, and all torture, of whatsoever class, is prohibited. 
X. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable, and this guarantee can only be suspended or infringed in the cases and according to the proceedings established by the laws. 
XI. No one is obliged to do what the law does not command, nor to cease to do what it does not prohibit. 
XII. Instruction is free, subject only to the conditions of capacity and morality determined by the laws under the inspection of the State. This inspection is extended to ail establishments for education and instruction, without any exception. 
XIII. In Bolivia, every man is equal to his fellow man in the eye of the law, without other restriction than that which the law itself establishes on grounds of public utility. All citizens, Bolivians by birth, are equally admissible to all public employments and offices, without other preference than that of merit, or other condition than that established by law. Those professional employments are excepted which may be exercised by foreigners, who shall have the same rights in Bolivia as their nation grants to Bolivians. 
XIV. In Bolivia every man's house is inviolable. Forcible entry thereof shall take place only in the cases and according to the forms prescribed by law. 
XV. All property is inviolable. Nevertheless the State may demand the sacrifice of a property on account of public utility legally proved, previously granting a just indemnification.
XVI. All properties are alienable, although appertaining to charitable uses, religious purposes, or other objects. 
XVII. Every man enjoys in Bolivia free choice of trade and calling, unless the exercise thereof be opposed to law or to morals. 
XVIII. No armed body or military authority can recruit or .demand lodging or other aid, except by means of the respective authorities, who shall proceed in such cases according to the laws. 
XIX. The confiscation of property can never be re-established. 
XX. The author of any useful invention in any branch of industry, he who improves it, and he who imports it into Bolivia, are the proprietors of their invention, improvement, or importation. The law assures to them an exclusive privilege for a time, or an indemnification in case the secret of the invention, improvement, or importation be taught. 
XXI. The law acknowledges the property in writings of all kinds, and guarantees it during the life of their author. 
XXII. No contribution can be established or collected, unless in fulfillment of the law. 
XXIII. The enjoyment of the guarantees and rights which this Constitution grants to every man, whatever may be his origin or his creed, is subordinate to the fulfillment of this duty, respect and obedience to the law, and to the constituted authorities. 
XXIV. The Bolivians moreover must serve and defend their country, sacrificing their lives thereto if it be necessary, and must contribute to the public expenses in proportion to their means. 
XXV. Every public functionary is responsible for his conduct in the exercise of his functions. 

<title> The Sovereignty and the Government. 
XXVI. The sovereignty rests in the nation; it is inalienable and imprescriptible, and no person, family, or fraction of the people can assume to themselves the exercise thereof. 
XXVII. Bolivia constitutes itself a Republic, one and indivisible, adopts as the form of Government that of popular representation, and delegates the exercise of its sovereignty to the legislative, executive, and judicial powers. The separation and independence of these Powers is the first and essential condition of its Government. 

<title> The Legislative Power. 
XXVIII. The legislative power resides in a Congress composed of 2 co-legislating Chambers, one of senators and the other of representatives, appointed, both one and the other, by the direct and secret suffrages of the. qualified citizens. The electoral law will determine for what causes a Bolivian citizen may be deprived of the right of electing and being elected, and will prescribe the forms of the election. 
XXIX. If a citizen be appointed senator and representative at the same time, he shall undertake the charge of senator. If one he appointed senator or representative for two or more electoral districts, he shall represent the nation for that in which he dwells. 
XXX. The Senators and Representatives are inviolable in regard to the opinions and votes which they give in the exercise of their functions. They cannot be corporally arrested in a civil cause during the sessions, nor within the 30 days before and after them; nor can they be criminally prosecuted during the sessions, without the permission of their Chamber, unless taken flagrante delicto, in which case their Chamber will, when informed thereof, authorize or forbid the continuation of the proceedings. 
XXXI. The Senators and Representatives are re-eligible, with the right of renouncing the re-election forthwith. 
XXXII. Neither the Congress nor either of the Chambers can constitute itself nor deliberate, without the concurrence of two-thirds of the deputies composing it. Each Chamber shall decide definitively upon the legality of the election of its members; shall admit or reject their excuses, and shall grant or refuse them leave of absence from the sessions. 
XXXIII. The Executive Power must convoke the Electoral Colleges and the ordinary Congress every two years, on the day appointed by the electoral law, for their meeting in the capital of the Republic on the 6th of August. If the Executive Power do not convoke them, the deputies shall assemble, with perfect right, at the place and on the day appointed. 
XXXIV. The Executive Power may convoke either an ordinary or an extraordinary Congress elsewhere than at the place appointed by this Constitution, whenever circumstances of internal commotion or external war, render its meeting in the capital of the Republic difficult or dangerous. 
XXXV. Extraordinary Congresses shall only occupy themselves with the business for which they have been convoked by the Executive Power. 
XXXVI. The Congress and each of the Chambers shall settle the regulations for their internal government, and shall not dispense with the observance thereof, without a previous resolution passed by two-thirds of the members present. 
XXXVII. The sessions of the Congress and of the Chambers shall be public. Nevertheless they may deliberate in secret session upon affairs of State and others that require reserve, in accordance with their respective regulations. 
XXXVIII. The power of passing laws, of interpreting, altering, or abrogating them, belongs exclusively to the Chambers. To delegate the exercise of this power is prohibited. 
XXXIX. The Executive Power and each Senator and Representative have the right of initiating projects of law, according to the forms determined by the internal regulations of the Congress and of the Chambers. 
XL. The laws may have their origin in either of the 2 Chambers, except those which authorize contributions, loans, and funds for the amortization of the public debb, which must be initiated in the Chamber of Representatives. 
XLI. Every law must be discussed and voted freely by the absolute majority of Congress, or of each of the Chambers; excepting those which, according to this Constitution must be voted by two-thirds of the suffrages. 
XLII. When a project of law has been adopted in one Chamber, it shall be sent to the other; and having been approved by the latter, it shall be referred to the Executive Power for its sanction. 
XLIII. Neither the Congress nor the Chambers can occupy themselves a second time in the same Legislature with a project of law which has been rejected therein. 
XLIV. If the Executive Power sanctions the project of law approved by the Congress, or by the Chambers, that Power must order its publication and execution; but if the Executive Power does not think the project useful, it must return the same in tho space of 10 days to the Congress or to the Chamber from which it received the project, with an explanatory message, requesting further deliberation. 
XLV. If the space of 10 days should elapse without the Executive Power making use of this power, the project shall have the force of law, by perfect right, unless the sessions are closed before the termination of that period; in which case the power shall be exercised within the first 8 days of the next session, when those 8 days have lapsed, the project shall have the force of law. 
XLVI. If the Congress insists by an absolute majority upon the project questioned by the Executive Power, the latter shall sanction it, and order that it be published without further formality. 
XLVII. The Executive Power cannot initiate reforms in the Constitution, nor question those which the Chambers make, nor the resolutions which they pass relative to tho election, the excuses, and the qualifications of their members. 
XLVIII. The laws shall be issued in form following:—"Bolivia, represented by the National Congress, decrees:" 
XLIX. The ordinary sessions of the Chambers shall last 60 days, and may be prorogued for a like period, at the discretion of the Congress.

<title> The Congress. 
L. It belongs to the Chambers assembled in Congress:
<list>
1. To open and close their sessions, or to prorogue them. 
2. To scrutinize the suffrages for the election of the President of the Republic; to certify the same, as being in conformity with tho law; and to proclaim the election. 
3. To receive the oath of the President of tho Republic; to accept his resignation, or to reject it. 
4. To examine and approve the expenses of the administration for the 2 years previously, upon the general accounts sent in to them by the respective Ministers of State; and to decree the estimates for the following [2 years]. 
5. To give or to withhold their approbation to the public Treaties and Concordats entered into by the executive Power. 
6. To suspend or to give effect to the decisions of councils bulls, briefs, and pontifical rescripts. 
7. To declare war or to make peace upon the message or the data which the Executive Power shall lay before, thorn. 
8. To allow the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the republic. 
9. To reconsider the laws questioned by the Executive Power. 
10. To reconsider the projects of law approved by both Chambers, with additions or modifications to which they have not agreed according to their regulations. 
11. To transfer their sessions and the executive power temporarily to another place, on account of internal commotion or external war. 
12. To declare the country in danger on account of internal commotions or external war; and to invest the Executive Power with extraordinary powers for the re-establishment of order and peace. 
13. To declare the extraordinary powers at an end, and the constitutional Government re-established when the causes mentioned in the preceding clause have ceased. 
</list>
LI. In cases 9 and 10 of the preceding Article, after declaration that the question has been sufficiently discussed, the Chambers shall separate to vote upon it in the ordinary manner. 
LII. The deliberation of the Congress in the cases 12 and 13 of the same Article shall bb voted by two-thirds of its members present. 
LIII. The election of the President of the Republic in the case of the 2nd attribution of Article L of this Constitution shall be made by secret suffrage. 
LIV. The Congress cannot in any case authorize the Executive Power to suspend the constitutional powers. 

<title> The Chamber of Senators. 
LV. The Senate shall be composed of 1 Senator for the department of the Beni, another for that of Cobija, 2 for that of Tarija, and 3 for each one of the other departments.
LVI. To be a Senator it is required:
<list>
1. To be a Bolivian by birth and a qualified citizen. 
2. To be of the age of 30 years. 
3. To have real property, trade, profession, or employment, producing an annual income of 1,000 dollars. 
4. Not to have suffered corporal or degrading punishment, in virtue of judicial condemnation. 
</list>
LVII. The special attributes of the Senate are:
<list>
1. To grant honours to those who have rendered great services to Bolivia. 
2. To allow Bolivians to accept titles, employments, honours, or incomes granted by other Governments, 
3. To appoint the members of the Supreme Court of Justice out of the triple nominations of the Chamber of Representatives. 
4. To propose to the Executive Power triple nominations for Archbishop, Bishops, ecclesiastical dignities, canonries, and prebends, according to their grade, excepting those for service. 
5. To appoint the Generals of the army, on the proposition of the Executive Power. 
6. To try in public and definitively the Fiscal and magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice for crimes and delinquencies committed in the exercise of their functions, and to visit them with the consequences. Special laws regulate these trials. 
7. To try in public those accused by the Chamber of Representatives. In this case the concurrence of two-thirds of the votes, shall pass sentence against the accused, but only to the effect of depriving him of his office, the cause being transferred to the Supreme Court of Justice, in order to be tried according to the laws. 
</list>
LVIII. The term of the Senators shall be for 4 years, two-thirds being renewed by lot in the first 2 years, and the remaining fraction in the second [2 years] ; but the Senators of Tarija shall be renewed by half, and those of the Beni and Cobija every 2 years. 
LIX. When the sessions of Congress are closed, the Senate may continue theirs as a national jury in order to try and decide in the national trials spoken of in the attributes 6 and 7 of Article LVII . The sessions of the Senate in this case cannot be prorogued for more than 30 days. 

<title> The Chamber of Representatives. 
LX. This Chamber is composed of Representatives elected in the proportion of one for every 30,000 souls, and for a fraction beyond 20,000. 
LXI. To be a Representative it is required: 
<list>
1. To be a Bolivian by birth and a qualified citizen. 
2. To have real property, trade, profession, or employment producing an annual income of 500 dollars. 
3. Nob to have suffered corporal or degrading punishment in virtue of judicial condemnation.
</list>
LXII. The special attributes of the Chamber of Representatives are: 
<list>
1. To initiate the laws concerning the matters indicated in Article XL. 
2. To propose to the Chamber of Senators triple nominations for magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and to the Executive Power for the officials of the superior courts. 
3. To appoint the jury of the press for every 2 years. 
4. To reinstate those who may have forfeited the right of citizenship. 
5. To impeach on its own account, or at the instance of others, before the Senate, the President of the Republic, the Ministers of State, and the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, for crimes and delinquencies committed in the exercise of their respective functions. 
</list>
LXIII. The Representatives shall continue in the exercise of their charge for 4 years, and shall be renewed every 2 years by half. The, first renewal shall be by lot, the fraction remaining shall be renewed in the following 2 years. 
LXIV. The election and the propositions assigned in Articles LVII and LXII shall be by secret suffrage, except that of the jury. 

<title>The Executive Power. 
LXV. The Executive Power rests with the President of the Republic and with the Ministers of Slate. 
LXVI. The Ministers of State are responsible, in company and conjointly with the President of the Republic, for all administrative acts. They are likewise responsible for the provisions, orders, and decrees which they issue in their respective branches. 
LXVII. The President of the Republic must have the same qualifications as are required by this Constitution for a Senator. He is appointed by the direct and secret suffrage of the qualified citizens, or by the Congress in the second case of Article L. The law will regulate the form of his election. 
LXVIII. If none of the candidates for the Presidentship of the republic has obtained the absolute plurality of votes of the citizen voters, the Congress shall decide the election by appointing one of the 3 candidates who have got the greatest number of votes. 
LXIX. When the scrutiny is completed, if no one of the 3 candidates is appointed President of the Republic by two-thirds of the votes of the members present at the session, there shall be a division for the 2 candidates who obtained the greatest number of votes at the popular election. If, on the scrutiny, neither of the 2 candidates obtains two-thirds of the votes, the voting shall be repeated in permanent session, until one of them does obtain it. 
LXX. The election of the President of the Republic, made by the people and proclaimed by the Congress, or decided by the latter according to the preceding Articles, shall be announced to the nation by means of a law. 
LXXI. The President of the Republic, before entering upon the exercise of his functions, shall take this oath before the Congress: "In the presence of God, and of the Bolivian people, represented by the Congress, I swear by these Holy Gospels to fulfill all the duties which the Constitution imposes on me." 
LXXII. The President of the Republic shall exercise the functions thereof for 5 years, reckoned from the day upon which he takes possession of the Presidentship; and he cannot be re-elected, except after an interval of 5 years. 
LXXIII. In case of the temporary infirmity or inability of the President of the Republic, the Council of Ministers shall take charge of the supreme authority, and shall appoint a President out of their own body. 
LXXIV. In case of renunciation, dismissal, permanent inability, or death of the President of the Republic, the same arrangement shall take place as in the preceding Article; but in these cases the Executive shall issue, within the peremptory term of 10 days, the decree which orders the election of a Constitutional President; as well as the summons for the Legislative Chambers which make the scrutiny. 
LXXV. The President of the Republic, as chief of the Administration, freely appoints and dismisses the Ministers of State; he presents, every 2 years, at the opening of the sessions of Congress, by means of a message, a general statement of the affairs of the Republic; he indicates the improvements or reforms which he considers necessary, and commands the regular army and navy. 
LXXVI. The attributes of the Executive Power are:
<list>
1. To sanction the laws and decrees by this formula. "Let this be executed:" to publish them, and to issue the necessary decrees and ordinances for their execution and fulfillment. 
2. To convoke the Electoral Colleges and the Legislative Chambers at the periods appointed by this Constitution and by the laws. 
3. To convoke an extraordinary meeting of the Chambers when the good of the republic requires it. 
4. To be present at the sessions at which the Congress opens and closes its labours. 
5. To preserve and defend the internal and external security of. the State according to the Constitution and the laws. 
6. To fulfill and to order the fulfillment of the Constitution, the laws, and the sentences of the tribunals. 
7. To declare war, with the concurrence of the Legislative Power, and to conclude peace during the recess of the Chambers, rendering an account thereof. 
8. To appoint to all military grades, up to that of colonel inclusive, and to propose to the Senate for the high rank of generals of the army, having power to go as high as these itself on the field of battle, in the name of the nation. 
9. To grant leave to the officials, in accordance with the laws, and to decree retiring, relieving, and other pensions. 
10. To organize the national guard, and to dispose it in accordance with the laws. 
11. To administer the national patronage in regard to the churches, benefices, and ecclesiastical persons. 
12. To suspend or promulgate the decisions of councils, bulls, briefs, and pontifical rescripts, with the consent of tho Legislative Power. 
13. To present to the archbishopric, bishoprics, ecclesiastical dignities, canonries, and prebends from the triple nominations sent in by the Chamber of Senators. 
14. To appoint the officials of the Superior Courts of Justice from the triple nominations of the Chamber of Representatives, and the Judges of Instruction, from a like nomination by the superior courts. 
15. To appoint absolutely the Fiscals of the Supreme and Superior Courts of Justice, and the other officials of the Republic, whose appointment or nomination are not reserved to another power or corporation. 
16. To issue, in the name of the nation, the appointments of all the public officials. 
17. To accept the resignation thereof, and to appoint temporarily to those which are to be elected or nominated by another power. 
18. To suspend for as long as 3 months, from their avocations, the Government officials and those of the Treasury, as a correctional punishment; and in serious cases, to bring them to trial before the proper tribunal. 
19. To issue letters of naturalization and citizenship in favour of foreigners who deserve them. 
20. To grant, in accordance with the law, temporary exclusive privileges to those who invent, improve, or import into the republic, processes or methods beneficial to science or art; or to indemnify them in case they teach others the secret of the invention, improvement, or importation. 
21. To grant pardon and amnesty for political offences, without prejudice to those which the Legislative Power may authorize; and to commute capital punishment to that of imprisonment or banishment for 10 years. 
22. To direct diplomatic negotiations, appoint Ministers, Diplomatic and Consular Agents, and receive the like foreign functionaries. 
23. To enter into Concordats and Treaties of Peace, Friendship, Commerce, and any others, with the approval of the Congress. 
24. To attend to the collection and application of the public revenues, and the administration of the national property, in accordance with the laws. 
25. To exercise the supreme superintendence in regard to all matters of police, the public establishments, religious and charitable, and those of education and instruction, without any exception. 
26. To declare the country in danger, and to assume extraordinary faculties, with the concurrence of the Council of Ministers, in cases of internal commotion or external war, announcing the same by a decree, countersigned by the Ministers of State. 
27. To declare the extraordinary faculties at an end, and the Constitutional Government re-established, when the causes mentioned in the preceding clause have ceased. 
28. To give an account to Congress of the use that has been made of the extraordinary faculties. The Ministers of State. 
</list>
LXXVII. The law determines the number and the attributes of the Ministers of State. 
LXXVIII. To be a Minister of State, it is required to be a Bolivian by birth, to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship, and not to have suffered corporal or degrading punishment in virtue of judicial condemnation. 
LXXIX. The orders and acts of the President of the Republic must be signed by him and countersigned by the respective Minister. Without this requisite, the acts of the President of the Republic are not to be obeyed or fulfilled. 
LXXX. The Ministers of State may take part, in the name of the Executive Power, in the discussion of the laws, but they cannot vote, nor be present at the voting. 
LXXXI. The Ministers of State shall report every 2 years to the Congress at the opening of the sessions on the state of their respective branches; they shall propose the improvements and reforms which they consider necessary, and in the course of the sessions they shall give to the Chambers such notices and information as they require of them concerning the business of their offices.
 
<title> The Judicial Power. 
LXXXII. The judicial power rests in the Supreme Court, in the superior courts and tribunals of the republic; to them belongs exclusively the faculty of judging and applying this Constitution in preference to the other laws, and the laws in preference to other ordinances. 
LXXXIII. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of 7 magistrates, one for each department, and born therein, and a Fiscal appointed by the Executive Power. The departments of Santa Cruz and the Beni shall be represented by a magistrate born in one of them, the same as those of Tarija and Cobija. 
LXXXIV. To be a magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice it is required to be a Bolivian by birth in exercise of the rights of citizenship; to be 35 years of age; to have been an official in one of the superior courts for 4 years, or to have exercised with good reputation the profession of advocate for 10 years; and not to have suffered corporal or degrading punishment in virtue of judicial condemnation.
LXXXV. There shall be superior courts of justice in the capitals of the judicial district. The law will specify the number of them, and of the magistrates of whom they are to be composed, their organization and attributes as well as those of the judges. 
LXXXVI. To be an official in a Superior Court of Justice it is required to be a Bolivian by birth, in exercise of the rights of citizenship; to be 30 years of age; to have been Judge of First Instance or Auditor-General of the Army for 3 years at least, or to have exercised for 6 years, with good reputation, the profession of Advocate; and not to have suffered corporal or degrading punishment in virtue of judicial condemnation. 
LXXXVII. There shall be Judges of First Instance in the capitals of departments and in the provinces. 
LXXXVIII. To be Judge of First Instance it is required to be a Bolivian by birth, in exercise of the rights of citizenship; to have exercised the profession of Advocate for 3 years with good reputation ; and not to have suffered corporal or degrading punishment in virtue of judicial condemnation. 
LXXXIX. The magistrates and judges are personally responsible for the infractions of the law which they commit in the exercise of their functions. 
XC. No magistrate or judge can be deprived of His office unless by executorial sentence, nor suspended unless in conformity with the laws. Nor can they be transferred without their express consent and the approval of the Executive Power. 
XCI. Publicity at the trials is an essential guarantee, unless it be dangerous to order and morality. In that case the tribunal will declare the trial secret by a previous resolution. The discussion may be secret in the tribunals, but the voting is to be with open doors and in a loud voice. The sentences are to have their reasons assigned, and to be based upon an express law which is to be cited, or, in default of that, in equity. A special law will regulate the gratuitous administration of justice. 
XCII. The law alone, and no other authority, can alter or dispense with the forms and proceedings prescribed by the laws in the different classes of trials. 

<title> The Interior Government. 
XCIII. The political government of the departments, provinces, and cantons, rests with the functionaries pointed out by the law; the law will determine their qualifications, their appointments, their attributes, and the term of their service. 

<title> The Armed Force. 
XCIV. The armed force is composed of the permanent army of the line; its business is to preserve the internal order of the republic, to defend its liberty, its integrity and independence, under the immediate orders of the Supreme Government. 
XCV. The armed force is essentially obedient; in no case shall it deliberate, and it shall be in all things subject to the military regulations and ordinances. 
XCVI. There shall also be corps of National Guards, whose organization and functions shall be regulated by a special law. 

<title> The Reform of the Constitution. 
XCVII. Reforms in any one or more Articles of this Constitution, or additions thereto, may be proposed in either of the 2 Legislative Chambers. If the proposition be supported by the fifth part at least of the members present, and the discussion be allowed by the absolute majority of votes, the debate shall be carried on in the form appointed for projects of law. If the reform or addition be declared necessary by the vote of two-thirds of the members present, it shall be sent to the other Chamber. 
XCVIII. If the reform or addition be approved by the other Chamber, on the same terms and with the same requisites as provided in the preceding Article, it shall be sent to the Executive Power for the sole purpose of having it published and circulated. 
XCIX. The Chambers, in the first sessions of the nest Legislature, in which there has been a renewal of members, shall consider the reform or addition approved in the preceding one; and if it be declared necessary by two-thirds of the members present of each Chamber, it shall become part of this Constitution, and be sent to the Executive Power for execution and publication. 
C. The power which Congress has to reform this Constitution shall never be extended to the form of Government, the independence or religion of the State. 
CI. The Congress shall have power to resolve any doubts which occur in regard to the sense of any one or more of the Articles of this Constitution, if they are declared reasonable by two-thirds of ,the votes of each Chamber. 
CII. The present Constitution and the rights established thereby are confided to the patriotism and valour of the Bolivians. 
CIII. The laws and decrees which are opposed to this Constitution are abrogated. 

<title> Transitory Article. 
The period of the Government of the present President of the Republic, Citizen Manuel Isidoro Belzu, runs from the 15th of August, 1850, when, having been constitutionally elected, he took possession thereof. 
Let this be communicated to the Executive Power for execution and fulfillment.