SECTION I.
<title>Of the Nation and its Worship.
ART. I. The Bolivian nation is composed of all Bolivians united under the same political association.
II. Bolivia is and shall be ever free from and independent of, all foreign domination. 
III. The name of Bolivia is immutable. 
IV. The religion of the Republic is the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman, to the exclusion of the public exercise of any other.

SECTION II.
<title> Of the Territory.
V. The territory of the Republic consists of the departments of Chuquisaca, Potosi, Paz de Ayacucho, Santa Cruz, Cochabamba, Oruro, Tarija, Beni, and the litoral district of Cobija. 
VI. A special law shall regulate the amended division of the territory of the Republic. VII. The territory is divided into departments, provinces, and cantons.

SECTION III.
<title> Of Bolivians.
VIII. The quality of Bolivian is either naturally or legally acquired, and is forfeited for various reasons. The civil laws will determine the cases of its acquirement and forfeiture.

SECTION IV.
<title> Of the Citizens.
IX. Citizens are;
<list> 
1st, married Bolivians, or those above 21 years of age, who have a known calling, or profess some science or art, without being dependent upon any person in the capacity of domestic servants; 
2nd, Foreigners who fought at Junin, Ayacucho, and Ingavi, and those who are in the service of the Republic, provided they possess the qualifications of the preceding paragraph; 
3rdly, Foreigners who were established in Bolivia at the time it declared its independence, and who, uniting in themselves the aforesaid qualifications, still remain in the country; 
4thly, Foreigners who, possessing the same qualifications, obtain letters of citizenship. 
</list>
X. Citizenship is suspended,-
<list>
1st, on account of insanity; 
2ndly, for avowed pauperism ; 
3rdly, for being a debtor in arrears to the public treasury ; 
4thly, for being prosecuted criminally for an offence subject to corporal or ignominious punishment; 
5thly, for drunkenness or gambling. 
</list>
XI. The right of citizenship is lost,
<list>
1st, by naturalization in a foreign country; 
2ndly, by having accepted employment or titles from other Governments without the express consent of the Senate; 
3rdly, by having suffered corporal or ignominious punishment by virtue of judicial sentence.
</list>

SECTION V.
<title> Of the form of Government.
XII. The Government of the Republic is popular representative under the form of unity.
XIII. The Sovereignty emanates from the nation; and its exercise is delegated to the 3 high powers, Legislative, Executive, and Judicial. Each of them will possess the attributes assigned to it by this Constitution. 

SECTION VI.
<title> Of the Legislative Power. 
XIV. The Legislative power resides in a Congress composed of 2 Co-legislative Chambers,-the one of Senators and the other of Representatives. To them exclusively belongs the power to enact, interpret, and annul laws. 
XV. The Legislative body shall meet every 2 years, on the 6th of August, in the capital of the Republic, even although it may not have been convened. 
XVI. The Sessions of the Legislative body shall be public, and matters shall be discussed with closed doors only when it may be deemed expedient. 
XVII. The ordinary Sessions shall last 100 days. 
XVIII. The Legislative body shall assemble extraordinarily in the place pointed out by the Executive Power; in which case it can solely occupy itself with the affairs submitted to it by the Government. 

SECTION VII.
<title> The Attributes of the Congress. 
XIX. The Chambers shall assemble in Congress,
<list>
1st, to open and close the sessions; 
2ndly, to scrutinize the votes for the election of President of the Republic, or to ratify it in case of its conformity with the election law; 
3rdly, in the event of the President being required to be sworn; 
4thly, to accept or reject his excuse or renunciation; 
5thly, to approve or disapprove the expenses of the administration disbursed during the 2 preceding years; 
6thly, to vote the estimates for those of the 2 following years; 
7thly, to approve or disapprove Treaties concluded by the Executive Power; 
8thly, to declare war at the recommendation of the Executive Power; 
9thly, to reconsider the laws returned to it by the Executive Power, with observations, in which case the Chambers must separate in order to vote ; 
10thly, to determine the points to which the reform of the Constitution is applicable; 
11thly, to decree the provisional removal of the Congress and of the Government to another place, whenever grave and urgent motives reader such a measure necessary, twothirds of the votes of each Chamber being necessary for that purpose. 
</list>

SECTION VIII.
<title> Of the Chamber of Representatives. 
XX. The Chamber of Representatives shall be composed of the Deputies elected by the nation, in the proportion of 1 for every 40,000 souls, and with 1 more for any fraction not under 20,000. A special law shall regulate the form of the elections, and determine the qualifications of the electors. 
XXI. To be a representative it is necessary,
<list>
1st, to be a Bolivian by birth; 
2ndly, to be a citizen in the exercise of civil rights 
3rdly, to be above 25 years of age; 
4thly, to possess a landed property of the value of not less than 4,000 dollars, or a trade or profession producing at least an annual income of 500 dollars; 
5thly, not to have been condemned to corporal or ignominious punishment; 
6thly, to have been born in the department, or to have lived and been domiciled therein at least 2 years immediately preceding the election. This last qualification is not required for those who are to be deputies for the Department of the Beni and the litoral district of Cobija. 
</list>
XXII. The peculiar attributes of the Chamber of Representatives are,
<list>
1st, to rehabilitate those who may have lost the right of citizenship; 
2ndly, to propose to the Executive, out of a list of 3, the members having votes of the Superior Courts of Justice; 
3rdly, to impeach, before the Chamber of Senators, the Ministers of State, the members of the National Council, and the members having votes of the Supreme Court of Justice, for faults committed in the exercise of their functions. 
</list>
XXIII. The Chamber of Representatives shall be renewed every 2 years in the proportion of one-half. The first renewal shall take place by lot, and should a fraction result, the members composing it shall go out in the second biennial period.

SECTION IX.
<title> Of the Chamber of Senators.
XXIV. The Chamber of Senators shall consist of 3 Senators for each of the Departments of Chuquisaca, Potosi, Paz de Ayuacucho, Santa Cruz, Cochabamba, and Oruro, and of 1 for each of the Departments of Tarija, Beni, and the litoral district of Cobija. The form of their election shall be regulated by law. 
XXV. For being a Senator it is requisite, 
<list>
1st, to be a Bolivian by birth; 
2nd, to be a citizen in the exercise of civil rights;
3rd, to be above 25 years of age; 
4th, to have a landed property producing an annual rental not less than 6,000 dollars, or a trade or profession which produces at least 1,000 dollars yearly; 
5th, the not having been condemned to corporal or ignominious punishment; 
6th, to reside in some part of the Republic at least 2 years preceding the election. 
</list>
XXVI. The peculiar attributes of the Chamber of Senators are, 
<list>
1st, to confer rewards and personal honours on those who have rendered distinguished services to the Republic; 
2nd, to allow Bolivians to accept employments and titles granted to them by another Government; 3rd, to propose to the Executive a list of 3 persons having votes to be members of the Supreme Court of Justice; 
4th, to nominate the Generals of the Army from a list of 3 persons given in by the Executive ; 
5th, to try publicly and conformably to the law for that purpose, the Ministers of State and the Members of the National Council, as far as dismissal only is involved, the prosecution passing to the Supreme Court whenever other penalties are incurred; 
6th, to try publicly, without appeal, the Members, having votes, of the Supreme Court of Justice, and enforce their responsibility, in conformity with the law in that case made and provided. 
</list>
XXVII. The Chamber of Senators shall be renewed by third-parts every 2 years, the 1st and 2nd third-part going out by lot. The Senators of the Departments of Tarija, Beni, and the litoral district of Cobija, shall be renewed every 4 years.

SECTION X.
<title> Regulatons common to both Chambers.
XXVIII. Neither of the Chambers shall sit unless there be present at least the two-third parts of the individuals composing it. 
XXIX. Any of the Members of the Legislative Body are eligible for the appointment of President of the Republic, Minister of State, or Diplomatic Agent, such Members ceasing to belong to their respective Chambers. 
XXX. The Senators and Representatives are irresponsible for the opinions and votes which they may give in the discharge of their duties. 
XXXI. The Senators and Representatives cannot be arrested or proceeded against during the sessions without permission of the Chamber to which they belong, nor 30 days before, nor 30 days after such sessions, unless they be found in flagranti; in which case, as well as in that of their being arrested or proceeded against when the Sessions are shut, information must be sent as speedily as possible to the Chamber to which they belong. 
XXXII. The Senators and Representatives may be re-elected, but in that case they have the right of refusal.

SECTION XI.
<title> Of the Formation of the Laws.
XXXIII. The laws may originate in either of the 2 Chambers on the proposition of its Members or that of the Executive Power. 
XXXIV. A bill (proyecto de ley), read and passed in the Chamber in which it criginated, shall be sent to the other, in order that it may be approved or rejected. 
XXXV. No bill thrown out by one of the Chambers can be again brought forward during the sessions of that year. 
XXXVI. No bill approved of by both Chambers shall possess the force of law until it obtain the sanction of the Executive Power. 
XXXVII. Should the Executive Power give its consent to the bill, it shall command the same to be executed and published as a law; but, if not, it shall, within the precise term of 10 days, return the said bill, together with its observations thereon, to the Chamber in which it originated. 
XXXVIII. Upon the expiration of the said term, the bills passed to the Executive Power shall possess the force of law, unless the Chambers shall have closed their sessions before the said term be ended, in which case such bills must be returned during the first days of the next sitting. 
XXXIX. For discussing the cases contemplated in the 2 foregoing Articles, both Chambers shall meet together, and the agreement of the two-third parts of the members present shall give the final consent to the said bills so commented upon. 
XL. The formula of the consent given by the Executive Power to the laws and decrees of the Legislative Body, shall be the following:- "Let it be executed."
XLI. The laws shall be promulgated with the following formula:- "We, N. N., President of the Republic, make known to all Bolivians that the Congress has decreed, and we proclaim the following law [here the text]. We therefore command that all the authorities of the Republic shall fulfill the same, and cause it to be fulfilled. The Minister of the Department shall cause it to be printed, published, and circulated among whom it may concern." The President shall sign it, and the respective Minister countersign it.

SECTION XII.
<title> Of the Executive Power.
XLII. The Executive Power is vested in the President of the Republic and in the Ministers of State, as appointed by law. 
XLIII. The attributes of the Executive Power are
<list>
1st, to preserve the tranquillity, order, and the internal and external security of the Republic, commanding and disposing of the armed force by sea and land; 
2nd, to convoke the Legislative Body at the periods appointed by this Constitution; and extraordinarily when it considers it necessary so to do; 
3rd, to be present when the Legislative Body opens and closes its sessions; 
4th, to sanction the laws and decrees enacted by the Legislative Body, and to command the same to be published and obeyed; 
5th, to return with observations to the Legislative Body, such laws or decrees as the said Executive, in its judgment considers inexpedient, conformably with what is provided in Article XXXVII; 
6th, to request the Legislative Body to prorogue their sessions for the space of 30 days; 
7th, to dissolve the Constitutional Chambers, in case they should openly and unquestionably transgress the limits assigned to them by this Constitution ; but this power can only be exercised by and with the previous consent of the National Council and of the Supreme Court of Justice, assembled in council for that purpose; 
8th, to convoke, the said power being so used, new Chambers for the following constitutional period; 
9th, to issue the decrees and regulations necessary for the execution of the laws; 
10th, to suspend or remove at pleasure, the persons employed in the Government, the Financial Department, and the Police; 
11th, to appoint military officers up to the rank of colonel inclusive, and to propose individuals to the Senate for generals, accompanying such recommendation with a minute of their services; 
12th, the President of the Republic can, nevertheless, confer on the field of battle high military employments; 
13th, to publish the organic regulations for the administration of the army and of the national guard; 
14th, to grant licenses, dismissions and pensions, conformably to the laws; 
15th, to decree civil and military retired pensions conformably to the laws; 
16th, to grant temporary leave of absence to all persons employed in the different departments of Government, and to accept their excuses and resignations; 
17th, to grant letters of marque; 
18th, to declare war, the same having been previously decreed by the Legislative Body, or during recess of the latter, the consent of the National Council having been previously obtained; 
19th, to decree general amnesties for political offences, with the previous consent of the National Council; 
20th, to commute capital punishment into that of imprisonment or transportation for 10 years; 
21st, to elect the Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, from a list of 3 sent in by the Senate; 
22nd, to elect the members, having votes, of the Superior Courts from a list of 3 proposed by the Chamber of Representatives; 
23rd, to nominate of itself the magistrates, judges of First Instance, and fiscal agents of the Tribunals and Minor Courts of the Republic; 
24th, to fill up, ad interim, vacancies occurring in employments, the nomination to which belongs to one of the other powers of the State; 
25th, to grant commissions for the employments in its appointment; 
26th, to supervise the collection of the public revenues, and order the disbursement of the same according to the laws; 
27th, to exercise, according to the laws, the national patronage, as regards the Church benefices and ecclesiastical persons; 
28th, to appoint as archbishops and bishops, one of the persons out of the list of 3 sent in by the National Council; 
29th, to fill up church preferments, canonries and prebends, from the list of 3 submitted by the National Council; 
30th, to refuse or grant, as previously decreed by the Legislative Body, the introduction of decisions of councils, bulls, briefs, and pontifical rescripts; 
31st, to conclude concordats according to instructions received from the Legislative Body; 
32nd, to appoint diplomatic ministers, consuls, and other persons employed in the Department of Foreign Affairs; 
33rd, to direct diplomatic negotiations; 
34th, to conclude every species of Treaty with other Governments, submitting them to the Legislative Body for its approbation; 
35th, to receive Ambassadors and Public Ministers; 
36th, to issue letters of naturalization or citizenship, in favour of persons to whom they may be granted by the Council of State; 
37th, to promote and encourage immigration; 
38th, to grant, subject to the approbation of the Legislative Body, exclusive temporary privileges, indemnifications and rewards, in favour of industry; 
39th, all public establishments, and all matters of Police, are, according to the laws and regulations controlling them, under the supreme supervision of the Executive Power. 
</list>
XLIV. The Executive Power is restricted: 
<list>
1st, from depriving any Bolivian of his liberty, or subjecting him, upon its own authority, to any punishment; 
2nd, when the security of the Republic requires the arrest of one or more individuals, the Executive can only detain them 48 hours, as within that period they must be brought up before the competent judge; 
3rd, from preventing the popular elections; 
4th, from suspending or putting off the assembling of the Legislative Body, except in the cases provided for by this Constitution. 
</list>
XLV. None of these restrictions shall take place in the event of external danger or internal commotion. 
XLVI. In the cases anticipated by the foregoing Article, the President of the Republic shall take such measures of security as he may judge necessary, giving an account of what he has done, and of his reasons for so doing to the Legislative Body, or during its recess, to the National Council.

SECTION XIII.
<title> Of the President of the Republic.
XLVII. The following qualifications are requisite for becoming President of the Republic: 
<list>
1st, to be a Bolivian by birth; 
2nd, to be a citizen in exercise of civil rights; 
3rd, to be above 35 years of age; 
4th, to have rendered important services to the Republic; 
5th, to possess the abilities required for the due administration of the State. 
</list>
XLVIII. The President of the Republic shall be elected by the people. A special law shall determine the form of the election, and the qualifications of the electors. 
XLIX. The mode of making the scrutiny, and, should there be one, of completing the election of a President of the Republic, shall be determined by a law. 
L. The functions of President of the Republic shall last 8 years, reckoned from the day of his taking office, and he cannot be reelected until after the expiration of a constitutional period. 
LI. The President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss, at will, the Ministers of State. 
LII. The President of the Republic, as Chief of the Administration, shall give an account of it to each Legislature.
LIII. In the case of the temporary sickness or incapacity of the President of the Republic, the President of the National Council shall take charge of the Administration. 
LIV. In the event of the death, permanent incapacity, or resignation of the President of the Republic, the President of the National Council shall likewise take charge of the Administration; but in this case he shall, within the precise term of 10 days, order, conformably to the law, that the election of a Constitutional President be proceeded with. 
LV. Should the death, permanent incapacity, or resignation of the President of the Republic, occur in the 1st year of the constitutional term of 2 years, the President of the Council shall convoke Extraordinary Chambers the same day on which he orders the election, in order that they may make the scrutiny conformably to the law. If the death, permanent incapacity, or resignation, should occur after the 1st year of the 2 years, then the scrutiny shall be made by the Constitutional Chambers in their ordinary sittings.

SECTION XIV.
<title> Of the Ministers of State.
LVI. The law shall determine the number of Ministers and their respective departments. 
LVII. The qualification for a Minister of State is that of being a citizen in the exercise of civil rights. 
LVIII. The Ministers of State are personally responsible for all the acts of the Administration in their respective Departments. 
LIX. No order of the President of the Republic, or of the Ministers of State, shall be complied with unless it be signed in rubric by the President, and countersigned by the Minister of the respective Department. 
LX. The Ministers of State, after having retired from office, cannot depart the territory of the Republic until the 1st Constitutional Chambers in which an improvement might be made, have closed their Sessions.

SECTION XV.
<title> Of the National Council.
LXI. There shall be a National Council composed of 2 Senators, 2 Representatives, the Ministers of State, 2 Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, a General of the Army, a Dignitary of the Church, and a Chief of one or other of the offices of Revenue. 
LXII. The Senators and Representatives of the National Council shall be elected by their respective Chambers before the closing of their sessions, and are to be relieved in each Legislature. 
LXIII, The President of the Republic shall nominate the other individuals of the National Council, who shall remain in their functions for 4 years, being open to re-election with right of refusal.
LXIV. The President of the Republic who shall have terminated his constitutional period, shall be by right a member of the Council. 
LXV. The National Council shall nominate each year its President from among the persons composing it. 
LXVI. The attributes of the Council are, 
<list>
1st, to watch over the observance of the Constitution, giving to the Executive Power the necessary information whenever it is infringed; 
2nd, to grant the rights of naturalization and citizenship; 
3rd, to recommend to the Executive Power, in ternary lists, persons to fill the archbishoprics, bishoprics, ecclesiastical dignities, canonships, and prebends; 
4th, to give its opinion on points required by this Constitution, and on all such which the Executive Power may judge necessary. 
</list>
LXVII. The Executive Power can also submit to the consideration of the National Counil,
<list>
1st, the bills which it desires to introduce into either of the Chambers; 
2nd, the bills which, being approved of by the Legislative Body, pass to the Executive for its consent; 
3rd, the general estimate of expenses which has to be submitted to the examination and approbation of the Legislative Body. 
</list>
LXVIII. The opinion of the National Council is purely a deliberative matter, except in those special cases in which the Constitution requires the Executive Power to act with its consent. 
LXIX. All the individuals composing the National Council are responsible for the opinions which they give in direct opposition to the Constitution, and they may be impeached and tried in the same ,manner As the Ministers of State. 
LXX. The Senators and Representatives who belong to the National Council shall take their seats in their respective Chambers during the time of the sessions. 
LXXI. The individuals of the National Council, after having retired from office, shall not depart the territory of the Republic until the first Constitutional Chambers in which they might be impeached shall have closed their sessions.

SECTION XVI.
<title> Of the Judicial Power.
LXXII. The Judicial Power exists in the Supreme Court of Justice, and in the other Tribunals and Courts determined by law. 
LXXIII. To the Tribunals and Courts belong exclusively the power of judging and of applying the laws. The law shall determine their -organization, their powers, and the manner of exercising them, and the law shall also designate the qualifications which such individuals should possess, 
LXXIV. The persons employed in the Judicial Department are :personally responsible for any infractions of the law which they commit in the exercise of their functions. 
LXXV. No person employed in the Judicial Department can be removed from office, either temporarily or permanently, unless by a judicial sentence, without appeal; nor can he be suspended unless by an Act declaring that there is sufficient cause for an indictment.

SECTION XVII.
<title> Of the Government of the Interior
LXXVI. The Political Government of the Departments, Provinces, and Cantons shall be placed in the hands of the functionaries designated by the law. 
LXXVII. The law shall determine the qualifications which the said functionaries should possess, and shall assign them their duties and powers.

SECTION XVIII.
<title> Of the Armed Force.
LXXVIII. The Legislative body shall, at the recommendation of the Executive Power, fix every 2 years, the amount of the armed force by sea and land. 
LXXIX. There shall also be in the Republic, National Guards, whose organization and service shall be fixed by law. 
LXXX. The armed force is essentially obedient, and cannot deliberate.

SECTION XIX.
<title> Of the Reform of the Constitution,
LXXXI. Either of the Chambers may initiate the reform of any Article or Articles of this Constitution, and discuss them in the form provided for other bills ; but in both Chambers the necessity for the reform must be established by two-thirds of the votes of the members present. 
LXXXII. The necessity of the reform being established by both Chambers, the Congress shall fix the points to be reformed, that they may be discussed in the first sessions of the Legislature which has been renewed. 
LXXXIII. The power which the Chambers possess of reforming the Constitution does not extend to the form of Government, or to the independence proclaimed by the Republic.

SECTION XX.
<title> Of the Duties of Bolivians.
LXXXIV. The duties of Bolivians are, 
<list>
1st, to watch over the preservation of the public liberties; 
2nd, to contribute to the public expenses in proportion to their property and conformably to law; 
3rd, to serve and defend the Republic sacrificing even life in its cause, if necessary.
</list>

SECTION XXI.
<title> Of the Duties of the Inhabitants.
LXXXV. The duties of the inhabitants of the Republic are: 
<list>
1st, to submit themselves obediently to the Constitution and the laws: 
2nd, to respect and obey the constituted authorities.
</list>

SECTION XXII.
<title> Of the Guarantees.
LXXXVI. This Constitution guarantees to the inhabitants of the Republic their civil liberty, personal security, property, and equality in the eye of the law. 
LXXXVII. In Bolivia are free those born of a slave-mother, since the 6th of August, 1825, and those born after that time. Slaves also, who, from whatever motive, have set foot on the Bolivian territory, since the promulgation of the Constitution of 1831, are free, as well .as those who have arrived in it since. 
LXXXVIII. All may remain in the Republic or quit it at their option, taking their property with them; provided, however, that they observe the police regulations, and respect the rights of a third party. 
LXXXIX. No law can be retrospective in its effect. 
XC. No inhabitant of the Republic can be prosecuted either by criminal or civil action, except by the tribunal previously appointed by the law. 
XCI. No one can be deprived of liberty except in the eases appointed by law, and under the formalities thereby prescribed. XCII. The house of every Bolivian is inviolable; the circumstances under which it may be entered by a search-warrant shall be determined by the law. XCIII. All trials shall be public, except in such cases as the law appoints otherwise. 
XCIV. Every one has a right to publish by the press his opinions without previous censorship, and under the responsibility of the law. 
XCV. Property is inviolable ; nor can any Bolivian be compelled to dispose of it, except when it is proved that such alienation is for the public benefit, and upon his previously receiving a fair compensation. 
XCVI. Torture, confiscation of property, and every extrajudicial ignominious punishment are prohibited. 
XCVII. The punishment of death shall be only inflicted in cases of treason towards the country, rebellion, parricide, assassination, and crimes pointed out in the Military Code. 
XCVIII. The Constitution repudiates hereditary employments and privileges. All properties are alienable, even should they belong to charitable institutions, religious, or other objects. 
XCIX. Letters and all epistolary correspondence are inviolable. The seizure of private papers shall be effected in the cases and in the manner determined by law. 
C. This Constitution guarantees to the inhabitants of the Republic the principle that the conscience is above all human power. 
CI. All laws contrary to this Constitution are abrogated.

<title> Temporary Articles. 
CII. For the fulfilment of Article LXI, the Convention shall name '4 individuals of its body to form part of the National Council until the assembling of the Constitutional Chambers. 
CIII. The installation of the first Constitutional Chambers shall take place in the next year of 1844. 