PRELIMINARY TITLE: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Art. 1. 
Bolivia, free, independent, and sovereign, constituted as a unitary republic, adopts for its government the democratic representative form. 
Art. 2. 
Sovereignty resides in the people; it is inalienable and imprescriptible; its exercise is delegated to the legislative, executive, and judicial powers. The independence and co-ordination of these powers is the basis of the government. The functions of the public power, legislative, executive, and judicial, cannot be united in a single organ. 
Art. 3. 
The State recognizes and upholds the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion. It guarantees the public exercise of any other worship. Relations with the Catholic Church shall be governed by concordats and agreements between the Bolivian State and the Holy See. 
Art. 4. 
The people do not deliberate nor govern except through their representatives and the authorities created by law. All armed forces or groups of persons who attribute to themselves the sovereignty of the people commit the crime of sedition.
PART ONE: THE PERSON AS A MEMBER OF THE STATE
Title One. Fundamental Rights and Duties of the Person
Art. 5. 
No type of servitude is recognized and no one shall be compelled to render personal services without his full consent and due compensation, Personal services may be demanded only when so established by law. 
Art. 6. 
Every human being has legal personality and capacity, in accordance with the laws. He enjoys the rights, freedoms, and guarantees recognized by this Constitution, without distinction as to race, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, origin, economic or social condition, or any other. 
The dignity and freedom of the person are inviolable. To respect them and protect them is a primary duty of the State. 
Art. 7. 
Every person has the following fundamental rights, in accordance with the laws which regulate their exercise: 

(a) To life, health, and safety; 
(b) To freely express his ideas and opinions, by any means of dissemination; 
(c) To assemble and to associate for lawful purposes; 
(d) To work and to engage in commerce, industry, or any other lawful activity, under conditions which do not injure the collective welfare; 
(e) To receive an education and acquire culture; 
(f) To teach under the supervision of the State; 
(g) To enter, remain in, travel through, and leave the national territory; 
(h) To make petitions, individually or collectively; 
(i) To private property, individually or collectively, provided it fulfills the social function; 
(j) To a fair remuneration for his labor, which will ensure to himself and his family an existence worthy of a human being; 
(k) To social security, in the form determined by this Constitution and the laws. 

Art. 8. 
Every person has the following fundamental duties; 

(a) To obey and comply with the Constitution and the laws of the republic; 
(b) To work, according to his capacity and capabilities, in some socially useful activity; 
(c) To acquire at least an elementary education; 
(d) To contribute, in proportion to his economic capacity, to the payment of the public services; 
(e) To care for, nourish, and educate his minor children, and to protect and support his parents if they are in a state of illness, poverty, or need;
(f) To perform civic and military services which the nation requires for its development, defense, and preservation; 
(g) To co-operate with the organs of the State and the community in social service and security; 
(h) To safeguard and protect the property and interests of the community. 

Title Two. Guarantees of the Person 
Art. 9. 
No one may be arrested, detained, or imprisoned except in the cases and according to the forms established by law; for the execution of the respective order it is required that this be issued by competent authority and served in writing. 
A person may not be held incommunicado except in obviously serious cases and never for more than twenty-four hours. 
Art. 10. 
Any offender caught in flagrante delicto may be arrested by any person, even without a warrant, for the sole purpose of taking him before an authority or competent judge, who must examine him within twenty-four hours at the most. 
Art. 11. 
Wardens of prisons shall not admit anyone as detained, arrested, or imprisoned without entering in his register a copy of the respective warrant. They can, nevertheless, retain within the prison limits those who have been arrested, for the purpose of bringing them before the competent judge within twenty-four hours. 
Art. 12. 
Any kind of torture, coercion, extortion or other form of physical or moral violence is prohibited, under penalty of immediate removal from office and without prejudice to sanctions that may be incurred by anyone who applies, orders, instigates, or consents to them. 
Art. 13. 
Attacks against personal safety render the immediate authors thereof responsible, and the fact that they obeyed superior orders in committing the offense shall not serve as an excuse. 
Art. 14. 
No one may be tried by special commissions nor turned over to judges other than those designated before the offense was committed nor shall he be compelled to testify against himself in a criminal trial or against blood relatives up to the fourth degree inclusive, or by affinity up to the second degree, as computed by civil law. 
Art. 15. 
Public officials who, without a state of siege having been declared, take measures for the molestation, confinement, or exile of citizens, and have these measures carried out, as well as those who close printing establishments or any other means of free expression of thought and resort to depredation or other form of abuse shall be subject to payment of compensation for damages, whenever it is proved by civil suit which may be independent of any corresponding criminal action, that such measures or steps were taken in violation of the rights and guarantees affirmed in this Constitution. 
Art. 16. 
An accused person is to be presumed innocent until his guilt has been proved. 
The right of defense of a person in a trial is inviolable. 
From the moment of his detention or imprisonment, a person held has the right to be assisted by a defender. 
No one may be sentenced to any penalty without having first been heard and adjudged in a legal trial; and the penalty shall not be undergone unless it has been imposed by final sentence and by a competent authority. A criminal conviction must be based on a law in effect prior to the trial, and subsequent laws shall only be applied if they are more favorable to the person tried. 
Art. 17. 
There is no penalty of infamy or civil death. In case of assassination, parricide, or treason, the punishment of thirty years' imprisonment shall be applied, without the right of pardon. Treason is defined as complicity with the enemy during a foreign war. 
Art. 18. 
Any person who believes that he is being unduly or illegally prosecuted, detained, tried, or imprisoned may appear, in person or through anyone acting in his name, with or without a notarized power of attorney, before the Superior Court of the District or before any sectional judge (juez de partido), at his choice, to demand that legal formalities be followed. At places where there is no juez de partido, this may be done before an investigating judge (juez instructor). 
The judicial authority shall immediately fix a day and hour for a public hearing, ordering that the defendant be brought before him. With this order a personal summons or notification shall be made to the office of the authority cited, and such order shall be obeyed without objection or excuse, by such authority and by those in charge of a jail or place of detention, who after being summoned may not disobey the order on grounds of higher orders. 
In no case may the hearing be suspended. After the facts have been examined, the judicial authority shall issue a judgment ordering freedom of the accused, the correction of legal defects, or placing the offender at the disposition of a competent judge. The decision must be carried out forthwith. The decision rendered may be appealed for review by the Supreme Court of Justice, within twenty-four hours, but without such appeal suspending execution of the judgment. 
If the defendant after attending the hearing leaves before hearing the judgment, he shall be validly notified within the courtroom. If he does not attend, the hearing will be held in absentia and after the explanation of the offender or his representative has been heard, the judgment will be rendered. 
Public officials or private persons who resist judicial decisions, in the cases covered by this article, shall be brought, by order of the authority who heard the habeas corpus proceedings, before the criminal judge for trial as a violator of constitutional guarantees. 
Any judicial authority who does not act in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be subject to the sanction prescribed by Article 127, item 12, of this Constitution. 
Art. 19. 
In addition to the right of habeas corpus, to which the preceding article refers, there is the recourse of amparo against the illegal acts or undue omissions of officials or private individuals that restrict, deny or threaten to restrict or deny the rights and guarantees of the person recognized by this Constitution and the laws. 
The recourse of amparo may be interposed by the person who considers himself aggrieved or by another person acting in his name with sufficient legal power, before the Superior Court in the capital of a department and before a Juez de Particle in the provinces, in the most summary form. The public ministry may also interpose this recourse directly whenever it is not done or cannot be done by the person affected. 
The authority or person accused shall be summoned in the manner indicated in the preceding article for the purpose of giving information and, if pertinent, of presenting the action taken concerning the act denounced, within a maximum period of forty-eight hours. 
The final decision shall be rendered at a public hearing immediately upon receipt of the testimony of the person accused and, in default thereof, it shall be made on the basis of the evidence offered by the petitioner. The judicial authority shall examine the competency of the official or acts of the private individual, and if the denunciation is found true and effective the requested amparo will be granted provided there is no other means or legal recourse for the immediate protection of the rights and guarantees restricted, suppressed, or threatened, and the decision is to be referred to the Supreme Court of Justice within twenty-four hours for review. 
The prior rulings of the judicial authority and the final decision granting amparo are to be executed immediately and without objection, the provisions of the preceding article being applicable in case of resistance. 
Art. 20. 
Private papers and correspondence are inviolable and may not be seized except in cases prescribed by law and by written order of competent authority setting forth the reasons therefore. Seized or intercepted private documents shall have no legal effect. 
No public authority nor any person or organization may intercept private conversations or communications by means of an installation which will control or centralize them. 
Art. 21. 
Every house is an inviolable asylum; at night it shall not be entered without the consent of the person who inhabits it, and in the daytime entrance thereto is only allowed on written order of a competent authority setting forth the reasons therefore, except in case of flagrante delicto. 
Art. 22. 
Private property is guaranteed, provided that the use made thereof is not prejudicial to the collective interest. 
Expropriation is effected for reasons of public benefit or when property does not fulfill a social purpose, authorized by law and with just compensation. 
Art. 23. 
Confiscation of property shall never be applied as punishment for political offenses. 
Art. 24. 
Foreign subjects and enterprises are subject to Bolivian laws, and in no case may they invoke exceptional position or have recourse to diplomatic claims. 
Art. 25. 
Within fifty kilometers of the frontiers foreigners may not acquire or possess, under any title, soil or subsoil, directly or indirectly, individually or as a company, under penalty of forfeiture to the State of the property acquired, except in case of national necessity so declared by special law. 
Art. 26. 
No tax is obligatory unless it has been established in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Those prejudiced may bring proceedings before the Supreme Court of Justice against any illegal taxation. Municipal taxes are obligatory when levied in accordance with the principles established in this Constitution. 
Art. 27. 
Taxes and other public charges are equally obligatory on all. Their creation, distribution, and repeal shall be of a general character and must be determined on the basis of equal sacrifice for the taxpayers, proportionally or progressively, according to the circumstances. 
Art. 28. 
The property of the Church, of religious orders and congregation, and of institutions engaged in educational, welfare, and charitable pursuits shall enjoy the same rights and guarantees as private individuals. 
Art. 29. 
The legislative power alone has the right to alter or modify the codes or to enact rules or provisions concerning judicial procedures. 
Art. 30. 
The public powers may not delegate the powers conferred on them by this Constitution nor grant to the executive power any others than are expressly authorized herein. 
Art. 31. 
The acts of those who usurp functions not belonging to them are null and void, as are also the acts of those who exercise jurisdiction or power not emanating from a law. 
Art. 32. 
No one shall be compelled to do what the Constitution or the laws do not order, or to deprive himself of things which they do not prohibit. 
Art. 33. 
The law shall provide only for the future and has no retroactive effect, except in social matters when expressly so stated and in criminal matters when it benefits the offender. 
Art. 34. 
Those who violate constitutional rights and guarantees shall be subject to ordinary jurisdiction.
Art. 35. 
The declarations, rights, and guarantees enumerated in this Constitution shall not be taken as a denial of other rights and guarantees not proclaimed therein which emanate from the sovereignty of the people and from the republican form of government. 
Title Three. Nationality and Citizenship
CHAPTER I. NATIONALITY
Art. 36. 
The following are Bolivians by origin: 

1. Those born in the territory of the Republic, except for children of foreigners who are in Bolivia in the service of their government. 
2. Those born in a foreign country of a Bolivian father or mother, by the sole act of taking up residence in the national territory or of registering in a consulate. 

Art. 37. 
The following are Bolivians by naturalization: 

1. Spaniards and Latin Americans who may acquire Bolivian nationality without renouncing that of their origin, whenever, by reciprocity, there are conventions on plural nationality with their respective governments. 
2. Foreigners who having resided two years in the Republic declare their intention to acquire Bolivian nationality and who obtain a certificate of naturalization according to law. 
The period of residence is reduced to one year in the case of foreigners who find themselves in the following circumstances: 

(a) That they have a Bolivian spouse or children; 
(b) That they are engaged in regular agricultural or industrial work; 
(c) That they are engaged in educational, scientific, or technical activities; 

3. Foreigners who perform military service at the legally required age. 
4. Foreigners who for their services to the country obtain it from the Chamber of Senators. 

Art. 38. 
A Bolivian woman married to a foreigner does not lose her citizenship. A foreign woman married to a Bolivian acquires her husband's nationality, provided she resides in the country and indicates her consent; and she does not lose it in case of widowhood or divorce. 
Art. 39. 
Bolivian nationality is lost by acquiring foreign nationality, but it may be regained merely by becoming domiciled in Bolivia, with the exception of those who adopt the system of plural nationality by virtue of conventions that have been signed on this subject.
CHAPTER II. CITIZENSHIP
Art. 40. 
Citizenship consists of: 

1. Participating as a voter or as an elected official in the formation or exercise of the public powers;
2. The right to hold public office, with no other requirement than that of fitness, save for exceptions established by law. 

Art. 41. 
Citizens include all Bolivians, male and female over twenty-one years of age, or eighteen if married, regardless of their degree of education, their occupation, or their income. 
Art. 42. 
The rights of citizenship are suspended: 

1. For taking up arms or rendering services in an enemy army in time of war. 
2. For defalcation of public funds or declared fraudulent bankruptcy, with conviction and sentence to corporal punishment. 
3. For accepting a foreign government position, without permission of the Senate, except for posts and missions of international, religious, university, and cultural organizations in general.

Title Four. Public Officials 
Art. 43. 
A special law shall enact the statute for public officials based on the fundamental principle that public officials and employees are exclusively servants of the interests of the community and not of partisanship or any political party. 
Art. 44. 
The statute for public officials shall establish the rights and duties of the officials and employees of the administration and shall contain provisions which guarantee an administrative career, as well as the dignity and efficiency of public office. 
Art. 45. 
Every public official, civilian, military, or ecclesiastic, is obligated, before assuming a public office, to declare expressly and specifically the property or income that he possesses, which shall be verified in the manner determined by law.
PART TWO: THE BOLIVIAN STATE
Title One. Legislative Power
CHAPTER I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Art. 46. 
The legislative power is vested in the National Congress, composed of two chambers, one of Deputies and one of Senators. 
Congress shall meet in ordinary session every year in the capital of the Republic on the sixth day of August, even when it has not been convoked. The sessions shall last ninety working days, which may be extended to one hundred twenty, either by the will of Congress itself or upon request of the executive power. If at any time the executive deems it expedient for the Congress not to meet in the capital of the Republic, a call may be issued designating another place for the meeting.
Art. 47. 
Congress may meet in extraordinary session by agreement of an absolute majority of its members or by convocation by the executive power. In either case it shall devote itself exclusively to the matters designated in the convocation. 
Art. 48. 
The chambers must function with an absolute majority of their members, at the same time, in the same place, and one house may not open or close its sessions on a different day from the other. 
Art. 49. 
Any Senator or Deputy may be named President or Vice-President of the Republic, Minister of State, or diplomatic agent, but he shall be suspended from his legislative functions for the time that he holds such position. Besides these, he may not hold any other position under the executive or judicial powers. 
Art. 50. 
The following may not be elected as national representatives: 

1. Civil servants and employees, military and police officials in service, and ecclesiastics having jurisdiction who do not resign and terminate their functions or employment at least sixty days prior to the verification of the election. University rectors and professors are excepted. 
2. Contractors for public works and services; administrators, managers and directors, agents and representatives of companies or establishments in which the government has a pecuniary share, or of enterprises subsidized by the State; administrators and collectors of public funds as long as their contracts and accounts have not been ended. 

Art. 51. 
Deputies and Senators are inviolable at all times for the opinions expressed by them in the discharge of their duties. 
Art. 52. 
No Senator or Deputy shall be accused, prosecuted, or arrested in any matter from the day of his election continuously until the end of his term of office unless the chamber to which he belongs consents by a two-thirds vote. In civil matters he may not be sued or required to give bond during a period beginning sixty days before the meeting of Congress and ending at the time he returns to his residence. 
Art. 53. 
The Vice-President of the Republic, in his capacity of President of the National Congress and of the Senate, enjoys the same immunities and prerogatives granted to Senators and Deputies. 
Art. 54. 
No Senator or Deputy shall purchase or lease public property in his name or in the name of a third person, nor shall he take over contracts for public works or sale of supplies to the State, or obtain from it concessions or any other kind of personal advantages. Nor may he, during his term of office, be an official, employee, agent, adviser or representative of an autonomous entity or of a company or enterprise doing business with the State. 
Violation of these provisions shall mean the loss of his popular mandate, by resolution of the respective chamber, in accordance with Article 67, paragraph 4, of this Constitution. 
Art. 55. 
During their constitutional term of office, Senators and Deputies may make representations to the executive power to secure compliance with legal provisions. They may also seek improvements to meet the needs of their electoral districts. 
Art. 56. 
Whenever a citizen is elected both Senator and Deputy, he shall accept the office that he prefers. If he is elected Senator or Deputy by two or more departments, he shall represent the district of his choice. 
Art. 57. 
Senators and Deputies may be reelected and they may resign their positions. 
Art. 58. 
The sessions of Congress and of both chambers shall be public, and they may only be secret when two thirds of the members thereof so resolve. 
Art. 59. 
The following are the functions of the legislative power: 

1. To enact laws, repeal, amend, or interpret them. 
2. Upon the initiative of the executive power, to impose taxes of any nature or kind, abolish existing ones, and determine their national, departmental, or university character, as well as to fix fiscal expenditures. 
Nevertheless, the legislative power, at the request of one of its members, may require the executive to submit projects on those subjects. If the executive does not submit the requested project within a period of twenty days, the representative who demanded it or some other member may submit his own for consideration and approval. Taxes shall be enacted for an indefinite time, unless the respective laws fix a specified period for them to be in effect. 
3. To fix expenditures of the public administration for each financial period, after submission of the draft budget by the executive power. 
4. To consider the development plans which the executive power submits for its consideration.
5. To authorize and approve the contracting of loans which obligate the general revenues of the State, as well as contracts relating to the exploitation of national resources. 
6. To grant subsidies or guarantees of interest for the construction and improvement of public works and those of social necessity. 
7. To authorize the alienation of national, departmental, municipal, and university property and any property in the public domain. 
8. To authorize the executive to acquire real property. 
9. To authorize the universities to contract loans. 
10. To establish the monetary system and that of weights and measures. 
11. To approve annually the accounts of expenditures and disbursements which the executive must submit at the first session of each legislative term. 
12. To approve international treaties, concordats and conventions. 
13. To exercise diplomatic influence over acts not yet consummated or international engagements of the executive power.
14. To approve, during each legislative term, the military forces to be maintained in time of peace. 
15. To permit the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the republic, fixing the time they will be allowed to remain therein. 
16. To authorize national troops to leave the territory of the republic, fixing the time of their absence. 
17. To create and abolish public offices, on the initiative of the executive power, specify their powers and fix their emoluments. 
The legislative power may approve, reject, or decrease the services, offices, or emoluments proposed, but may not increase them, with the exception of those pertaining to the national Congress. 
18. To create new departments, provinces, sections of provinces, and cantons, as well as to fix their boundaries, open major ports, and establish custom houses. 
19. To decree amnesties for political offenses and grant pardons after receiving a report from the Supreme Court of Justice. 
20. To appoint the justices (ministros) of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
21. To appoint representatives on the electoral courts. 
22. To exercise, through the committees of both chambers, the right of supervision over autonomous, independent, and semi-independent entities and "mixed economy" companies.

CHAPTER II. CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES
Art. 60. 
Deputies shall be elected by universal and direct voting, by a simple plurality of votes, and with proportional representation of minorities. 
The law shall fix the number and the system of election of proprietary deputies and alternates, on the basis of the population density of the national territory. 
Deputies shall hold office for four years and the chamber will be renewed in its entirety. 
Art. 61. 
To be a Deputy it is necessary: 

1. To be a Bolivian by birth and have fulfilled military duties. 
2. To be at least twenty-five years of age as of the date of the election. 
3. To be inscribed in the civic register. 
4. To be nominated by a political party or by a civic group representative of the live forces of the country, having recognized juridical personality, forming a bloc or front with a political party. 
5. Not to have been condemned to corporal punishment, unless rehabilitated by the Senate; nor to have charges or writs of execution against him; nor to be included among the cases of exclusion or incompatibility established by law. 

Art. 62. 
The Chamber of Deputies shall:

1. Elect the justices of the Supreme Court of Justice by absolute majority of votes from lists of three candidates proposed by the Senate. 
2. Have the initiative in the exercise of powers (3), (4), (5) and (14) of Article 59. 
3. Consider the report on a state of siege which must be submitted by the executive, approving it or opening responsibility proceedings before Congress. 
4. Impeach before the Senate the justices of the Supreme Court of Justice for offenses committed in the exercise of their functions. 
5. Propose lists of three candidates to the President of the Republic for the appointment of the presidents of the economic and social entities in which the State participates. 
6. Exercise any other powers conferred by the Constitution and the laws.

CHAPTER III. CHAMBER OF SENATORS
Art. 63. 
The Senate is composed of three Senators for each department, elected by universal and direct suffrage: two for the majority and one for the minority, according to law. 
Art. 64. 
To be a Senator it is necessary to be at least thirty-five years of age and to fulfill the conditions required of a Deputy. 
Art. 65. 
Senators hold office for the term prescribed for Deputies, with complete renewal at the end of that period. 
Art. 66. 
The powers of this chamber are: 

1. To take cognizance of impeachments made by the Chamber of Deputies against justices of the Supreme Court and the Attorney General of the Republic, in accordance with the Law of Responsibilities. 
The Senate shall try in sole instance justices of the Supreme Court and the Attorney General of the Republic and shall impose on them the penalty and responsibility corresponding to the impeachment by the Chamber of Deputies, based on the complaint of the injured parties or denunciation by any citizen. 
In the cases covered by the preceding paragraphs a vote of two thirds of the members present shall be necessary. A special law shall prescribe the procedure and formalities of such trials. 
2. To restore Bolivian nationality or citizenship to those who have lost such status. 
3. To allow Bolivians to accept employment, titles, or emoluments from a foreign government. 
4. To approve municipal ordinances on licenses and taxes. 
5. To confer public honors on those who deserve them for eminent services to the nation. 
6. To propose lists of three candidates to the Chamber of Deputies for the election of justices of the Supreme Court of Justice.
7. To propose lists of three candidates to the President of the Republic for the appointment of the Comptroller-General of the Republic, the Attorney General of the Republic, and the superintendent of banks. 
8. To grant pecuniary awards, by a two-thirds vote. 
9. To accept or refuse, by secret vote, promotions to General of the Army, the Air Force, of division, of brigade, to Admiral, Rear Admiral, and Vice Admiral of the Armed Forces of the nation, as proposed by the executive power. 
10. To approve or reject the appointments of Ambassador and Ministers Plenipotentiary, proposed by the President of the Republic. 
11. To elect, by an absolute majority of votes, the magistrates of the District Courts, as well as of the National Labor Court and the National Mining Court, from lists of three proposed by the Supreme Court of Justice.

CHAPTER IV. CONGRESS
Art. 67. 
The following are the functions of each chamber: 

1. To verify the credentials issued by the electoral courts. Claims of disqualification of persons elected or for annulment of an election may be taken only before the National Electoral Court, the decisions of which cannot be reversed by the chambers. If in verifying credentials against which no claim has been entered in the National Electoral Court, the chamber finds grounds for annulment, the case is to be sent, by a two-thirds vote decision, to be heard and ruled upon by that court. A decision must be rendered within fifteen days. 
2. To select its officers (mesa directiva). 
3. To prescribe its regulations and enforce them. 
4. To remove temporarily or definitively, by a two-thirds vote, any of its members for serious misdoings in the exercise of their functions. 
5. To fix the per diem to be received by the lawmakers; order payment of its budgets; appoint and remove its administrative personnel; and attend to all matters relating to its internal economy and procedure. 
6. To undertake such investigations as are necessary in conformity with its constitutional function, for which it may appoint committees from among its members in order to facilitate this task. 
7. To impose sanctions on those who commit offenses against a chamber or its members, in the form established in its regulations, but ensuring the right of defense in such cases. 

Art. 68. 
The chambers shall meet in joint session of Congress for the following purposes: 

1. To open and close their sessions. 
2. To verify the election returns for President and Vice-President of the Republic, or to name them whenever there has not been an absolute majority of votes, pursuant to the provisions of this Constitution.
3. To receive the oath of office of the dignitaries indicated in the preceding paragraph. 
4. To accept or reject the resignation of those officials. 
5. To exercise the powers referred to in sections (11) and (13) of Article 59. 
6. To reconsider the bills vetoed by the executive. 
7. To decide on a declaration of war on petition of the executive. 
8. To determine the strength of the Armed Forces. 
9. To consider bills approved in the originating chamber but not approved in the reviewing chamber. 
10. To decide, by a two-thirds vote of the total membership, conflicts of jurisdiction between the executive or the Supreme Court and the chambers, or between any of the foregoing and the National Electoral Court. 
11. To exercise the powers pertaining to it under Articles 111, 112, and 113 of the Constitution. 
12. To take cognizance, as prosecutor and according to law, of charges of responsibility against the President and Vice-President of the Republic, Ministers of State, chiefs of diplomatic missions, and the Comptroller-General of the Republic, for offenses committed in the exercise of their functions. 

Art. 69. 
In no case shall Congress delegate to one or more of its members, or to any other power, the functions given to it by this Constitution. 
Art. 70. 
Each chamber may, at the initiative of its members and by a vote of an absolute majority of the members present, agree to censure the acts of the executive power, addressing it against the Ministers of State, separately or jointly, for the purpose of obtaining a modification of the political procedure that gave rise to the censure. 
It may, at the same initiative, request the Ministers of State for oral or written information for legislative purposes or purposes of inspection or examination, and it may propose investigation of any matter of national interest.
CHAPTER V. LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
Art. 71. 
Laws, except in the cases specified in paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), and (14) of Article 59, may originate in the Senate or in the Chamber of Deputies, on the proposal of one or more of their members, the Vice-President of the Republic, or through a message from the executive power, on condition, in the latter case, that the bill is supported during the discussion by the Minister of the corresponding department. 
The Supreme Court may submit bills on judicial matters and amendments of the codes, by means of a message directed to the legislative power.
Art. 72. 
A bill passed in the chamber of origin shall be forwarded immediately to the other chamber for consideration. If the other chamber approves it, it shall be sent to the executive power for promulgation. 
Art. 73. 
A bill rejected in the chamber of origin may not be reintroduced in either chamber until the following session. 
Art. 74. 
If the reviewing chamber limits itself to amending or modifying the bill, this will be considered approved if the chamber of origin accepts the amendments or modifications by an absolute majority. But if it does not accept them, or if they are corrected or changed, the two chambers shall meet in joint session at the call of either president, within twenty days, to deliberate on the bill. 
In the event of its approval it shall be sent to the executive for promulgation as a law of the Republic; but if it is rejected, it may not be proposed again except at a subsequent legislative session. 
Art. 75. 
If the reviewing chamber fails to act on the bill within twenty days, the chamber of origin shall demand action thereon, within a new period of ten days, at the end of which Congress shall be considered in joint session. 
Art. 76. 
Any bill sanctioned by the legislative power may be objected to by the President of the Republic within a period of ten days from the date on which he received it. 
A bill not objected to within the ten days shall be promulgated as law. If Congress adjourns during that period, the President of the Republic shall publish a message containing his objections for consideration at the next legislative session. 
Art. 77. 
The objections of the executive shall be addressed to the chamber of origin. If the latter and the reviewing chamber, assembled in joint session, find them well founded and amend the bill accordingly, it shall be returned to the executive power for promulgation. 
If both chambers, by a majority of two thirds of the members present, find the objections to be unfounded, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it as law within a further period of ten days. 
Art. 78. 
Laws not vetoed and not promulgated by the President of the Republic within ten days from his receipt of them shall be promulgated by the President of Congress. 
Art. 79. 
Legislative and chamber resolutions do not require promulgation by the executive. 
Art. 80. 
Promulgation of the laws shall be made by the President of the Republic in this form: 
"Whereas the national Congress has sanctioned the following law: ... Therefore, I hereby promulgate it so that it may be held and obeyed as a law of the Republic." 
Congressional resolutions shall be promulgated in this form:
"The national Congress of the Republic resolves: ... Therefore, it shall be observed in accordance with the Constitution." 
Art. 81.
A law is binding from the day of its publication, unless provision to the contrary is made in the law itself.
CHAPTER VI. CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE
Art. 82. 
During the adjournment of the chambers a congressional committee shall function composed of nine Senators and eighteen Deputies, who, with their respective alternates, shall be elected by each chamber in a way that insofar as possible will reflect the territorial composition of Congress. It shall be presided over by the Vice-President of the Republic and shall include the elective President of the Senate and the President of the Chamber of Deputies, acting as first and second Vice-Presidents, respectively. 
Appropriate regulations shall establish the time and manner of electing the congressional committee and its internal regime. 
Art. 83. 
The powers of the congressional committee are: 

1. To see that the Constitution is complied with and that citizen guarantees are respected, and to this end, to adopt such measures as are deemed appropriate. 
2. To exercise functions of investigation and general supervision of the public administration, directing to the executive power such representations as are deemed pertinent. 
3. To request the executive, by a two-thirds vote of all its members, to convoke a special session of Congress whenever the importance and urgency of a matter so demands. 
4. To acquaint itself with all pending matters in order that action thereon shall be taken up at the next period of sessions.
5. To prepare bills for consideration by the chambers. 

Art. 84. 
The congressional committee shall report on its activities at the first regular sessions of the chambers.
Title Two. The Executive Power
CHAPTER I. PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
Art. 85. 
The executive power is exercised by the President of the Republic together with the Ministers of State. 
Art. 86. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected by direct suffrage. A Vice-President shall be elected at the same time and in the same manner. 
Art. 87. 
The term of the constitutional President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be four years without extension. Neither may be reelected until four years have elapsed since the termination of his constitutional mandate. The Vice-President may be elected President of the Republic after four years since the end of his mandate. 
Art. 88. 
To be elected President or Vice-President of the Republic the same qualifications are required as those of a Senator. 
Art. 89. 
The following may not be elected President or Vice-President of the Republic: 

1. Ministers of State or presidents of economic and social entities in which the State participates, who do not vacate their offices six months prior to the date of the election. 
2. Relatives by blood or affinity within the second degree, by civil law computation, of those who held the presidency or vice-presidency of the Republic during the last year prior to the election. 
3. Members of the Armed Forces in active service, of the clergy, and ministers of any religious faith. 

Art. 90. 
If no candidate for the presidency or vice-presidency of the Republic obtains an absolute majority of votes, Congress shall elect them from among the three who received the greatest number of votes for each office. 
If, after taking the first count, no one obtains an absolute majority of the votes of the members present, the subsequent count shall be limited to the two that received the greatest number of votes. In case of a tie, the voting shall be repeated until one of the candidates obtains an absolute majority. 
The election, the counting, and proclamation shall be conducted at a permanent and public session. 
Art. 91. 
The proclamation of the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be made by means of a law. 
Art. 92. 
Upon taking possession of their offices, the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take a solemn oath of loyalty to the Republic and the Constitution before Congress. 
Art. 93. 
In the event of a temporary impediment or absence of the President of the Republic, before or after the proclamation, he shall be replaced by the Vice-President and, in default of the latter and successively, by the President of the Senate, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, and President of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
The Vice-President shall assume the presidency of the Republic if that office becomes vacant before or after the proclamation of the President-elect, and shall hold that office until the end of the constitutional term. 
In default of the Vice-President, the President-elect of the Senate shall act in his stead, and in default of the latter, the President of the Chamber of Deputies and of the Supreme Court of Justice, in strict order of priority. In this latter case, if three years of the presidential term have not yet elapsed, a new election for President and Vice-President shall be held, solely to complete such term.
Art. 94. 
As long as the Vice-President does not exercise the executive power, he shall serve as President of the Senate, without prejudice to the election by that body of a president to take his place in his absence. 
Art. 95. 
The President of the Republic may not leave the national territory without the consent of Congress. 
Art. 96. 
The powers and duties of the President of the Republic are: 

1. To comply with and enforce the laws, issuing appropriate decrees and orders, without restrictively defining rights, altering those defined by law, or contravening their provisions, keeping in mind the restrictions contained in this Constitution. 
2. To negotiate and conclude treaties with foreign nations; and to exchange them when ratified by Congress. 
3. To conduct foreign relations, appoint diplomatic and consular officials, and to receive foreign officials in general. 
4. To participate in the enactment of codes and laws, by means of special messages. 
5. To call Congress into special sessions. 
6. To administer the national revenues and order their disbursement through the appropriate ministry, in accordance with the laws and strictly subject to the budget. 
7. To submit to the legislative power, within the first thirty regular sessions, the national and departmental budgets for the succeeding financial period, and while they are in effect, to propose such changes as he deems necessary. The accounts of public expenditures under the budget are to be submitted annually. 
8. To present to the legislative power development plans not covered by ordinary budgets on the subject or in time for action. 
9. To examine resolutions passed by municipalities, especially those relating to revenue and taxes, and to denounce before the Senate those that are contrary to the Constitution and the laws, if the offending municipality does not accept the requirements of the executive. 
10. To submit annually at the first regular session of Congress a written message concerning the progress and state of the business of the administration during the year, accompanied by reports from the ministries. 
11. To furnish the chambers, through the Ministers, such information as they may request, but he may withhold information on diplomatic negotiations which in his opinion should not be made public. 
12. To enforce the decisions of the courts. 
13. To grant amnesties for political offenses, without prejudice to those that may be granted by the legislative power. 
14. To appoint the Attorney General, the Comptroller-General of the Republic, and the superintendent of banks, from lists of three candidates proposed by the Senate, and the presidents of the economic and social entities in which the State participates, from lists proposed by the Chamber of Deputies. 
15. To appoint those employees of the administration whose designation is not reserved by law to some other power, and to issue their credentials. 
16. To make interim appointments, in the event of resignation or death, of employees who should be selected by another power, if the latter is adjourned. 
17. To attend the opening and closing sessions of Congress. 
18. To preserve and defend the internal order and the external security of the Republic, in accordance with the Constitution. 
19. To designate the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and the commanders of the army, air force, navy, and the director of the Supreme Command of Public Security. 
20. To propose to the Senate, in cases of vacancies, promotions to General of the army, of the air force, of division, of brigade, of Admiral, vice admiral, and rear admiral in the Armed Forces of the Nation, with a report on their services and promotions. 
21. During an international war, to confer on the field of battle the ranks referred to in the preceding paragraph. 
22. To establish and open minor ports. 
23. To designate the representatives of the executive power on the Electoral Courts. 
24. To exercise the highest authority in the National Agrarian Reform Service. To grant title deeds based on the redistribution of lands, pursuant to provisions of the Agrarian Reform Law, as well as deeds relating to land colonization. 

Art. 97. 
The rank of Captain General of the Armed Forces is inherent in the office of President of the Republic. 
Art. 98. 
The President of the Republic shall visit the various centers of the country at least once during his term of office in order to study their needs.
CHAPTER II. MINISTERS OF STATE
Art. 99. 
The business of the public administration is conducted by Ministers of State, whose number and duties are determined by law. A decree of the President of the Republic shall be sufficient for their appointment or removal. 
Art. 100. 
To be a Minister of State the same qualifications are required as those of a Deputy. 
Art. 101. 
The Ministers of State are responsible for acts of administration in their respective offices, jointly with the President of the Republic. They shall be jointly and severally responsible for acts agreed to at a cabinet council.
Art. 102. 
All decrees and orders of the President of the Republic must be signed by the appropriate Minister. Without this requirement they shall not be valid nor obeyed. 
Art. 103. 
Ministers of State may attend the discussions in either chamber, but they must withdraw before a vote is taken. 
Art. 104. 
As soon as Congress opens its sessions the Ministers shall present their respective reports on the condition of their administration, in the manner indicated in Article 96, section 10. 
Art. 105. 
The account of the disbursement of revenues which must be submitted to Congress by the Minister of Finance shall bear the approval of the other Ministers insofar as their respective offices are concerned. All Ministers shall participate in the preparation of the general budget. 
Art. 106. 
No oral or written order from the President of the Republic shall exempt the Ministers from their responsibility. 
Art. 107. 
Ministers shall be tried in accordance with the Law of Responsibilities for offenses they may commit in the performance of their functions.
CHAPTER III. INTERNAL REGIME
Art. 108. 
The territory of the Republic is divided into departments, provinces, provincial sections, and cantons. 
Art. 109. 
In political and administrative matters the government of a department is entrusted to a prefect who represents the executive power, and subordinate to whom are the sub-prefects in the provinces and the corregidores in the cantons. The powers, qualifications, and manner of election for these offices, and the length of their terms, shall be determined by law. 
Art. 110. 
The departments shall be governed in accordance with a regime of administrative decentralization to be established by law.
CHAPTER IV. PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC ORDER
Art. 111. 
In cases of grave danger caused by internal disorder or international war the chief of the executive power, with the approval of the Council of Ministers, may declare a state of siege in such portion of the territory as may be necessary. 
If Congress should meet in regular or extraordinary session while the Republic or a portion thereof is in a state of siege, the continuation of such state of siege must have legislative authorization. The same procedure shall apply if a decree of state of siege is issued by the executive power while the chambers are in session. 
If the state of siege is not lifted within ninety days, at the end of such period it shall expire ipso facto, except in the case of civil or international war. Persons who have been subject to restriction shall be set free, unless they have been placed under the jurisdiction of competent courts. 
The executive may not prolong a state of siege beyond ninety days nor declare another within the same year, except with the consent of Congress. For this purpose he must convoke an extraordinary session if it occurs while the chambers are adjourned.
Art. 112. 
The declaration of a state of siege produces the following effects:

1. The executive may increase the Armed Forces and call into service such reserves as he deems necessary. 
2. He may order such advance collections of taxes and national revenues as he deems necessary, as well as negotiate and demand loans, provided ordinary resources are insufficient. In the case of forced loans the executive shall fix the quotas and distribute them among the taxpayers in accordance with their economic capacity. 
3. The rights and guarantees granted by this Constitution shall not be suspended ipso facto and in general by the mere declaration of a state of siege; but they may be with respect to specified persons charged upon good grounds with conspiring against the public order, in accordance with the provisions of the following paragraphs. 
4. The legitimate authorities may issue orders for the summons or arrest of those accused, but within a maximum of forty-eight hours they shall be placed at the disposal of a competent judge, together with the documents on which the arrest was based. 
If the preservation of the public order necessitates the removal of the suspects elsewhere, they may be ordered confined to a departmental or provincial capital that is not unhealthful. 
Banishment for political reasons is prohibited; but a person confined, sought or under arrests on such grounds, who requests a passport to leave the country, may not be denied it for any reason whatever and the authorities must grant him the guarantees necessary for the purpose. 
Persons carrying out orders which violate these guarantees may be tried at any time, even if the state of siege has ended, as guilty of an offense against the constitutional guarantees, and the fact that they obeyed superior orders shall not serve as an excuse. In case of international war censorship of correspondence and all publication media may be established. 

Art. 113. 
The government shall report to the next session of Congress on the reasons why the state of siege was declared and the use made of the powers conferred on it by this chapter, setting forth the result of judicial proceedings ordered and suggesting measures necessary to meet obligations incurred through direct loans and the collection of taxes in advance. 
Art. 114. 
Congress shall devote its first meetings to examination of the report referred to in the preceding article and may either approve it or fix the responsibility of the executive power.
The chambers may, to that effect, conduct any investigations deemed necessary and may request of the executive an explanation and justification of all acts relating to the state of siege, even if they were not mentioned in the report submitted. 
Art. 115. 
Neither Congress nor any association or public gathering may grant to the executive power extraordinary powers, the whole of the public power, or give it supremacy by which the life, the honor, and the property of Bolivians shall be at the mercy of the government or of any person whatsoever. 
The personal inviolability and the immunities established for the national representatives by this Constitution are not suspended during a state of siege.
Title Three. Judicial Power
CHAPTER I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Art. 116. 
The judicial power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice, the Superior District Courts, and any other courts and tribunals that may be established by law. 
The administration of justice is gratuitous and no charges extraneous to the judicial branch may be imposed on litigants. 
No extraordinary courts or tribunals may be established. 
Art. 117. 
Judges are independent in the administration of justice and are subject only to the laws. 
The law shall establish the judicial roster and the conditions for permanency of judicial officials, merit qualifications, promotions, increases, pensions and retirement. 
Art. 118. 
The law shall determine the organization and powers of the courts and tribunals of the republic. 
Art. 119. 
The judicial power enjoys economic autonomy. The national budget shall assign to it a fixed, annual, and sufficient appropriation, which shall be centralized, with the special revenues created for the judicial service, in a judicial treasury, which shall operate as an office of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
Art. 120. 
Publicity in trials is an essential condition in the administration of justice except when public morals may be offended thereby. The secrecy of evidence in criminal proceeding is abolished. 
Art. 121. 
The courts shall not, on their own responsibility, allow magistrates or judges to function if they have not been appointed in conformity with this Constitution or secondary laws. 
Art. 122. 
The functions of the ordinary courts are as follows: 

1. To take cognizance of all litigation between private parties and between such parties and the State, when the latter acts as a person under private law. 
2. To decide direct appeals for annulment brought under Article 31 of this Constitution against any act or resolution of any public authority other than judicial. 
These appeals shall be entered within a maximum period of thirty days before a court or tribunal having the power to try in first instance an authority who has exceeded his powers. The record and findings may be referred, under responsibility, within twenty-four hours, to the court or judge who will hear the appeal.

CHAPTER II. SUPREME COURT OF JUSTICE
Art. 123. 
The Supreme Court of Justice is the highest court of justice in the Republic. It consists of a President and eleven justices (ministros) divided into three sections (salas): one civil, one criminal, and one for social and administrative matters. 
Art. 124. 
To be a justice of the Supreme Court a person must be a native Bolivian, must have served in the judiciary or practiced law creditably for ten years, and must have the qualifications required of a Senator. 
Art. 125. 
Justices of the Supreme Court shall be elected by the Chamber of Deputies from lists of three proposed by the Senate. 
Art. 126. 
Justices of the Supreme Court shall hold office for ten years, those of the District Courts for six years, and sectional judges (jueces de partido) and investigating judges (instructores) for four years, their reelection being permitted. 
During these terms, which are personal, no magistrate or judge may be removed or suspended except by final judicial decision or in those cases determined by law. They may not be transferred without their express consent. 
Art. 127. The powers of the Supreme Court, in addition to those specified by law, are: 

1. To direct and represent the judicial power. 
2. To propose lists of three candidates to the Senate for the election of magistrates of the Superior District Courts, and of the National Labor Courts and Mining Courts; to elect the ordinary judges and labor judges, according to law. 
3. To prepare and approve the annual judicial budget, and to administer and disburse the funds of the judicial treasury, under the supervision of the office of the Comptroller-General of the Republic. The President of the Supreme Court shall order the payments to be made. 
4. To take cognizance of appeals for annulment and decide the principal question. 
5. To take cognizance of, in sole instance, questions of pure law wherein the decision rests upon the constitutionality or unconstitutionality of a law, decree, or resolution of any kind. 
6. To decide in sole instance on charges of responsibility against the President and Vice-President of the Republic and Ministers of State for offenses committed in the performance of their functions whenever Congress decrees impeachment pursuant to Article 68, section 12. 
7. To decide, also in sole instance, on charges of responsibility based on denunciation or complaint against diplomatic and consular agents, surveying commissioners, prefects of departments and departmental superintendents of mines, Rectors of Universities, members of the superior courts, government and district attorneys, and in general, against high officials having national jurisdiction specified by law, for offenses committed in the performance of their functions. 
8. To take cognizance of contentious cases arising out of contracts, negotiations, and concessions made by the executive power, and of contentious-administrative claims which the decisions thereon may bring about. 
9. To settle conflicts of jurisdiction between municipalities or between these and the political authorities, and between either of these and the municipalities of the provinces. 
10. To take cognizance in sole instance of suits against the resolutions of the legislative power or of one of its chambers, whenever such resolutions may affect one or more concrete rights, either civil or political, and regardless of who the interested parties may be. 
11. To decide disputes that arise between the departments, whether they concern their boundaries or any other rights in controversy. 
12. To suspend from office, according to the gravity of the case and by a two-thirds vote, ordinary judges against whom criminal proceedings have been brought for common offenses or those resulting from the performance of their functions. 

Art. 128. 
It is a function of the district courts, in addition to those established by law, to try, individually or collectively, mayors and members of municipal councils, sub-prefects, sectional (de partido) judges and attorneys, agrarian and labor judges, and other officials specified by law, for offenses committed in the performance of their functions.
CHAPTER III. THE PUBLIC MINISTRY
Art. 129. 
The Public Ministry represents the State and society. It is exercised in the name of the nation by committees designated by the legislative chambers, by the Attorney General, by district attorneys, and by any other officials on whom the law bestows this function. 
Art. 130. 
The Attorney General shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from a list of three candidates proposed by the Senate. His term of office shall be ten years and he may be reelected and may not be removed from office except by virtue of a sentence of conviction. 
To be Attorney General of the Republic the same qualifications are necessary as for a justice of the Supreme Court. 
Art. 131. 
The law shall determine the organization and powers of the Public Ministry. 
PART THREE: SPECIAL REGIMES
Title One. Economic and Financial Regime
CHAPTER I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Art. 132. 
The economic organization must respond essentially to principles of social justice intended to ensure to all inhabitants a life worthy of the human being. 
Art. 133. 
The economic regime shall seek to strengthen in national independence and development of the country through the protection and utilization of natural and human resources as a safeguard to the security of the State and achievement of the well-being of the Bolivian people. 
Art. 134. 
The private concentration of economic power shall not be permitted to such a degree that it will endanger the economic independence of the State. No form of private monopoly is recognized. Concessions for public services, when they are exceptionally made, may not be granted for a period of more than forty years. 
Art. 135. 
All enterprises established for exploitation, profit, or business within the country shall be considered national enterprises and shall be subject to the sovereignty, the laws, and the authorities of the republic.
CHAPTER II. NATIONAL PROPERTY
Art. 136. 
Within the original domain of the State, in addition to property to which the law gives that character, are the soil and the subsoil with all their natural resources; lake, river and thermal waters; and all physical elements and forces susceptible of utilization. Laws shall establish the conditions of such ownership, and those for their concession and allotment to private individuals. 
Art. 137. 
Assets in the patrimony of the nation constitute public property which is inviolable, and it is the duty of every inhabitant of the national territory to respect and protect it. 
Art. 138. 
The nationalized mining groups are a part of the patrimony of the nation as one of the bases for the development and diversification of the economy of the country, and they cannot be transferred or allotted to private enterprises under any form of title of private ownership. The top level direction and administration of the state mining industry shall be entrusted to an independent entity (entidad autarquica) with powers to be specified by law. 
Art. 139. 
Deposits of hydrocarbons, regardless of the state or form in which they are found, are in the direct, inalienable and imprescriptible domain of the State. No concession or contract may confer ownership of deposits of hydrocarbons. The exploration, exploitation, marketing, and transportation of the hydrocarbons and their derivatives pertain to the State. It shall exercise this right through independent entities or through concessions and contracts for a limited time to mixed companies of joint operation or to private persons, according to law. 
Art. 140. 
The promotion and development of nuclear energy is a function of the State.
CHAPTER III. ECONOMIC POLICY OF THE STATE
Art. 141. 
The State may regulate by law the exercise of commerce and industry whenever the public security or necessity urgently requires this. In such cases it may also assume the top-level direction of the national economy. This intervention shall be exercised in the form of control, stimulation, or direct management. 
Art. 142. 
The executive power may, subject to legislative approval by Congress, establish a fiscal monopoly of specified exports, provided that the needs of the country so require. 
Art. 143. 
The State shall determine the monetary, banking, and credit policy, with the objective of improving the conditions of the national economy. It shall, moreover, control the monetary reserves. 
Art. 144. 
The programming of economic development shall be accomplished by the exercise of and in the affirmation of the national sovereignty. The State shall periodically formulate a general plan for the economic and social development of the Republic, the execution of which shall be obligatory. This planning shall include the state, mixed, and private sectors of the national economy. 
Private initiative shall receive the encouragement and co-operation of the State whenever it contributes to the improvement of the national economy. 
Art. 145. 
State exploitation undertakings shall be carried out according to economic planning, preferably by independent or autonomous entities or mixed capital companies. The top-level direction and administration thereof shall be in charge of directors selected according to law. The directors may not hold any other public office nor engage in industrial, commercial, or professional activities relating to such entities.
CHAPTER IV. REVENUES AND BUDGET
Art. 146. 
The revenues of the State are divided into national, departmental and municipal, and shall be independently disbursed by their treasuries according to their respective budgets and in accordance with the general plan for the economic and social development of the country. 
A law shall classify the national, departmental, and municipal revenues. 
Departmental, municipal, judicial, and university funds, collected by offices under the national treasury, shall not be centralized in that treasury. 
The executive power shall specify the rules for the preparation and presentation of the draft budgets of the entire public sector. 
Art. 147. 
The executive power shall present to the legislative power, within its first thirty regular sessions, the bills for the national and departmental budgets. 
Upon receipt of the budget bills, they must be considered by Congress within a period of sixty days. 
If the aforementioned period has expired without the bills being approved, they shall have the force of law. 
Art. 148. 
The President of the Republic, with the approval of the Council of Ministers, may order payments not authorized by the budget law only for the purpose of meeting undeferrable necessities resulting from public calamities, internal disorder, or exhaustion of funds allocated to the maintenance of services which if discontinued would cause serious damage. Expenditures for these purposes shall not exceed one percent of the total disbursements authorized by the national budget. 
Ministers of State and officials who permit expenditures which are in violation of the provisions of this article shall be jointly and severally liable for their reimbursement and guilty of the crime of misappropriation of public funds. 
Art. 149. 
Every bill which may entail expenditures by the State must indicate, at the same time, the manner of meeting them and the form of disbursement. 
Art. 150. 
The public debt is guaranteed. Every obligation of the State, contracted according to law, is inviolable. 
Art. 151. 
The general account of revenues and expenditures for each financial period shall be submitted to Congress by the Minister of Finance at its first regular session. 
Art. 152. 
The autonomous and independent state entities must also submit annually to Congress an account of their revenues and expenditures, accompanied by a report from the Comptroller-General. 
Art. 153. 
The prefectures of departments and the municipalities may not create protectionist or prohibitory systems which may affect the interests of other districts of the Republic, nor may they enact ordinances favoring the inhabitants of the department or excluding any other Bolivians. 
No local customs houses (aduanillas), retention station, or toll house of any kind may exist in the Republic unless expressly established by a law.
CHAPTER V. OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER-GENERAL
Art. 154. 
There shall be an office of accounting and fiscal control which shall be called the Office of the Comptroller-General of the Republic. The law shall define the powers and responsibilities of the Comptroller-General and of the officials under him. The Comptroller-General shall be directly subordinate to the President of the Republic and shall be appointed by him from a list of three proposed by the Senate; he shall be entitled to the same irremovability and term of office as justices of the Supreme Court of Justice. 
Art. 155. 
The Office of the Comptroller-General of the Republic shall have charge of the fiscal control of the operations of the autonomous and independent entities and the mixed companies. Their yearly activities shall be subject to review by trained auditors. Each year they shall publish a report and a statement showing their financial situation and they shall submit such accounts as are prescribed by law. No official under the Comptroller-General of the Republic shall be a member of the boards of directors of the independent entities which they are entrusted to control, and they shall receive no emoluments from those entities. 
Title Two. Social Regime 
Art. 156. 
Labor is a duty and a right, and it constitutes the basis of the economic and social order. 
Art. 157. 
Labor and capital enjoy the protection of the State. The law shall regulate their relationship by establishing rules concerning individual and collective contracts, minimum wages, maximum working hours, work by women and minors, paid weekly and annual days of rest, holidays, bonuses, premiums, and other systems of sharing in the profits of an enterprise, compensation for length of service, discharges, professional training, and other social and protective benefits for workers. 
It is a function of the State to create conditions which will guarantee employment, stability of work, and fair remuneration to all. 
Art. 158. 
The State has the obligation to defend human capital by protecting the health of the population; it shall ensure the continuity of its means of livelihood and the rehabilitation of disabled persons; it shall also strive for the improvement of the living conditions of the family as a group.
The social security systems shall be based on principles of universal coverage, solidarity, uniformity of treatment, economy, timeliness and effectiveness, embracing the contingencies of illness, maternity, occupational hazards, disability, old age, forced shutdowns, family allotments, and housing of social interest.
Art. 159. 
Freedom of employers to form associations is guaranteed. Unionization is recognized and guaranteed as a means of protection, representation, welfare, education, and culture for workers, as is union immunity as a guarantee to the directors of unions while carrying out the legal activities connected with their mandates, for which they may not be prosecuted or arrested. 
The right to strike is likewise established, as the legal right of workers to suspend work in the defense of their rights, after complying with legal formalities. 
Art. 160. 
The State, through adequate legislation, shall promote the organization of co-operatives. 
Art. 161. 
The State, through courts or special agencies, shall settle disputes between employers and workers or employees, as well as those arising in connection with social security. 
Art. 162. 
Social provisions of law are matters of public order. They will be retroactive whenever the law expressly so indicates. 
The rights and benefits granted in favor of workers cannot be waived, and any agreement to the contrary or intended to evade their effects is null and void. 
Art. 163. 
Persons declared meritorious (los Benemeritos de la Patria) deserve the gratitude and respect of the citizenry and of the public powers, for their persons and their legally acquired property. They shall be given preference for positions in the public administration or in independent and semi-independent entities, according to their capacities. In case of forced unemployment, or if they are lacking in means of livelihood, they shall receive a lifetime pension from the State according to law. They may not be removed from office except in case of a legal impediment established by a final judgment. Anyone who disregards this right shall be obligated to pay personal indemnity to the aggrieved meritorious person, as pecuniary and moral damages assessed by a court. 
Art. 164. 
Social service and welfare are functions of the State, and the conditions relating thereto shall be prescribed by law. The rules relating to public health are compulsory and obligatory. 
Title Three. Agrarian and Rural Labor Regime
Art. 165. 
Lands are originally the domain of the nation and the State is responsible for the distribution, regrouping, and redistribution of agrarian property in accordance with the economic and social needs of rural development. 
Art. 166. 
Labor is the basic source for the acquisition and conservation of agrarian property and the right of the rural worker (campesino) to an allotment of lands is proclaimed. 
Art. 167. 
The State does not recognize the latifundio. The existence of communal, co-operative, and private ownership of land is guaranteed. The law shall establish the forms of ownership and regulate changes therein. 
Art. 168. 
The State shall plan and promote the economic and social development of rural workers' communities and agricultural co-operatives. 
Art. 169. 
The rural "homestead" (solar campesino) and the small holding are declared indivisible; they constitute the essential minimum and they are in the nature of an unattachable family patrimony according to law. Medium holdings and agricultural enterprises recognized by law are entitled to the protection of the State provided they fulfill an economic and social function, in accordance with development plans. 
Art. 170. 
The State shall regulate the system of exploitation of renewable natural resources, with provision for their conservation and increment. 
Art. 171. 
The State recognizes and guarantees the existence of organizations of rural workers. 
Art. 172. 
The State shall promote colonization plans in order to achieve a rational distribution of people and better exploitation of the land and the natural resources of the country, primarily in frontier areas. 
Art. 173. 
The State has the obligation to grant development loans to farmers to increase agricultural production. Their granting is to be regulated by law. 
Art. 174. 
The encouragement and supervision of literacy and education for rural workers is a function of the State in fundamental, technical, and vocational aspects, in accordance with rural development plans and programs, with the promotion of access to culture in all its forms. 
Art. 175. 
The National Agrarian Reform Service has jurisdiction throughout the territory of the Republic. Its legal titles are definitive, final, and without further appeal, establishing perfect and fully legal ownership for permanent recording in the register of real rights. 
Art. 176. 
The regular courts may not review, modify, and never annul the decisions of agrarian courts, whose decisions constitute legal, proven, irremovable, and definitive right. 
Title Four. Cultural Regime
Art. 177. 
Education is the most important function of the State, and in performing this function it must promote the culture of the people. 
Freedom of teaching is guaranteed under the tutelage of the State.
Public education is gratuitous and it shall be provided on a democratic, one-school-for-all basis. The elementary phase is compulsory. 
Art. 178. 
The State shall encourage vocational education and technical professional instruction, guided by the degree of economic development and the sovereignty of the country. 
Art. 179. 
Literacy is a social necessity to the attainment of which all inhabitants of the country must contribute. 
Art. 180. 
The State shall give assistance to students who lack the means for access to higher education, in order that ability and vocation shall be the conditions that prevail over social or economic position. 
Art. 181. 
Private schools shall be subject to the same authorities as public schools and shall be governed by officially approved plans, programs and regulations. 
Art. 182. 
Freedom of religious instruction is guaranteed. 
Art. 183. 
Schools supported by welfare institutions shall have the co-operation of the State. 
Art. 184. 
Public and private education at the pre-school, elementary, secondary, normal, and special levels shall be governed by the State through the appropriate ministry and in accordance with the Code of Education. The teaching staff is protected from removal under conditions stipulated by law. 
Art. 185. 
Public universities are autonomous and have equal standing. Autonomy consists of freedom to administer their own funds; to appoint their rectors, faculty, and administrative staff; to prepare and approve their own bylaws, curricula, and annual budgets; to accept legacies and donations; to enter into contracts to achieve their purposes; and to support and improve their schools and institutes. They may negotiate loans guaranteed by their own assets and funds, after obtaining legislative approval. 
The public universities shall constitute, in the exercise of their autonomy, the Universidad Boliviana, which shall co-ordinate and adopt programs of their aims and functions through a central organization pursuant to a national plan of university development. 
Art. 186. 
The public universities are authorized to grant academic diplomas and degrees that are nationally recognized. 
Art. 187. 
Public universities must be obligatorily and sufficiently subsidized by the State from national funds, independent of their own, departmental, and municipal funds, now established or to be established. 
Art. 188. 
Private universities, recognized by the executive power, are authorized to issue academic diplomas. Nationally recognized degrees shall be granted by the State. 
The State shall not subsidize private universities. The operation thereof, their bylaws, programs, and curricula, shall require prior approval by the executive power.
Authorization will not be extended to private universities whose curricula do not ensure a technical, scientific, and cultural training in the service of the nation and the people, and which are not within the spirit inspired by this Constitution. 
For the granting of academic diplomas by private universities, the examining boards, in examinations for degrees, shall be composed of delegates from the state universities, in accordance with the law. 
Art. 189. 
All universities in the country are obligated to maintain institutes for the cultural, technical, and social training of workers and low income sectors. 
Art. 190. 
Education in all its degrees shall be subject to the guardianship of the State exercised through the appropriate ministry. 
Art. 191. 
Historic monuments and archeological objects are the property of the State. The colonial, artistic, archeological, historic and documentary wealth, and that originating in religious worship, are the cultural treasure of the nation, protected by the State, and cannot be exported. 
The State shall organize a register of the artistic, historic, religious, and documentary wealth, provide for its custody, and see to its conservation. 
The State shall protect buildings and objects that are declared to be of historic or artistic value. 
Art. 192. 
Examples of popular arts and crafts are factors of the national culture and enjoy special protection by the State, with the aim of preserving their authenticity and increasing their production and dissemination.
Title Five. Family Regime
Art. 193. 
Matrimony, the family, and maternity are under the protection of the State. 
Art. 194. 
Matrimony rests on the equality of the rights and duties of the spouses. 
Free or de facto unions that meet the conditions of stability and singularity, and that are maintained between persons having the legal capacity to marry, produce effects similar to marriage, both in the personal and property relations of the parties living together and with respect to the children born to them. 
Art. 195. 
All children, without distinction as to origin, have equal rights and duties in respect of their parents. Filiation may be established by any means conducive to proof thereof, in accordance with the system specified by law. 
Art. 196. 
In cases of the separation of spouses, the situation of the children shall be determined by taking into account their best care and the moral and material interest in them. Agreements entered into or proposals made by the parents may be accepted by judicial authorities provided they conform to such interest. 
Art. 197. 
The authority of the father and of the mother, as well as of a guardian, is established in the interest of children, minors, and incompetents, in harmony with the interest of the family and of society. Adoption and institutions similar thereto shall likewise be organized to the benefit of minors. 
A special code shall regulate family relations. 
Art. 198. 
The law shall determine what property shall comprise a family homestead (patrimonio familiar) which is unattachable and inalienable, and also family allotments under the social security system. 
Art. 199. 
The State shall protect the physical, mental, and moral health of children, and shall uphold the rights of children to a home and to an education. 
A special code shall regulate the protection of minors in harmony with general legislation. 
Title Six. Municipal Regime 
Art. 200.
Community government is autonomous. In the capitals of departments there shall be a municipal council (concejo) and a mayor (alcalde). In the provinces, provincial sections and in ports there shall be municipal boards (juntas). Mayors shall be salaried. 
In the cantons there shall be municipal agents. 
The members of municipal councils and boards shall be elected by popular vote under an incomplete list system and for a term of two years. 
Mayors shall be elected by the respective councils or boards, for a term of two years. 
Art. 201. 
The powers of the municipal councils are: 

1. To enact ordinances for the proper servicing of the community. 
2. To approve annually the municipal budget by programs, at the proposal of the mayor. 
3. To consider the municipal ordinances on licenses and taxes, based on a technical report from the ministry of finance. 
4. To establish and revoke municipal taxes, after approval by the Senate. 
5. To propose lists of three to the mayors for the appointment of municipal employees. 
6. To hear appeals from orders of the mayor. 
7. To consider the annual report of the mayor. 
8. To accept legacies and donations. 

Art. 202. 
Municipal councils in the capitals of departments shall exercise supervision and control over provincial municipal councils; mayors of capitals of departments over provincial mayors, and the latter, over cantonal agents. 
Art. 203. 
A law shall establish the boundaries of the territorial jurisdiction of each municipality. 
Art. 204. 
To be a mayor or member of a municipal council it is necessary to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights and a resident of the locality. 
Art. 205. 
Mayors have the following powers and duties: 

1. To oversee the provisioning of the city. 
2. To suppress speculation. 
3. To fix and control the selling price of articles of prime necessity and of public amusements. 
4. To maintain and supervise services relating to good neighborhoods, street cleaning, comfort, ornamentation, urban development, and recreation. 
5. To promote popular culture. 
6. To protect public morals. 
7. To co-operate with social welfare and charitable services. 
8. To collect and expend the municipal revenues in accordance with the budget. 
9. To negotiate loans for public works of recognized necessity, following approval by the municipal council and authorization by the Senate. 
10. To call upon the police in the enforcement of their orders. 

Art. 206. 
Within an urban district landowners may not possess areas of unimproved lands greater than that fixed by law. Excess areas may be expropriated and used for the construction of housing of social interest.
Title Seven. Armed Forces Regime 
Art. 207. 
The Armed Forces of the nation are organically composed of the High Command, the army, the air force and the naval force, the strength of which shall be determined by the legislative power, at the proposal of the executive. 
Art. 208. 
The Armed Forces have the fundamental mission of defending and preserving the national independence, the security and stability of the Republic, and national sovereignty and honor; ensuring the rule of the Constitution, guaranteeing the stability of the legally constituted government, and co-operating in the integral development of the country. 
Art. 209. 
The organization of the Armed Forces rests on its ranks of authority and discipline. They are essentially obedient, they do not deliberate, and they are subject to military laws and regulations. As an institutional organization they do not participate in political activity, but individually their members enjoy and exercise the rights of citizenship under conditions prescribed by law. 
Art. 210. 
The Armed Forces are subordinate to the President of the Republic and receive their orders from him on administrative matters, through the Minister of Defense; and on technical matters, through the Commander-in-Chief. 
In the event of war, the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces shall direct operations. 
Art. 211. 
No foreigner shall exercise command or hold employment or an administrative post in the Armed Forces without prior authorization from the Captain General. 
In order to serve as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, Chief of the General Staff, commander and chiefs of staff of the army, the air force, the naval force, and of large units, it is necessary to be a Bolivian by birth and meet the requirements prescribed by law. The same conditions shall be necessary to be under-secretary in the Ministry of National Defense. 
Art. 212. 
The Supreme Council of National Defense, the composition, organization, and powers of which shall be determined by law, shall be headed by the Captain General of the Armed Forces. 
Art. 213. 
Every Bolivian is obligated to render military service in accordance with the law. 
Art. 214. 
Promotions in the Armed Forces shall be granted in accordance with the law on the subject.
Title Eight. National Police Regime 
Art. 215. 
The forces of the national police consist of the General Administration, the National Guard, Traffic, and the National Criminal Investigation Bureau. Their specific mission is the preservation of the public order, the protection of society through their specialized agencies, and the guarantee of enforcement of the laws. The national police is governed by its organic law. It does not deliberate nor take part in partisan politics. 
Art. 216. 
The forces of the national police are subordinate to the President of the Republic through the Minister of government. 
Art. 217. 
To be appointed as director general of the national police it is necessary to be a Bolivian by birth and to possess an academic degree. 
Art. 218. 
In the event of international war, the forces of the national police shall become subordinate to the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces for the duration of the conflict.
Title Nine. Electoral Regime
CHAPTER I. SUFFRAGE
Art. 219. 
Suffrage constitutes the foundation of the representative democratic regime and it is based on the universal, direct and equal, individual and secret, free and obligatory vote; on a public counting of votes, and on a system of proportional representation. 
Art. 220. 
All Bolivians who have reached twenty-one years of age, or eighteen if married, are voters, regardless of their degree of education, occupation, or income, with no further requirement than inscription in the civic register, upon presentation of documents of personal identification. 
Foreigners may vote in municipal elections under conditions prescribed by law. 
Art. 221. 
Citizens who can read and write and who meet the requirements indicated in the Constitution and the laws may be elected to public office.
CHAPTER II. POLITICAL PARTIES
Art. 222. 
Citizens have the right to become organized in political parties in accordance with provisions of this Constitution and the Electoral Law. 
Art. 223. 
Representation of the people is exercised through the political parties or the fronts or coalitions formed by parties. Civic groups representative of the live forces of the country, with recognized juridical personality, may form a part of such fronts or coalitions and offer their candidates for President and Vice-President of the Republic, Senators, Deputies, and councilmen. 
Art. 224. 
Political parties shall be registered and their legal personality recognized by the National Electoral Court.
CHAPTER III. ELECTORAL ORGANS
Art. 225. 
The electoral organs are:

1. The National Electoral Court 
2. The Departmental Courts 
3. The local electoral courts 
4. Election boards at polling places 
5. Electoral notaries and other officials designated by law. 

Art. 226. 
The autonomy, independence, and impartiality of the electoral organs is established and guaranteed. 
Art. 227. 
The composition and the jurisdiction and competence of the electoral organs will be established by law.
PART FOUR: PRIMACY AND AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 
Title One. Primacy of the Constitution 
Art. 228. 
The Constitution of the State is the supreme law of the national juridical system. The courts, judges, and authorities shall apply it with preference over the laws, and the laws with preference over any other resolutions. 
Art. 229. 
The principles, guarantees, and rights affirmed by this Constitution may not be altered by laws which regulate their exercise and they need no previous regulations for their enforcement. 
Title Two. Amendment of the Constitution 
Art. 230. 
This Constitution may be amended in part, if the need therefore is previously stated and is precisely specified in an ordinary law approved by two thirds of the members present in each of the chambers. 
This law may be introduced in either chamber, in the manner prescribed by this Constitution. 
The law declaring the amendment shall be sent to the executive for its promulgation and he may not veto it. 
Art. 231. 
In the first meetings of the legislative session of a new constitutional term the matter shall be taken up in the chamber that proposed the amendment and, if it is approved by two thirds of the votes it shall be sent to the other chamber for review, where it must also receive a two-thirds vote. 
All other procedure shall be the same as is provided in the Constitution for relations between the two chambers. 
Art. 232. 
The chambers shall discuss the amendment and vote upon it by conforming to the provisions specified in the declaratory law. 
If the amendment is enacted it shall be forwarded to the executive for promulgation, the President of the Republic not having the power to object to it. 
Art. 233. 
Whenever an amendment relates to the constitutional term of office of the President of the Republic, it shall become effective only in the following term. 
Art. 234. 
Congress has the power to enact laws interpreting the Constitution. These laws require a two-thirds vote for their approval and cannot be vetoed by the President of the Republic. 
Art. 235.
Laws and provisions contrary to this Constitution are hereby repealed.
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Art. 1. 
The terms of the President and Vice-President of the Republic and national representatives, elected last July 3, shall be governed by the provisions of this Constitution. 
Art. 2. 
The solemn oath to this Constitution shall be taken February 3, 1967, at 16:00 hours, in a formal ceremony. Date of sanction: February 2, 1967 Date of promulgation: February 2, 1967