We, the representatives of the Brazilian people, meeting in constituent congress, in order to organize a free and democratic regime, do establish, decree, and proclaim the following CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNITED STATES OF BRAZIL
<preamble>

TITLE I. 
<title> THE FEDERAL ORGANIZATION. PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS. 
ART. 1. The Brazilian nation adopts, as its form of government under the representative regime, the federal republic proclaimed on November 15, 1889, and constitutes itself, by the perpetual and indissoluble union of its former provinces, as the United States of Brazil. 
ART. 2. Each of the former provinces shall constitute a state, and the former neutral municipality shall constitute the federal district, continuing as capital of the union as long as the provisions of the succeeding article are not put into effect. 
ART. 3. There remains to the union in the central plateau of the republic a zone of 14,400 square kilometers, which shall be marked out at the proper time in order to establish therein the future federal capital. When the transfer of the capital shall have been accomplished, the existing federal district shall constitute a state.
ART. 4. The states may unite with one another, subdivide, or partition themselves for annexation to others or to form new states by means of acquiescence of the respective legislative assemblies, in two successive annual sessions, and of approval by the national congress.
ART. 5. Each state is bound to provide at its own expense for the necessities of its government and administration; but the union shall render aid to the state which in case of public calamity requests it.
ART. 6. The federal government may not intervene in the affairs peculiar to the states, except:
<list>
1. To repel foreign invasion or that of one state in another; 
2. To maintain the federal republican form; 
3. To reestablish order and tranquillity in the states, upon requisition of their respective governments; 
4. To assure the execution of federal laws and judgments. 
</list>
ART. 7. The union has exclusive jurisdiction to impose: 
<list>
1. Duties upon imports of foreign origin; 
2. Duties of entry, clearance, and stay of ships, coastwise trade being free to national goods, as well as to foreign goods that have already paid import duties; 
3. Stamp taxes, saving the restriction in art. 9, sec. 1, No. 1; 
4. Federal postal and telegraph rates.
</list>
SEC. 1. The union shall also have exclusive jurisdiction over: 
<list>
1. The establishment of banks of emission; 
2. The creation and maintenance of custom-houses.
</list>
SEC. 2. The imposts created by the union shall be uniform throughout all the states
SEC. 3. The laws of the union, the acts and judgments of its authorities, shall be put into execution throughout the country by federal officials; the first-mentioned may he entrusted, however, for execution to the governments of the states, with their assent. 
ART. 8. The federal government is forbidden to create in any manner distinctions or preferences in favor of the ports of some of the states against those of others. 
ART. 9. The states have exclusive jurisdiction to impose taxes: 
<list>
1. On the exportation of goods of their own production; 
2. On rural and urban real property; 
3. On the transfer of property; 
4. On industries and professions. 
</list>
SEC. 1. The states also have exclusive power to impose: 
<list>
1. St amp taxes on documents issued by their respective governments and on affairs of their own economy; 
2. Charges relating to their own telegraphs and posts. 
</list>
SEC. 2. The products of other states are free of duties in the state through which they are exported. 
SEC. 3. A state may impose import duties on foreign goods only when destined for consumption within its own territory, the proceeds of the duties reverting, however, to the federal treasury. 
SEC. 4. The right is reserved to the states to establish telegraphs between the various points within their territories and between these and points in other states that are not served by federal lines, the union having the power to expropriate them when demanded by the general good.
ART. 10. The states are forbidden to tax the federal property and revenues or the services controlled by the union, and vice versa. 
ART. 11. Both the states and the union are forbidden to: 
<list>
1. impose taxes, on the transit through the territory of a state or in the passage from one state to another, on the products of other states of the republic or on foreign products, as well as on the vehicles of land or sea that carry them; 
2. Establish, subsidize, or embarrass the exercise of religious worship; :3. Enact retroactive laws.
</list>
ART. 12. The union as well as the states shall have power to establish any other sources of revenue than those enumerated in Arts. 7 and 9, cumulatively or not, observing the provisions of arts. 7, 9, and 11, No. 1. 
ART. 13. The rights of the union and of the states to legislate on railways and internal navigation shall be regulated by federal law. Coastwise traffic shall be carried on by national ships. 
ART. 14. The land and sea forces are permanent national institutions destined for the defense of the country without and the maintenance of the laws within. The armed forces are essentially obedient, within the limits of the law, to their superior officers and obliged to support the constitutional institutions.
ART. 15. The organs of the national sovereignty are the legislative, the executive, and the judicial power, harmonious with and independent of each other. 

SECTION I. 
<title> THE LEGISLATIVE POWER. 
CHAPTER I. 
<title> GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
ART. 16. The legislative power is exercised by the national congress with the approval of the president of the republic. 
SEC. 1. The national congress consists of two branches: the chamber of deputies and the senate. 
SEC. 2. The election for senators and deputies shall occur simultaneously throughout the country.
SEC. 3. No one may he at the same time deputy and senator. 
ART. 17. The congress shall meet in the federal capital, independently of call, on the 3d of May of each year, if the law does not designate another day, and shall function four months from the opening date; and it, may be extended, adjourned, or called in extraordinary session. 
SEC. 1. The congress alone may determine the extension or adjournment of its sessions. 
SEC. 2. Each legislature shall last three years. 
SEC. 3. The government of the state in the representation of which a vacancy occurs, for whatever cause, including resignation, shall immediately order a new election. 
ART. 18. The chamber of deputies and the senate shall function separately, and, if not otherwise determined by a majority vote, in open sessions. Decisions shall be reached by majority vote, there being present in each chamber an absolute majority of its members. 
Each chamber shall have power to: 
Verify and accept the credentials of its members; 
Elect its officers; 
Organize its internal government; 
Regulate the service of its internal police; 
Name the employees of its secretariat. 
ART. 19. The deputies and senators are inviolable for their opinions, words, and votes in the exercise of their office. 
ART. 20. The deputies and senators, from the time they receive their credentials until the new election, may not be arrested nor prosecuted criminally without prior permission of their chambers, except when taken in flagrante in a non-bailable crime. In that case, the proceedings having been carried as far as formal indictment, the prosecuting authority shall send the papers to the respective chamber to pass upon the admissibility of the charges, unless the accused elects immediate trial. 
ART. 21. The members of both the chambers, upon taking their seats, shall make a formal promise, in public session, faithfully to perform their duties. 
ART. 22. During the session the senators and deputies shall receive an equal pecuniary remuneration, and an expense allowance, which shall be fixed by the congress at the end of each legislature for the following. 
ART. 23. No member of the congress, after his election, may enter into contracts with the executive power, nor receive from him commissions or paid employments. 
<list_1>
SEC. 1. The following are excepted from this provision: 
<list_2>
(1) Diplomatic missions; 
(2) Military commissions or commands; 
(3) Preferments and legal promotions. 
</list_2>
SEC. 2. However, no deputy or senator may accept appointment to missions, commissions, or commands specified in Nos. 1 and 2 of the preceding paragraph, without permission of his respective chamber, whenever the acceptance would result in the cessation of the exercise of his legislative functions, unless in case of war or cases in which the honor and integrity of the union are involved. 
</list_1>
ART. 24. Neither may the deputy or senator be president or part of the directorate of banks, companies, or undertakings that enjoy privileges from the federal government, defined by law. 
Failure to observe the stipulations contained in this and the preceding articles involves loss of the office. 
ART. 25. The office of legislator is incompatible with the exercise of any other function during the sessions. 
ART. 26. The following are conditions of eligibility for the national congress: 
<list>
1. Possession of the rights of Brazilian citizens and of the qualifications for registration as a voter;
2. More than four years of Brazilian citizenship for the chamber and six years for the senate. 
This provision does not include the citizens referred to in No. 4 of art. 69. 
</list>
ART. 27. The congress will establish by special law the cases of electoral incompatibility.

CHAPTER II. 
<title> THE CHAMBER or DEPUTIES.
ART. 28. The chamber of deputies is composed of representatives of the people elected by the states and by the federal district by means of direct vote, the representation of the minority being guaranteed. 
SEC. 1. The number of deputies shall be fixed by law in a ratio which shall not exceed 1 for every 70,000 inhabitants, the number for each State being not less than 4 
SEC. 2. To this end the federal government shall immediately order the taking of a census of the population of the republic, which shall be revised decennially. 
ART. 29. The chamber shall have the initiative in the adjournment of the legislative session and in all laws of taxation, laws fixing the land and sea forces, the consideration of measures proposed by the executive power, and the determination of the admissibility or non-admissibility of charges against the president of the republic, in the terms of art. 53, and against the ministers of state in the crimes related to those of the president of the republic.

CHAPTER III. 
<title> THE SENATE. 
ART. 30. The senate consists of citizens eligible in accordance with the terms of art. 26 and more than 35 years of age, in the number of 3 senators for each state and 3 for the federal district, elected in the same manner as the deputies. 
ART. 31. The term of the senators shall be 9 years, the senate being renewed triennially by thirds. The senator elected in place of another shall hold office for the term remaining to the one being substituted. 
ART. 32. The vice-president of the republic shall be president of the senate, where he shall have only a deciding vote, and shall be replaced in case of absence or impediments, by the vice-president of the same. 
ART. 33. The senate shall have sole power to try the president of the republic and the other federal officials designated by the constitution, in the manner and form prescribed thereby. 
SEC. 1. The senate, when sitting as a court justice, shall be presided over by the president of the federal supreme court.
SEC. 2. It shall impose sentence of conviction only by two-thirds of the members present.
SEC. 3. It may impose no penalties other than loss of office and incapacity to, exercise any other, without prejudice to the action of the ordinary courts against the condemned.

CHAPTER IV. 
<title> THE POWERS OF THE CONGRESS. 
ART. 34. The national congress shall have exclusive power to:
<list>
1. Estimate the receipts and fix the federal expenses annually and examine the accounts of receipts and expenditures of each fiscal period; 
2. Authorize the executive power to make loans and engage in other operations of credit;
3. Legislate in regard to the public debt and establish means for its payment; 
4. Regulate the collection and distribution of the federal revenues;
5. Regulate international commerce, as well as that of the states with each other and with the federal district, establish custom-houses in the ports, and create and abolish warehouses: 
6. Legislate regarding the navigation of rivers that water more than one state, or that extend to foreign territory; 
7. Determine the weight, value, design, character, and denomination of the coinage; 
8. Create banks of emission, legislate regarding them, and tax them; 
9. Fix the standards of weights and measures; 
10. Determine finally the boundaries of the states with each other, those of the federal district, and those of the nation with adjoining states; 
11. Authorize the government to declare war, if resort to arbitration is not feasible or has failed, and to make peace;
12. Pass finally upon treaties and conventions with foreign nations; 
13. Move the capital of the union; 
14. Grant subsidies to the states in accordance with art. 5; 
15. Legislate on the federal postal and telegraph services; 
16. Adopt the regulations requisite for the safety of the frontiers; 
17. Fix annually the land and sea forces; 
18. Legislate on the organization of the army and navy; 
19. Permit or prohibit the passage of foreign troops through the national territory for military operations; 
20. Mobilize and utilize the national guard or civil militia, in the cases contemplated by the constitution; 
21. Declare in a state of siege one or more points of the national territory, in the emergency of aggression by foreign forces or of internal commotion, and approve or suspend the siege which may have been declared by the executive power or his responsible agents in the recess of the congress; 
22. Regulate the conditions and the procedure of the elections for federal offices throughout the country; 
23. Legislate regarding the civil, commercial, and criminal law of the republic and the procedural law of the federal courts; 
24. Establish uniform laws of naturalization; 
25. Create and abolish federal public offices, fix their powers, and determine their salaries; 26. Organize the federal judiciary, in accordance with art. 55, and following, of Sec. III; 
27. Grant amnesties; 
28. Commute and pardon the penalties imposed upon federal officials for offenses in office; 
29. Legislate regarding the lands and mines belonging to the union; 
30. Legislate concerning the municipal organization of the federal district, as well as on the police, higher instruction, and the other services which may be reserved in the capital for the government of the union; 
31. Subject to special legislation the points in the territory of the republic necessary for the establishment of arsenals and other establishments and institutions of federal utility. 
32. Regulate the cases of extradition between the states; 
33. Enact the laws and resolutions necessary for the exercise of the powers that belong to the union; 
34. Enact the organic laws for the complete execution of the constitution; 
35. Extend and adjourn its sessions.
</list>
ART. 35. The congress shall also have power, but not exclusively, to:
<list>1. Watch over the constitution and the laws and provide for the necessities of a federal character; 
2. Stimulate in the country the development of letters, arts, and sciences, as well as immigration and agriculture, and industry and commerce, without privileges that might hinder the action of the local governments; 
3. Create institutions of higher and secondary instruction in the states; 
4. Provide secondary instruction in the federal district.
</list>

CHAPTER V. 
<title> LAWS AND RESOLUTIONS. 
ART. 36. With the exceptions contained in art. 29, all bills may originate indiscriminately in the chamber or in the senate, upon initiative of any one of its members.
ART. 37. A bill passed in one of the chambers shall be sent to the other; and the latter, if it concurs, shall send it to the executive power which, if it approves, will sanction and proclaim it.
SEC. 1. If, however, the president of the republic considers it unconstitutional or contrary to the interests of the nation, he will refuse his sanction within ten working days after the one on which he received the bill, returning it within that period to the chamber in which it originated, together with the reasons for his refusal. 
SEC. 2. The silence of the president during the ten-day period implies approval; and in case he refuses his approval after the congress has already adjourned, the president will make his reasons public. 
SEC. 3. The bill having been returned to the chamber in which it originated will there be submitted to debate and roll-call, where it will be considered repassed if it obtains two-thirds of the votes present. In that case the bill will be sent to the other chamber, which if it approves it in the same manner and by a like majority will send it as a law to the executive power for the formality of proclamation.
SEC. 4. The sanction and the proclamation will take place in the following form:
<list>
1. "The national congress decrees and I approve the following law (or resolution)"; 
2. "The national congress decrees and I proclaim the following law (or resolution)." 
</list>
ART. 38. If the law is not proclaimed within 48 hours by the president of the republic in the cases enumerated in secs. 2 and 3 of art. 37, the president of the senate, or the vice-president, if the former fails to do so within an equal period, will proclaim it, employing the following formula: "F., president (or vice-president) of the senate, makes known to those to whom these presents may come that the national congress decrees and proclaims the following law (or resolution)."
ART. 39. The bill of one chamber, amended in the other, will be returned to the first, which if it accepts the amendments will send it, altered in conformity therewith, to the executive power. 
SEC. 1. In the contrary case, the bill will return to the revising chamber, and if the changes receive two-thirds of the votes of the members present, they shall be considered repassed, being then sent back with the bill to the chamber of origin, which can reject them only by a like majority.
SEC. 2. If the changes are rejected in that manner, the bill will be submitted without them for executive approval. 
ART. 40. Bills defeated or not sanctioned, may not be renewed in the same legislative session. 

SECTION II. 
<title> THE EXECUTIVE POWER. 
CHAPTER I. 
<title> THE PRESIDENT AND THE VICE-PRESIDENT. 
ART. 41. The executive power is exercised by the president of the republic of the United States of Brazil, as elective chief of the nation.
SEC. 1. The vice-president, elected simultaneously with him, acts in place of the president in case of his incapacity and succeeds him in case of vacancy. 
SEC. 2. In case of incapacity or lack of the vice-president, there shall be called to the presidency successively the vice-president of the senate, the president of the chamber, and the president of the federal supreme court. 
SEC. 3. The essential conditions for being elected president or vice-president of the republic are the following: 
<list>
1. To be Brazilian born; 
2. To be in the enjoyment of the political rights; 
3. To be more than 35 years old. 
</list>
ART. 42. In case of vacancy, for whatever cause, of the presidency or vice-presidency, before two years of the presidential term have passed, a new election will be held 
ART. 43. The president shall hold office for four years, and is not reeligible for the term immediately following. 
SEC. 1. The vice-president who has exercised the presidency in the last year of the presidential period may not be elected president for the following term. 
SEC. 2. The president shall lay down the exercise of his functions, without delay, on the same day on which his presidential term ends, the president-elect immediately succeeding him. 
SEC. 3. If the latter is incapacitated, or defaults, the substitution shall take place in accordance with art. 41, secs. 1 and 2. 
SEC. 4. The first presidential term shall end November 15, 1894. 
ART. 44. On assuming office, the president will make this affirmation before the congress, or, if this is not in session, before the federal supreme court: 
"I promise to maintain and fulfill with perfect loyalty the federal constitution, to promote the general welfare of the republic, observe its laws, and support its union, integrity, and independence." 
ART. 45. The president and vice-president may not leave the national territory without permission of the congress, under penalty of losing their office. 
ART. 46. The president and the vice-president will receive a salary, fixed by the congress in the preceding presidential period.

CHAPTER II. 
<title> THE ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT. 
ART. 47. The president and the vice-president of the republic shall be chosen by direct vote of the nation and an absolute majority 
SEC. I. The election shall take place on the first of March in the last year of the presidential period, the canvass of the votes taking place in the federal capital and in the capitals of the states for each respective circumscription. The congress will make the final canvass in its first session of the same year, with whatever number of members present.
SEC. 2. If none of the candidates has received an absolute majority, the congress shall elect by majority vote of those present one of the two candidates receiving the highest vote in the direct election. In case of tie the elder shall be considered chosen.
SEC. 3. The procedure of election and canvassing will be regulated by ordinary law.
SEC. 4. The relatives, by blood or marriage within the first and second degrees, of the president and vice-president in office at the time of the election or within six months before, are ineligible to these offices.
CHAPTER III. 
<title> THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER.
ART. 48. The president of the republic shall have exclusive power to:
<list>
1. Approve, proclaim, and make public the laws and resolutions of the congress; issue decrees, instructions, and regulations for their faithful execution; 
2. Freely appoint and remove the ministers of state; 
3. Exercise or designate the one to exercise the supreme command of the land and naval forces of the United States of Brazil when called to arms in the internal or external defense of the Union;
4. Administer the army and the navy and distribute their respective forces, in accordance with the federal laws and 4. the necessities of the national government; 
5. Fill the federal civil and military offices, saving the restrictions expressed in the constitution; 
6. Pardon and commute penalties in the crimes subject to federal jurisdiction, save in the cases referred to in art. 34, 6. No. 28, and art. 52, sec. 2;
7. Declare war and make peace in accordance with art. 34, No. 11; 
8. Declare immediate war in case of foreign invasion or aggression; 
9. Render annual account of the condition of the country to the national congress, recommending the urgent measures and reforms in a message which he will send to the secretary of the senate on the opening day of the legislative session; 
10. Convoke the congress in special session; 
11. Appoint the federal judges upon nomination of the supreme court; 
12. Appoint the members of the federal supreme court and the diplomatic ministers, submitting the nominations to the approval of the senate. In the recess of the congress, appoint them temporarily until the senate acts; 
13. Appoint the other members of the diplomatic corps and the consular agents; 
14. Maintain relations with foreign states; 
15. Declare, personally or through his responsible agents, the state of siege in any part of the national territory, in the cases of foreign aggression, or serious internal commotion (art. 6, No. 3; art. 34, No. 21, and art. 80) ; 
16. Undertake international negotiations, conclude agreements, conventions, and treaties, always subject to the referendum of the congress, and approve those which the states may conclude in conformity with art. 65, submitting them, when expedient, to the authority of the congress.
</list>

CHAPTER IV. 
<title> THE MINISTERS OF STATE.
ART. 49. The president of the republic is assisted by the ministers of state, agents of his confidence, who subscribe to his acts, and each one of whom presides over one of the ministries into which the federal administration may be divided. 
ART. 50. The ministers of state may not accumulate the exercise of any other public employment or office, nor may they be elected president, or vice-president of the union, deputy, or senator. The deputy or senator who accepts the post of minister of state shall lose his seat, and a new election shall immediately be held in which he may riot be a candidate. 
ART. 51. The ministers of state may not appear in the sessions of the congress, and may communicate with it only in writing, or personally in conference with the committees of the chambers. The annual reports of the ministers shall be directed to the president of the republic and distributed among all the members of the congress. 
ART. 52. The ministers of state are not responsible either before the congress or before the courts for advice tendered the president of the republic. 
SEC. 1. They are responsible, however, as regards their acts, for the crimes defined by law.
SEC. 2. In the ordinary crimes and official crimes they shall be tried and sentenced by the federal supreme court, and in those connected with those of the president of the republic by the authority competent to try him.

CHAPTER V. 
<title> THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PRESIDENT.
ART. 53. The president of the United States of Brazil shall be submitted to trial and judgment, after the chamber has declared that grounds for proceeding exist, before the federal supreme court in ordinary crimes and before the senate in official crimes. When the accusation has been declared well-founded, the president shall be suspended from office. 
ART. 54. Official crimes are those acts of the president of the republic which threaten: 
<list>
1. The political existence of the union; 
2. The constitution and the form of the federal government; 
3. The free exercise of the political powers; 
4. The enjoyment and legal exercise of the political or individual rights; 
5. The internal security of the country; 
6. The honesty of the administration; 
7. The safeguarding and constitutional employment of the public funds; 
8. The budget laws voted by the congress.
</list> 
SEC. 1. These offenses shall be defined by special law. 
SEC. 2. Another law shall regulate the accusation, the trial, and the judgment. 
SEC. 3. Both of these laws shall be enacted in the first session of the first congress.

SECTION III.
<title> THE JUDICIAL POWER.
ART. 55. The judicial power of the Union shall have for its organs a federal supreme court, with its seat in the capital of the republic, and such other federal judges arid courts, distributed throughout the country, as the congress may create. 
ART. 56. The federal supreme court shall consist of 15 judges, appointed in the manner indicated in art. 48, No. 12, from among citizens of notable learning and reputation, eligible to the senate. 
ART. 57. The federal judges hold office for life and can lose their office only by judicial sentence. 
SEC. 1. Their salaries shall be fixed by law and may not be reduced. 
SEC. 2. The senate will try the members of the federal supreme court for official crimes, and that court will try the inferior federal judges. 
ART. 58. The federal courts will elect from their midst their own presidents and will organize their respective secretariats. 
SEC. 1. The appointment and removal of the secretarial employees, as well as the filling of judicial offices in the judicial districts, belongs to the respective presidents of the courts. 
SEC. 2. The president of the republic will name from among the members of the federal supreme court the attorney-general of the republic, whose attributes will be determined by law. 
ART. 59. The federal supreme court shall have power: 
<list_1>
1. To try and to sentence, originally and exclusively: 
<list_2>
(a) The president of the republic for ordinary crimes, and the ministers of state in the cases defined in art. 52; 
(b) The diplomatic ministers in ordinary and official crimes; 
(c) The cases and conflicts between the Union and the states, or between these latter one with another; 
(d) Suits and claims between foreign countries and the Union or the states; 
(e) Conflicts of the federal judges or courts with each other, or between them and those of the states, as well as those of the judges and courts of one state with the judges and courts of another state;
</list_2> 
2. To try, on appeal, questions decided by federal judges and courts, as well as those treated in sec. 1 of the present article, and in art. 60. 
3. To review adjudicated cases in accordance with art. 81.
</list_1>
Sec. 1. From the sentences of the state courts of last instance appeal will lie to the federal supreme court: 
<list>
(a) When the validity or application of federal treaties and laws is questioned, and the decision of the state court is contrary thereto; 
(b) When the validity of the laws or of the acts of state governments is questioned in view of the constitution, and the decision of the state court considers these acts or laws valid. 
</list>
SEC. 2. In the cases in which the federal judiciary has to apply state laws, they shall consult the jurisprudence of the local courts, and, vice versa, the state judiciary shall consult the jurisprudence of the federal courts when called upon to interpret laws of the union. 
ART. 60. The federal judges and courts shall have power to try and to judge: 
<list>
(a)Cases in which either of the parties bases his action or defense on provisions of the federal constitution; 
(b) All cases instituted against the government of the union or the federal treasury, based on provisions of the constitution, laws and regulations of the executive power, or contracts entered into with said government; 
(c) Cases arising from compensation, reimbursement, indemnity for damages or any others moved by the government of the union against individuals, or vice versa; 
(d) Litigation between a state and citizens of another state, or between citizens of diverse states, when the laws of these differ; 
(e) Suits between foreign states and Brazilian citizens; 
(f) Actions brought by foreigners and based either on contracts with the government of the union, or on conventions or treaties of the union with other nations; 
(g) Questions of maritime law and navigation, on the ocean as well as on the rivers and lakes of the country; 
(h) Questions of international criminal or civil law; 
(i) Political crimes.
</list>
SEC. 1. The congress is forbidden to commit any federal jurisdiction to the state courts. 
SEC. 2. The sentences and orders of the federal judiciary are executed by judicial officers of the union, to whom the local police is obliged to render assistance when invoked by them. 
ART. 61. The decisions of the state judges or courts, in matters within their jurisdiction, terminate the cases and questions, except as to: 
<list> 
1. Habeas corpus, or Estates of deceased foreigners, when the matter is not covered by convention or treaty. 
2. In such cases there shall be voluntary appeal to the federal supreme court. 
</list>
ART. 62. The state courts may not intervene in questions submitted to the federal courts, nor annul, alter, or suspend their sentences and decrees. And, reciprocally, the federal judiciary may not intervene in questions submitted to the courts of the states, nor annul, alter, or suspend the decisions or decrees of the same, except in the cases expressly declared in the constitution. 

TITLE II. 
<title> THE STATES. 
ART. 63. Each state shall be governed by the constitution and laws which it may adopt, the constitutional principles of the union being respected.
ART. 64. The states shall own the mines and unoccupied lands situated within their respective territories, the union possessing only that portion of the territory which may be indispensable for the defense of the frontiers, fortifications, military constructions, and federal railways. The national property not necessary for the services of the union shall pass into the possession of the states in whose territory it may be located. 
ART. 65. The states shall have power: 
<list>
1. To enter into mutual agreements and conventions of a non-political character (art. 48, No. 16); 
2. To exercise in general any and every power or right not denied them by express provision of the constitution or contained by implication in such express provisions. 
</list>
ART. 66. The states are forbidden to: 
<list>
1. Refuse faith to public documents, of a legislative, administrative, or judicial nature, of the union or of any of the states;
2. Reject the coinage or the bank emissions in circulation by act of the federal government; 
3. Make or declare war among themselves or engage in reprisals; 
4. Refuse the extradition of criminals, demanded by the courts of other states, or of the federal district, according to the laws of the union by which this matter is governed (art. 34, No. 32). 
</list>
ART. 67. Saving the restrictions specified in the constitution and the federal laws, the federal district shall be administered by municipal authorities. The expenses of a local character in the capital of the republic fall exclusively upon the municipal authorities.

TITLE III. 
<title> THE MUNICIPALITY. 
ART. 68. The states will organize in a manner that assures the autonomy of the municipalities in everything respecting their peculiar interests. 

TITLE IV. 
<title> BRAZILIAN CITIZENS. 
SECTION 1. 
<title> THE CHARACTER OF BRAZILIAN CITIZENS. 
ART. 69. The following are Brazilian citizens:
<list>
1. Those born in Brazil, though of foreign fathers, if the latter are not resident in the service of their country; 
2. The children of Brazilian fathers, and the illegitimate children of Brazilian mothers, born in foreign countries, if they establish a domicile in the republic; 
3. The children of a Brazilian father who is abroad in the service of the republic, even though they do riot acquire a domicile in Brazil; 
4. Foreigners who, being in Brazil on November 15, 1889, do not declare, within six months after the constitution goes into effect, their intent to preserve their original nationality; 
5. Foreigners naturalized in other ways. 
</list>
ART. 70. Voters are the citizens of more than 21 years of age who are registered in conformity with the laws. 
<list_1>
SEC. 1. The following may not be registered as voters for either federal or state elections:
<list_2> 
1. Beggars; 
2. Illiterates; 
3. Common soldiers, save the students of the higher military schools; 
4. Members of monastic orders, companies, congregations, or communities of whatever denomination, subject to a vow of obedience, rule, or statute which involves the renunciation of individual liberty.
</list_2>
SEC. 2. Citizens not eligible for registration are ineligible for election.
</list_1> 
ART. 71. The rights of Brazilian citizens are suspended or lost only in the cases herewith specified. 
<list_1>
SEC. 1. They are suspended: 
<list_2>
(a) For physical or moral incapacity; 
(b) For criminal sentence, as long as its effects continue. 
</list_2>
SEC. 2. They are lost: 
<list_2>
(a) By naturalization in a foreign country; 
(b) By the acceptance of an office or a pension from a foreign government, without permission of the federal executive power. 
</list_2>
SEC. 3. A federal law will determine the conditions for reacquiring the rights of Brazilian citizen.
</list_1>

SECTION II. 
<title> DECLARATION OF RIGHTS.
ART. 72. The constitution assures to Brazilians and to foreigners resident in the country the inviolability of the rights regarding liberty, personal security, and property, in the following terms: 
<list>
SEC. 1. No one can be obliged to do or to refrain from doing anything except by virtue of law. 
SEC. 2. All are equal before the law. The republic does not admit privileges of birth, does not recognize courts of nobility, and extinguishes the honorary orders now existing and all their prerogatives and regalia, as well as titles of nobility and of council. 
SEC. 3. All individuals and religious confessions may exercise publicly and freely their forms of worship, associating themselves for this purpose and acquiring property, the provisions of the common law being observed. 
SEC. 4. The republic recognizes only civil marriage, which shall be free. 
SEC. 5. The cemeteries shall be secular in character and shall be administered by the municipal authority, all religious cults being free to practice their respective rites with regard to their own believers, so long as they do not offend public morals and the laws. 
SEC. 6. The instruction given in public institutions shall be laic. 
SEC. 7. No sect or church shall receive official subsidies, nor maintain relations of dependency or alliance with the government of the union or with those of the states. 
SEC. 8. It is permitted to all to associate and assemble freely and without arms, the police not being permitted to intervene except to maintain public order. 
SEC. 9. Every person whatsoever is permitted to make representations to the public authorities by means of petition, to denounce abuses, and to promote the responsibility of offenders. 
SEC. 10. In time of peace, everyone may enter the national territory or leave it with his fortune and his goods, when and how he pleases, independently of a passport. 
SEC. 11. The home is the inviolable asylum of the individual; no one may penetrate therein at night without the consent of the inhabitant, unless to aid victims of crimes or disasters, nor by day except in the cases and in the manner prescribed by law. 
SEC. 12. On any subject, the expression of thought by print or on the platform is free, independently of censorship, each one answering for the abuses he may commit, in the cases and in the manner determined by law. 
SEC. 13. Except in flagrante delicto, no one may be arrested until after formal accusation of the suspect, except in the cases determined by law, and upon written order of the competent authority. 
SEC. 14. No one may be kept in confinement without formal arraignment, except in the cases specified by law, nor taken to prison or kept there if he offers requisite bail in the cases in which the law permits it.
SEC. 15. No one may be sentenced save by the competent authority by virtue of an existing law and in the manner stipulated therein.
SEC. 16. The most extensive defense shall be secured by law to the accused, with all the appeals and measures essential thereto, beginning with the written accusation furnished the person arrested within 24 hours and signed by the competent authority, with the names of the accuser and of the witnesses. 
SEC. 17. The right of property is maintained to its fullest extent, saving expropriation for public necessity or utility by means of prior indemnity. 
The mines belong to the owners of the soil, saving the limitations that may be established by law for the good of the development of this branch of industry. 
SEC. 18. The secrecy of correspondence is inviolable. 
SEC. 19. No penalty shall extend beyond the person of the offender. 
SEC. 20. The penalty of the galleys and of official banishment are abolished. 
SEC. 21. Likewise the penalty of death is abolished, saving the dispositions of military law in time of war. 
SEC. 22. Habeas corpus shall always be granted whenever the individual suffers or finds himself in imminent danger of suffering violence, or coercion illegally or through abuse of power. 
SEC. 23. Saving the cases which by their nature belong to special tribunals, there shall be no privileged jurisdiction. 
SEC. 24. The free exercise of any moral, intellectual, or industrial profession is guaranteed. 
SEC. 25. Industrial inventions belong to their authors, to whom there shall be guaranteed by law a temporary monopoly, or there shall be granted by the congress a reasonable premium when it becomes convenient to make the invention common property. 
SEC. 26. The authors of literary and artistic works are guaranteed the exclusive right to reproduce them in print or by any other mechanical process whatever. The heirs of the authors will enjoy this right for the time to be fixed by law. 
SEC. 27. The law will also insure property in trade-marks. 
SEC. 28. No Brazilian citizen may be deprived of his civil or political rights or exempt himself from the performance of any civic duty by reason of religious belief or office. 
SEC. 29. Those who allege religious belief as a motive for exempting themselves from any burden which the laws of the republic impose upon citizens, and those who accept foreign decorations or titles of nobility, shall lose all their political rights. 
SEC. 30. No tax of any kind may be levied save by virtue of a law which authorizes it. 
SEC. 31. The institution of the jury is maintained. 
</list>
ART. 73. Public civil and military offices are accessible to all Brazilians, the conditions of special capacity being observed which may be established by law, the accumulation of salaried offices being, however, forbidden. 
ART. 74. Permanent patents, posts, and offices are guaranteed to the fullest extent. 
ART. 75. Retirement with pay may be allowed public officials only in the cases of incapacity incurred in the service of the nation. 
ART. 76. The officers of the army and the navy can only lose their commissions by condemnation to more than two years of imprisonment, imposed by the competent tribunals. 
ART. 77. The military forces of land and sea shall have a special court for the trial of military offenses. 
SEC. 1. This court shall consist of a supreme military tribunal, the members of which shall hold office for life, and of the councils necessary for the framing of the indictment and the trial of the crimes.
SEC. 2. The organization and functions of the supreme military tribunal will be regulated by law. 
ART. 78. The enumeration of the guaranties and rights expressed in the constitution does not exclude other guaranties and rights not enumerated but resulting from the form of government it establishes and the principles it ordains.

TITLE V. 
<title> GENERAL PROVISIONS.
ART. 79. The citizen invested with the functions of any one of the three federal powers may not exercise those of either of the others. 
ART. 80. Any portion of the territory of the union may be declared in a state of siege, the constitutional guaranties being there suspended for a fixed time, when the security of the republic requires it, in case of foreign aggression or internal commotion (art. 34, No. 21). 
SEC. 1. If the congress is not in session, and the country is in imminent danger, the federal executive power will exercise this attribute (art. 48, No. 15). 
SEC. 2. The latter, however, will, during the state of siege, limit himself in the repressive measures against persons to ordering: 
<list>
1. Their detention in a place not destined for common criminals; 
2. Their banishment to other places in the national territory.
</list> 
SEC. 3. As soon as the congress convenes, the president of the republic will report to it, with their justification, the exceptional measures that may have been adopted. 
SEC. 4. The authorities that may have ordered such measures are responsible for any abuses committed. 
ART. 81. Adjudicated cases, in criminal matters, may be reviewed at any time, for the benefit of those convicted, by the federal supreme court, for amending or confirming the sentence. 
SEC. 1. The law will determine the cases and the form of review, which can be demanded by the convicted, by any individual, or ex officio by the attorney-general of the republic. 
SEC. 2. In this revision the penalties of the sentence reviewed may not be increased. 
SEC. 3. The provisions of the present article are applicable to the military trials. 
ART. 82. Public officers are strictly responsible for the abuses and omissions practised in the exercise of their functions, as well as for indulgence or negligence in not making effective the responsibility of their subordinates. Public officers on assuming office will obligate themselves by formal affirmation to the performance of their legal duties. 
ART. 83. The laws of the former regime shall remain in force until repealed, so far as they are not, expressly or by implication contrary to the system of government established by the constitution and the principles consecrated therein. 
ART. 84. The government of the union guarantees the payment of the public internal and external debt. 
ART. 85. The officers of the navy and of the auxiliary forces thereof shall enjoy the same commissions and advantages as those of the army in positions of a corresponding class. 
ART. 86. Every Brazilian is subject to military service in defense of the country and the constitution, in accordance with the federal laws. 
ART. 87. The federal army will consist of contingents which the states and the federal district are obliged to furnish, constituted in conformity with the annual law fixing the armed forces. 
SEC. 1. A federal law will determine the general organization of the army in accordance with No. 18 of art. 34.
SEC. 2. The union will undertake the military instruction of the various troops and branches of the service and the higher military education. 
SEC. 3. Forced military recruiting is forbidden. 
SEC. 4. The army and the navy will be constituted by voluntary enlistment without bonuses, and, lacking this, by drawings previously organized. 
For the personnel of the navy, the naval academy, the schools of naval apprentices, and the merchant marine, by drawings, will all contribute. 
ART. 88. The United States of Brazil will in no case engage in a war of conquest, directly or indirectly, alone or in alliance with another nation. 
ART. 89. A court of accounts is instituted to audit the accounts of receipts and expenditures and to verify their legality, before their presentation to the congress. The members of this court shall be appointed by the president of the republic with the approval of the senate, and may be removed from office only by judicial sentence. 
ART. 90. The constitution may be amended on the initiative of the national congress or on that of the assemblies of the states. 
SEC. 1. An amendment will be considered proposed when, after being offered by at least one-fourth of the members of either chamber of the national congress, it shall have been approved in three readings, by two-thirds of the votes in one or the other chamber, or when requested by two-thirds of the states within the period of a year, each state being represented by a majority vote of its assembly. 
SEC. 2. Such proposal shall be considered approved if in the following year it is accepted after three readings by a two-thirds majority of the votes in the two chambers of congress. 
SEC. 3. The amendment when adopted shall be published with the signatures of the presidents and secretaries of the two chambers, and will become an integral part of the constitution. 
SEC. 4. Proposals tending to abolish the republican federal form or the equality of representation of the states in the senate may not be made the subject of consideration by the congress. 
ART. 91. When this constitution has been adopted it shall be proclaimed by the officers of the congress and signed by the same.

<title> TRANSITORY PROVISIONS. 
ART. 1. After this constitution has been proclaimed, the congress, sitting jointly as a general assembly, shall then elect by an absolute majority of votes on the first ballot, and by plurality on the second if no candidate has received an absolute majority, the president and the vice-president of the United States of Brazil. 
SEC. 1. This election shall occur by means of two distinct ballotings for president and vice-president, respectively, the ballots for president being first received and canvassed, the same process being then followed for the vice-president. 
SEC. 2. The president and the vice-president, elected in the manner specified in this article, will occupy the presidency and the vice-presidency during the first presidential period. 
SEC. 3. For this election no incompatibilities will be operative. 
SEC. 4. The election being concluded, the congress will consider its constituent function terminated, and, dividing into chamber and senate, will enter upon the exercise of its normal functions on June 15 of the current year, being under no circumstances subject to dissolution. 
SEC. 5. In the first year of the first legislature, directly in the preliminary labors, the senate will differentiate the first and second thirds of its membership, whose term of office will expire at the end of the first and second trienniums. 
SEC. 6. This division will occur by means of three lists, corresponding to the three thirds, the senators of each state and of the federal district being graded according to the order of the votes received by them, so that the one standing first in the order of votes in the federal district and each of the states shall be put into the third belonging to the last triennium, and the two following names into the other thirds in the order of votes received. 
Sec. 7. In case of tie, the oldest shall be favored, and when the age is the same the selection being by lot. 
ART. 2. Any state which, up to the end of the year 1892, shall not have proclaimed its constitution shall be subjected to that of one of the others, which may seem most convenient for this adaptation, until the state subjected to this rule shall amend it by the process therein determined. 
ART. 3. In the measure that the states are organized, the federal government will turn over to them the administration of the services which by the constitution belong to them, and will liquidate the responsibility of the federal administration as regards these services and the payment of the respective personnel. 
ART. 4. While the states are occupied with regulating the expenditures during the period of organization of their services, the federal government will for this purpose open up for them special credits, according to the conditions established by law. 
ART. 5. In the states that have been organized the classification of revenues established by the constitution will go into effect. 
ART. 6. In the first appointments to the federal and the state judiciary, the law judges and the superior judges of greatest note shall be preferred. Those who are not included in the new judicial organization and have served more than 30 years shall be retired with full pay. Those who have served less than 30 years shall continue to receive their salaries until employed or retired with the pay corresponding to the time of their service. The expenses in connection with the retired judges or those put at disposition shall be paid by the federal government. 
ART. 7. There is voted for Dom Pedro of Alcantara, ex-emperor of Brazil, a pension which, beginning with November 15, 1889, shall guarantee him for the whole period of his life a decent subsistence. The regular congress in its first meeting shall fix the amount of this pension. 
ART. 8. The federal government shall acquire for the nation the house in which Dr. Benjamin Constant Botelho de Magalhaes died, and shall order placed therein a memorial tablet in homage to the memory of the great patriot - the Founder of the Republic. The widow of Dr. Benjamin Constant shall enjoy during her lifetime the use of the said house. 