
TITLE I.
<title> THE EMPIRE OF BRAZIL, ITS TERRITORY, GOVERNMENT, DYNASTY AND RELIGION
ART. 1. The empire of Brazil is the political association of all Brazilian citizens. These constitute a free and independent nation, which admits of no other ties of union or federation inconsistent with its independence. 
ART. 2. Its territory is divided into provinces as now existing, which may be subdivided as may be demanded for the good of the state. 
ART. 3. Its government is a hereditary, constitutional, and representative monarchy. 
ART. 4. The ruling dynasty is that of Dom Pedro I, actual emperor and perpetual defender of Brazil. 
ART. 5. The Roman Catholic Apostolic religion will continue to be that of the empire. All other religions are permitted, with their own particular forms of worship, in buildings destined for this purpose, but without any of the external appearance of a church. 

TITLE II.
<title> BRAZILIAN CITIZENS.
ART. 6. The following are Brazilian citizens: 
<list>
1. Persons born in Brazil, whether free-born or freedmen, even of foreign fathers, so long as these are not in residence in the service of their country. 
2. Children of Brazilian fathers and illegitimate children of Brazilian mothers, born abroad, who establish a domicile in the empire. 
3. Children of Brazilian fathers abroad in the service of the empire, even without establishing a domicile in Brazil. 
4. All persons born in Portugal and her possessions, who, being residents of Brazil at the time when independence was declared in the province in which they lived, acquiesced in this act expressly or tacitly by the continuation of their residence there. 
5. Naturalized foreigners, whatever their religion. The law will determine the qualifications required for obtaining naturalization papers. 
</list>
ART. 7. The following lose their rights as Brazilian citizens: 
<list>
1. Those who become naturalized in foreign countries. 
2. Those who without permission of the emperor accept employment, pensions, or decorations from any foreign government. 
3. Those banished by judicial sentence. 
</list>
ART. 8. The exercise of political rights is suspended: 
<list>
1. By physical or moral incapacity. 
2. By a sentence involving imprisonment or exile, for the duration of the sentence.
</list>

TITLE III.
<title> THE NATIONAL POWERS AND REPRESENTATION.
ART. 9. The separation and harmony of political powers is the protective principle of the rights of citizens and the most secure means of making effective the guaranties which the constitution offers. 
ART. 10. The political powers recognized by the constitution of the empire of Brazil are four: the legislative power, the moderative power, the executive power, and the judicial power. 
ART. 11. The representatives of the Brazilian nation are the emperor and the general assembly. 
ART. 12. All these powers are, in the empire of Brazil, delegated by the nation.

TITLE IV. 
<title> THE LEGISLATIVE POWER. 
CHAPTER I.
ART. 13. The legislative power is delegated to the general assembly with the approval of the emperor. 
ART. 14. The general assembly consists of two chambers: the chamber of deputies and the chamber of senators or senate. 
ART. 15. The general assembly has the power: 
<list>
1. To administer the oath to the emperor, the prince imperial, the regent, or the regency. 
2. To elect the regency or the regent and to determine the limits of his authority. 
3. To recognize the prince imperial as successor to the throne, in the first session immediately following his birth. 
4. To appoint a tutor for the emperor during his minority in case his father has not named one in his testament. 
5. To settle any doubts that may arise concerning the succession to the crown. 
6. To make an investigation of the past administration upon the death of the emperor or a vacancy in the throne, and to remedy the abuses that may have crept in. 
7. To select a new dynasty in case of the extinction of the ruling one. 
8. To make, interpret, suspend, and revoke laws. 
9. To watch over the constitution and promote the general welfare of the nation. 
10. To determine annually the public expenditures and apportion the direct taxes. 
11. To fix annually, upon information from the government, the ordinary and extraordinary land and sea forces. 
12. To permit or prohibit the entry of foreign military or naval forces into the empire or its ports. 
13. To authorize the government to contract loans. 
14. To establish suitable measures for the payment of the public debt. 
15. To regulate the administration of national property and order the sale of the same.
16. To create or abolish public offices and fix their remuneration. 
17. To fix the weight, value, design, type, and denomination of moneys, as also the standard of weights and measures. 
</list>
ART. 16. Each of the legislative chambers shall have the designation of "August and Most Worthy Representatives of the Nation." 
ART. 17. Each legislature shall have a period of four years; and each annual session shall last four months. 
ART. 18. The imperial opening session shall occur each year on May 3. 
ART. 19. The closing session shall likewise be imperial, and this, like the opening session, shall be in general assembly, the two chambers sitting jointly. 
ART. 20. The procedure and the participation of the emperor shall be governed by the rules of the general assembly. 
ART. 21. The election of the respective presidents, vice-presidents, and secretaries of the chambers, the verification of the credentials of the members, the oath of office, and the internal government shall be governed by the respective rules of procedure. 
ART. 22. In the joint sessions of the two chambers the president of the senate will preside, the deputies and senators being seated indiscriminately.
ART. 23. No meeting of either chamber may be held unless one more than a half of the membership is present. 
in ART. 24. The sessions of each chamber shall be public, except in the cases which the good of the state demands that they be secret. 
ART. 25. Measures will be adopted by an absolute majority of the votes of the members present. 
ART. 26. The members of each chamber are inviolable for the opinions advanced by them in the performance of their functions. 
ART. 27. No senator or deputy may during his term of office be arrested by any authority whatsoever, save upon order of his respective chamber, unless he has been apprehended in flagrante in the commission of a capital crime. 
ART. 28. If any senator or deputy is arraigned for crime, the judge, suspending all subsequent procedure, shall report to the respective chamber, which will decide whether the proceedings should continue and the defendant be suspended from the exercise of his functions. 
ART. 29. The senators and deputies may be appointed to the posts of ministers of state or councilors of state, with this distinction: the senators retain their seats in the senate, but the deputies lose their places in the chamber of deputies, a new election being held in which the deputy in question is eligible for re-lection and may combine the two functions. 
ART. 30. They may also combine the two functions if they were already exercising the functions of either of the positions mentioned, at the time of their election. 
ART. 31. No one may be at the same time a member of both chambers. 
ART. 32. The exercise of any office other than that of councilor or minister of state is suspended as long as the mandate of deputy or senator continues. 
ART. 33. In the interval between sessions, the emperor may not employ a senator or deputy outside the empire, nor may they even exercise the functions of their offices when this makes it impossible for them to appear at the time of the regular or special sessions of the general assembly. 
ART. 34. If in any unforeseen case affecting the public security or the good of the state it becomes imperative that a senator or deputy leave for some other commission, the respective chamber can so determine. 

CHAPTER II.
<title> THE CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES.
ART. 35. The chamber of deputies is elective and temporary. 
ART. 36. The chamber of deputies has the sole initiative: 
<list>
1. As regards taxes. 
2. As regards recruiting. 
3. In the choice of a new dynasty in case of the extinction of the ruling one. 
</list>
ART. 37. Likewise in the chamber of deputies there shall commence: 
<list>
1. The examination of the past administration and the reform of abuses introduced during the same. 
2. The discussion of the proposals made by the executive power. 
</list>
ART. 38. It is within the exclusive power of the same chamber to decree the propriety of the impeachment of the ministers and councilors of state. 
ART. 39. The deputies shall receive during the sessions a pecuniary remuneration fixed at the close of the last session of the preceding legislature. Aside from this a reimbursement will be established for the expenses of coming and going to and from the sessions.

CHAPTER III.
<title> THE SENATE. 
ART. 40. The senate consists of life members and shall be constituted by election in the provinces.
ART. 41. Each province shall send half as many senators as deputies, with this difference, that when the number of deputies from the province is odd, the number of its senators shall be half of the number immediately below, so that a province which sends eleven deputies will send five senators. 
ART. 42. A province which sends only a single deputy will still send a senator in spite of the above rule. 
ART. 43. The elections will occur in the same manner as for deputies, but in triple lists, from which the emperor will select one-third of the whole list. 
ART. 44. Vacancies in the senate will be filled in the same manner as the first election, in each respective province. 
ART. 45. The qualifications for senator are: 
<list>
1. Brazilian citizenship and the enjoyment of the political rights. 
2. Forty years of age or more. 
3. Knowledge, capacity, and virtues, with preference for those who have rendered service to the country. 
4. An annual rental from property, industry, commerce, or employment of 800 milreis. 
</list>
ART. 46. The princes of the imperial house are senators ex officio, and will take a seat in the senate upon attaining the age of 25 years. 
ART. 47. The senate shall have exclusive power: 
<list>
1. To take cognizance of the individual offenses committed by members of the imperial family, by ministers and councilors of state, and by senators, as well as of the offenses committed by deputies during the legislative term. 
2. To try ministers and councilors of state for official offenses. 
3. To issue the call for the convocation of the general assembly in case the emperor shall not have done so within two months after the time fixed by the constitution, for which purpose the senate will meet in special session. 
4. To convoke the assembly upon the death of the emperor for the election of a regency in the cases provided, if the provisional regency fails to do so. 
</list>
ART. 48. In the trial of crimes in which the accusation is not made by the chamber of deputies, the prosecutor of the crown and of the national sovereignty will bring the charges. 
ART. 49. The sessions of the senate will open and close at the same time as those of the chamber of deputies. 
ART. 50. Except in the cases specified in the constitution any meeting of the senate at other times than during the sessions of the chamber of deputies shall be null and void. 
ART. 51. The remuneration of senators shall be half again as much as that of the deputies.

CHAPTER IV. 
<title> THE PROPOSAL, DISCUSSION, APPROVAL, AND PROMULGATION OF THE LAWS.
ART. 52. The proposal, rejection, and approval of bills is within the competence of either chamber. 
ART. 53. The executive power exercises his right of initiative in the enactment of laws through any one of the ministers of state; and only after such proposals shall have been considered by a committee of the chamber of deputies, where it must begin, may it take the form of a bill. 
ART. 54. The ministers may attend and discuss the proposal after the report of the committee; but they may not vote nor be present at the voting, unless they are senators or deputies. 
ART. 55. If the chamber of deputies adopts the proposed measure it will send the same to the senate with the following formula: "The chamber of deputies sends to the chamber of senators the accompanying proposal of the executive power (with or without amendments) and is of the opinion that it is expedient." 
ART. 56. If it can not accept the proposed measure, it will communicate with the emperor through a delegation of seven members in the following tenor: "The chamber of deputies evidences to the emperor its recognition of the zeal shown by him in safeguarding the interests of the empire; and respectfully beseeches him to deign to take under further consideration the proposal of the government." 
ART. 57. In general, the measures which the chamber of deputies accepts and approves will be sent to the senate with the following formula: "The chamber of deputies sends the accompanying proposal to the senate and is of the opinion that it is expedient to request therefor the approval of the emperor." 
ART. 58. If, however, the senate does not accept the measure of the chamber of deputies in its entirety but has altered or added to it, it will send it back in the following manner: "The senate returns to the chamber of deputies its proposal (so-and-so), with the accompanying amendments or additions, and is of the opinion that with them it is expedient to request of the emperor his approval for the same." 
ART. 59. If the senate after deliberation is of the opinion that it can not accept the proposal or bill, it will so say in the following terms: "The senate remits to the chamber of deputies proposal so-and-so, to which it can not give its assent." 
ART. 60. The same procedure will be followed by the chamber of deputies with regard to bills originating in the senate. 
ART. 61. If the chamber of deputies does not approve the amendments or additions of the senate, or vice versa, and still regards the measure as advantageous, it may by a deputation of three members request the meeting of the two chambers in joint session, to be held in the senate chamber, and in accordance with the conclusions there reached the necessary further steps will then be taken. 
ART. 62. When either of the two chambers at the close of its discussions accepts in its entirety the bill sent it by the other, it will couch it in the terms of a decree and after being read in session will send it to the emperor in duplicate originals signed by the president and the two first secretaries of the chamber, requesting his approval in the following formula: "The general assembly sends the enclosed decree to the emperor, judging it advantageous and useful to the empire, and petitions your imperial majesty to deign to give it your approval." 
ART. 63. This remittance will be made by a deputation of seven members, sent by the chamber which last considered the bill, which will at the same time inform the other chamber, in which the bill originated, that it has adopted its proposal relating to such matter, and that it has sent the same to the emperor, petitioning him for his approval. 
ART. 64. If the emperor refuses his assent, he will reply in the following terms: "The emperor desires to ponder over the bill to decide upon it in due time." To which the chamber will answer that it praises his imperial majesty for the interest which he takes in the nation. 
ART. 65. This refusal will have merely a suspensive effect; for whenever two legislatures immediately following the one that passed the measure, reenact it for approval in the same terms, the emperor will be considered to have given his approval. 
ART. 66. The emperor will give or withhold his approval for every bill within a month after it has been presented to him. 
ART. 67. If he does not do so within the time indicated, it will have the same effect as though he had expressly refused his approval, so that there may begin to be counted the legislatures in which he may still refuse his approval, or the time when the decree may be considered as in force by reason of his having already refused his approval in two preceding legislatures.
ART. 68. If the emperor accepts the bill of the general assembly he will express his approval as follows: "The emperor assents"; with that which is approved and in the terms in which it is to be promulgated as a law of the empire; and one of the two original copies, after being signed by the emperor, will be sent to the archives of the chamber that sent it, and the other will be used for the promulgation of the law by the respective secretary of state, where it will be preserved. 
ART. 69. The formula for the promulgation of the law shall be conceived in the following terms: "We, Dom -, by the Grace of God and the unanimous acclamation of the people, Constitutional Emperor and Perpetual Defender of Brazil, make known to all our subjects that the general assembly decreed and we desire the following law (the entire text of the law in its provisions only): Therefore we command that all authorities charged with the recognition and execution of the law in question shall obey it and cause it to be obeyed and preserved as completely as determined therein. The secretary of state of (the competent department) causes it to be printed, published, and enter into effect." 
ART. 70. When the law has been signed by the emperor, countersigned by the proper secretary of state, and sealed with the seal of the empire, the original will be retained in the public archives and printed copies sent to all municipal councils of the empire, to all courts and other places where it is necessary that it should be made public.

CHAPTER V.
<title> THE GENERAL COUNCILS OF THE PROVINCES AND THEIR ATTRIBUTES.
ART. 71. The constitution recognizes and guarantees the right of every citizen to take part in the affairs of his province, and that are of immediate concern to his peculiar interests. 
ART. 72. This right shall be exercised by district councils and by boards, which, under the designation of general councils of the province, shall be established in every province except the one in which the capital of the empire is located. 
ART. 73. Each of the general councils shall consist of 21 members in the most populous provinces, such as Pará, Maranhão, Ceará, Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas Geraes, São Paulo, and Rio Grande do Sul; and in the others, of 13 members. 
ART. 74. The elections shall be held at the same time and in the same manner as for the representatives of the nation, and for the duration of each legislature. 
ART. 75. The age of 25 years, honesty, and a decent living are the qualifications necessary for membership in these councils. 
ART. 76. They shall meet in the capital of the province; and in the first preliminary session they shall select a president, vice-president, secretary, and vice-secretary, who will serve for the entire time of the session, and shall examine and verify the legitimacy of the election of their members. 
ART. 77. There shall be annual sessions lasting two months, which may be extended for another month if the majority of the council concurs. 
ART. 78. More than half of the membership of the council must be present in order to have a session. 
ART. 79. The president of the province, his secretary, and the military commander in the province are ineligible for election to the general council. 
ART. 80. The president of the province will assist at the installation of the general council, which will occur on the first day of December, and shall have a place equal with that of the president of the council, and at his right hand; and there he will direct his address to the council, informing it of the state of public affairs and of the measures which the province most needs for its improvement. 
ART. 81. The councils shall have for principal function the proposal, discussion, and consideration of matters of most interest to their provinces, proposing measures peculiar to and adapted to their localities and needs.
ART. 82. The measures which originate in the district councils will be sent officially to the secretary of the general council, where they will be discussed in open sessions, as well as those that originate in the general councils themselves. Their decisions will be taken by an absolute majority of the votes of the members present. 
ART. 83. In these general councils the following matters may neither be introduced nor discussed as bills: 
<list>
1. Those relating to the general interests of the nation. 
2. Those relating to any settlements with other provinces. 
3. Those relating to taxes, the initiative with regard to which falls exclusively to the chamber of deputies. 
4. Those relating to the execution of the laws; but in this regard they should make representations with their grounds simultaneously to the general assembly and the executive power. 
</list>
ART. 84. The resolutions of the general councils will be sent directly to the executive power, through the president of the province as intermediary. 
ART. 85. If the general assembly is in session at this time the respective secretary of state will send the resolutions to it to be introduced as bills and to receive the approval of the assembly in a single discussion in each chamber. 
ART. 86. If the general assembly is not at the time in session, the emperor will order the resolutions temporarily enforced if he considers them deserving of prompt action by reason of the utility that would accrue to the general welfare of the province by their observance. 
ART. 87. If, however, these conditions do not exist, the emperor will declare that he suspends his judgment with regard to that matter. To which the council will reply that it received most respectfully the reply of his imperial majesty. 
ART. 88. As soon as the general assembly convenes, these suspended resolutions will be sent to it, as well as those that may have been put into effect, to be considered and acted upon in the manner prescribed in art. 85. 
ART. 89. The order and manner of business to be followed by the general councils of the province in their activities, as well as their internal and external discipline and order, will all be regulated by rules of procedure enacted for them by the general assembly.

CHAPTER VI.
<title> ELECTIONS.
90. The nomination of deputies and senators for the general assembly and of the members of the general councils of the provinces shall be made by indirect elections, the body of active citizens selecting in parochial assemblies the provincial electors and these the representatives of the nation and the provinces. 
ART. 91. In these primary elections the voters shall comprise: 
<list>
1. Brazilian citizens in the enjoyment of their political rights. 
2. Naturalized foreigners. 
</list>
ART. 92. The following are excluded from voting in parochial assemblies: 
<list>
1. Those below 25 years of age, among whom are not included married men and military officers above the age of 21, bachelors of law, and clericals admitted to the holy orders. 
2. Sons living with their parents, unless they hold public office. 
3. Personal servants, not including bookkeepers and first cashiers of commercial houses, servants of the imperial household not with white sleevebands, and the administrators of country estates and factories. 
4. Members of religious orders and those that live in monastic communities. 
5. Those without a net annual income of 100 milreis from property, industry, commerce, or employment.
</list>
ART. 93. Those who may not vote in the primary assemblies of the parish may not form part of nor take part in the choice of any elective national or local authority 
ART. 94. All those who are qualified to vote in the parochial primary elections may be electors and vote for deputies, senators, and members of the provincial council except: 
<list>
1. Those who have not a net annual income of 200 milreis from property, industry, commerce, or employment. 
2. Freedmen. 
3. Criminals arraigned on complaint or by judicial inquest. 
</list>
ART. 95. All who are permitted to be electors are eligible for deputies except: 
<list>
1. Those without 400 milreis of net income in accordance with arts. 92 and 94. 
2. Naturalized foreigners. 
3. Those not professing the religion of the state. 
</list>
ART. 96. Brazilian citizens wherever they may happen to be are eligible in any electoral district for deputies or senators, even though they were not born there and are neither resident nor domiciled there. 
ART. 97. A law will regulate the process of elections and the number of deputies in relation to the population of the empire.

TITLE V.
<title> THE EMPEROR.
CHAPTER I.
<title> THE MODERATIVE POWER
ART. 98. The moderative power is the key of the whole political organization and is entrusted exclusively to the emperor as supreme chief and first representative of the nation, that he may incessantly watch over the maintenance of the independence, equilibrium, and harmony of the rest of the political powers. 
ART. 99. The person of the emperor is sacred and inviolable; he is not subjected to any responsibility whatsoever. 
ART. 100. His titles are Constitutional Emperor and Perpetual Defender of Brazil, and he is addressed as His Imperial Majesty. 
ART. 101. The emperor exercises the moderative power: 
<list>
1. In appointing the senators in the manner indicated in art. 43. 
2. In convoking the general assembly in the intervals between sessions, when the good of the empire demands it. 
3. In giving his approval to the decrees and resolutions of the general assembly to give them the force of law. 
4. In approving and suspending temporarily the resolutions of the provincial councils. 
5. In extending or adjourning the sessions of the general assembly and in dissolving the chamber of deputies in the cases required for the salvation of the state, convoking immediately another to take its place. 
6. In appointing and removing freely the ministers of state. 
7. In suspending the magistrates in the cases determined in art. 154. 
8. In pardoning or reducing the penalties imposed on convicted criminals.
9. In granting amnesties in urgent cases when counseled by the dictates of humanity and the good of the state.
</list>

CHAPTER II. 
<title> THE EXECUTIVE POWER.
ART. 102. The emperor is the chief of the executive power and exercises it through his ministers of state. Its principal attributes are the following: 
<list>
1. To convoke the new general assembly in regular session on the 3d of May of the third year of the existing legislature.
2. To appoint bishops and incumbents to ecclesiastical benefices. 
3. To appoint the magistrates. 
4. To fill the other civil and political offices. 
5. To appoint the commanders of the military and naval forces and remove them when demanded by the good of the nation. 
6. To appoint ambassadors and other diplomatic and commercial agents. 
7. To direct political negotiations with foreign nations. 
8. To make treaties of offensive and defensive alliance, of aid and commerce, bringing them subsequently to the attention of the general assembly when the interests and security of the state permit it. If treaties concluded in times of peace involve the cession or exchange of territory of the empire or of possessions to which the empire is entitled, they shall not be ratified without the approval of the general assembly.
9. To declare war and make peace, informing the assembly with such communications as are compatible with the interests and security of the state. 
10. To issue naturalization papers in conformity with the law. 
11. To confer titles, honors, military orders, and decorations in recognition of services performed for the state, pecuniary grants depending upon the approval of the assembly, unless already designated and levied by law. 
12. To issue decrees, instructions, and regulations adequate for the proper execution of the laws. 
13. To order the application of the revenues designated by the general assembly for the various branches of public administration. 
14. To grant or withhold approval to conciliar decrees and papal letters and all other ecclesiastical legislation not contrary to the constitution, the approval of the assembly being requisite if they contain general provisions. 
15. To take all necessary measures requisite for the internal and external security of the state, in accordance with the constitution. 
</list>
ART. 103. The emperor before being acclaimed shall take the following oath on the hands of the president of the senate, before a joint meeting of the two chambers: "I swear to maintain the Roman Catholic Apostolic religion, the integrity and indivisibility of the empire, to observe and compel the observance of the political constitution of the Brazilian nation and of the other laws of the empire, and to promote the general welfare of Brazil as far as in me lies." 
ART. 104. The emperor may not leave the empire of Brazil without the consent of the general assembly; and if he does so it will be understood that he has abdicated the crown.

CHAPTER III. 
<title> THE IMPERIAL FAMILY AND ITS MAINTENANCE.
ART. 105. The heir presumptive of the empire shall have the title of Prince Imperial, and his eldest-born that of Prince of Grand Pará; all the others shall have the title of Prince. The heir presumptive shall be addressed as His Imperial Highness, as likewise the Prince of Grand Pará; the other princes shall be addressed as His Highness. 
ART. 106. The heir presumptive upon completing 14 years of age shall take the following oath on the hands of the president of the senate, both chambers sitting in joint session: "I swear to maintain the Roman Catholic Apostolic religion, to observe the political constitution of the Brazilian nation and to obey the laws and the emperor." 
ART. 107. The general assembly immediately upon the emperor's succeeding to the empire will assign to him and to his august spouse, the empress, an allowance corresponding to the respect due to his high dignity.
ART. 108. The allowance assigned to the present emperor and his august spouse shall be increased, seeing that the actual circumstances do not permit of fixing at once an amount suited to the respect due their exalted persons and the dignity of the nation. 
ART. 109. The general assembly will also assign a maintenance for the prince imperial and the other princes upon their birth. The maintenance allowed to the princes will cease only upon their leaving the empire. 
ART. 110. The tutors of the princes will be selected and appointed by the emperor, and the assembly will fix their salaries to be paid by the national treasury. 
ART. 111. In the first session of each legislature the chamber of deputies will require from the tutors an account of the state of progress of their august pupils. 
ART. 112. When the princesses marry, the assembly will assign them a dowry and upon the payment of the same the maintenance allowance will cease. 
ART. 113. The princes who marry and take up their residence outside of the empire will receive for once and all a sum fixed by the assembly, upon which their maintenance allowance will cease. 
ART. 114. The allowance, maintenance, and dowry mentioned in the preceding articles will be paid by the public treasury, delivered to a major domo appointed by the emperor, with whom will be adjusted all active and passive transactions affecting the interests of the royal house. 
ART. 115. The palaces and national lands belonging actually to Dom Pedro I shall always remain in the possession of his successors; and the nation will look after the acquisitions and constructions it may judge suited to the decent support and recreation of the emperor and his family.

CHAPTER IV. 
<title> THE IMPERIAL SUCCESSION. 
ART. 116. Dom Pedro I, by unanimous acclamation of the people, actual Constitutional Emperor and Perpetual Defender, shall always reign in Brazil. 
ART. 117. His legitimate descendants will succeed to the throne in the order of primogeniture and representation, the elder line always being preferred to posterior lines; in the same line the nearer degrees to the more remote; in the same degree the masculine sex to the feminine and in the same sex the elder person to the younger. 
ART. 118. If the line of legitimate descendants of Dom Pedro I becomes extinct, then in the life of the ultimate descendant, and during his reign, the general assembly will select a new dynasty. 
ART. 119. No foreigner may succeed to the throne of the empire. 
ART. 120. The marriage of the princess heir presumptive of the crown shall be made in accordance with the wish of the emperor; if there is no emperor at the time when such marriage is being arranged it can not be consummated without the approval of the general assembly. Her husband shall have no part in the government and shall be called emperor only after having a son or daughter by the empress.

CHAPTER V. 
<title> THE REGENCY DURING THE MINORITY OR INCAPACITY OF THE EMPEROR. 
ART. 121. The emperor is a minor until the completion of 18 years. 
ART. 122. During his minority the empire shall be governed by a regency which shall fall upon the nearest relative of the emperor in the line of succession of more than 25 years of age. 
ART. 123. If the emperor has no relative that fulfills these requirements, the empire shall be governed by a permanent regency, appointed by the general assembly, consisting of three members, the eldest of which shall be president. 
ART. 124. As long as this regency has not been selected, a provisional regency will govern the empire, consisting of the ministers of state and of justice and of the two councilors of state senior in point of service, presided over by the empress, or lacking her, by the oldest councilor of state. 
ART. 125. In case of the death of the reigning empress, this regency will be presided over by her husband. 
ART. 126. If the emperor for a physical or moral reason, clearly recognized by a majority of each of the chambers of the assembly, becomes incapable of governing, the prince imperial will reign in his stead, if he is more than 18 years of age. 
ART. 127. The regent as well as the regency will take the oath mentioned in art. 103, adding the clause of fidelity to the emperor and of turning over the government to him as soon as he reaches majority or his incapacity ceases. 
ART. 128. The acts of the regency and of the regent shall be issued in the name of the emperor by the following formula: "The Regency, or the Imperial Prince Regent, decrees in the name of the Emperor." 
ART. 129. Neither the regency nor the regent shall be responsible. 
ART. 130. During the minority of the successor to the crown, his tutor shall be the one named by his father in his testament; lacking this, the empress mother shall appoint him as long as she remains unmarried; lacking this, the general assembly will appoint the tutor, but no one shall ever be named tutor who is in line for succession to the throne in case of his failure to succeed.

CHAPTER VI.
<title> THE MINISTRY.
ART. 131. There shall be various secretaries of state. The law will designate the matters belonging to each one, and the number of the same; will combine them or divide them as may appear most expedient. 
ART. 132. The ministers of state will countersign all acts of the executive power; without which they may not be carried into effect. 
ART. 133. The ministers of state shall be responsible for: 
<list>
1. Treason. 
2. Bribery, subornation, or peculation. 
3. Abuse of power. 
4. Failure to observe the law. 
5. For working against the liberty, security, or property of citizens. 
6. For any dissipation of public property. 
</list>
ART. 134. A special law will define the nature of these offenses and the manner of proceeding against them. 
ART. 135. The ministers shall not be freed of responsibility by reason of the oral or written order of the emperor. 
ART. 136. Foreigners, even though naturalized, may not be ministers of state.

CHAPTER VII.
<title> THE COUNCIL OF STATE.
ART. 137. There shall be a council of state composed of life councilors appointed by the emperor. 
ART. 138. Their number shall not exceed ten. 
ART. 139. The ministers of state shall not be counted in this number, nor are these to be considered councilors without special appointment to this post by the emperor. 
ART. 140. The same qualifications are required for councilor of state as for senator. 
ART. 141. The councilors of state before assuming office shall swear an oath on the hands of the emperor to maintain the Roman Catholic Apostolic religion; to observe the constitution and the laws; to be faithful to the emperor; to advise him according to their consciences, looking solely to the welfare of the nation.
ART. 142. The councilors shall be heard in all serious matters and general measures of public administration, especially as regards the declaration of war, treaties of peace, negotiations with foreign nations, as well as on all occasions in which the emperor proposes to exercise any of the attributes of the moderative power indicated in art. 101, with the exception of No. 6. 
ART. 143. The councilors of state are responsible for all manifestly false counsel offered the emperor contrary to the laws and the interests of the state. 
ART. 144. The prince imperial shall by right have a seat in the council of state as soon as he completes 18 years of age; the other princes of the imperial house shall be dependent upon appointment by the emperor for admission to the council of state. They and the prince imperial shall not be counted in the number fixed in art. 138.

CHAPTER XIII.
<title> THE MILITARY FORCES.
ART. 145. All Brazilians are obliged to take arms to sustain the independence and integrity of the empire and to protect it against external or internal enemies. 
ART. 146. As long as the general assembly does not fix the permanent military and naval forces, they shall continue as then existing until altered for greater or less by the same. 
ART. 147. The military forces are essentially obedient; they may never assemble unless so ordered by the proper authority. 
ART. 148. It is within the exclusive power of the executive to employ the armed military or naval forces as may seem expedient for the security and defense of the empire. 
ART. 149. The officers of the army and navy may not be deprived of their commissions except by a sentence in a proper trial. 
ART. 150. A special ordinance will regulate the organization of the Brazilian army, its promotions, pay, and discipline, as likewise for the naval forces.

TITLE VI.
<title> THE JUDICIAL POWER.
SINGLE CHAPTER.
<title> THE JUDGES AND COURTS OF JUSTICE
ART. 151. The judicial power is independent and shall consist of judges and jurors, who will take part in civil and criminal cases, in the cases and manner determined by the codes. 
ART. 152. The jurors will pass on the facts, and the judges will apply the law. 
ART. 153. The law judges shall be permanent, by which it is not understood that they may not be transferred from one place to another for the period and in the manner to be fixed by law. 
ART. 154. The emperor may suspend them for complaints lodged against them, having first heard them, secured the necessary information, and the council of state having been heard. The papers relating to them shall be sent to the appellate courts of the respective districts for proceedings in conformity with the law. 
ART. 155. These judges can lose their places only by virtue of a sentence. 
ART. 156. All law judges and judicial officers are responsible for abuses of power and malfeasance committed in the exercise of their offices; this responsibility will be fixed in a regulatory law. 
ART. 157. For subornation, bribery, peculation, and extortion, popular action will lie against them, which may be instituted within a year and a day by the complainant himself or by any individual, following the procedure established by law. 
ART. 158. To try cases in the second and last instance there shall be in the provinces of the empire the appellate courts necessary for the convenience of the people.
ART. 159. In criminal cases the examination of witnesses and all other steps of the proceedings after the commitment shall be public from the start. 
ART. 160. In civil cases and in penalties imposed in civil proceedings, the parties may appoint judges of arbitration. Their decisions shall be executed without appeal, if the parties so agree. 
ART. 161. Unless it appears that conciliation has been tried, no proceedings whatever shall be begun. 
ART. 162. For this purpose there shall be justices of the peace, who shall be elected for the same time and in the same manner as the members of the district councils are chosen. Their powers and districts shall be fixed by law. 
ART. 163. In the capital of the empire, in addition to the appellate court that should exist there as in the other provinces, there shall be a tribunal with the designation of supreme court of justice, composed of learned judges chosen from the appellate courts by seniority and endowed with the title of councilor. In the first organization the judges of the courts to be abolished may be used for this tribunal. 
ART. 164. This tribunal shall have jurisdiction: 
<list>
1. To concede or deny review in the cases and manner determined by law. 
2. To judge the offenses and official faults of its members, the members of the appellate courts, the members of the diplomatic service, and the presidents of the provinces. 
3. To judge and settle conflicts of jurisdiction and competence of the provincial appellate courts.
</list>

TITLE VII.
<title> THE ADMINISTRATION AND ECONOMY OF THE PROVINCES.
CHAPTER I. 
<title> THE ADMINISTRATION.
ART. 165. There shall be in each province a president appointed by the emperor, who may remove him when he believes that the good of the service of the state so requires. 
ART. 166. A law will determine his attributes, competence, and authority, and whatever contributes to the better execution of this administration.

CHAPTER II. 
<title> THE LOCAL COUNCILS.
ART. 167. In all cities and towns now existing, and in those which may hereafter be created, there shall be councils, to whom is assigned the municipal government and administration of such cities and towns. 
ART. 168. The councils shall be elective and composed of the number of aldermen determined by law, and he who obtains the largest number of votes shall be the president. 
ART. 169. The exercise of their municipal functions, the enactment of their police ordinances, the application of their revenues, and all their special and general powers shall be fixed by a regulatory law.

CHAPTER III. 
<title> THE NATIONAL FINANCES.
ART. 170. The collection and expenditure of the national finances shall be entrusted to a tribunal under the name of the national treasury, in which in the various steps duly established by law there shall be regulated the administration, collection, and accounting of the same, in mutual relations with the treasuries and authorities of the provinces of the empire. 
ART. 171. All direct taxes, save those to be applied to the interest payments and sinking fund of the national debt, shall be fixed annually by the general assembly but shall continue until their repeal is made public or they are superseded by others. 
ART. 172. The minister of state of finances, having received from the other ministers their budgets relating to the expenditures of their respective departments, shall present to the chamber of deputies each year immediately upon the convening of the same a general balance of receipts and expenditures of the national treasury for the preceding year, and likewise the general budget of all public expenditures for the coming year, and the amount of all taxes and public revenues.

TITLE VIII.
<title> GENERAL PROVISIONS AND GUARANTIES OF THE CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS OF BRAZILIAN CITIZENS.
ART. 173. The general assembly at the commencement of its sessions shall inquire whether the constitution of the state has been scrupulously observed, in order to proceed as may be required. 
ART. 174. If four years or more after the constitution of Brazil has been duly sworn to, it is apparent that any of its articles need amendment, the proposal shall be made in writing, originating in the chamber of deputies, and supported by a third of their number. 
ART. 175. The proposal shall be read three times with intervals of six days between each two readings; and after the third reading the chamber of deputies will decide whether the proposal is admissible, after which will follow all the steps requisite for the passage of a law. 
ART. 176. Having been taken under consideration and the necessity of an amendment having been recognized, a law will be passed to be approved and promulgated by the emperor in the usual fashion, and in which it will be signified to the electors for deputies in the subsequent legislature that in their mandates they confer special power upon the deputies for the proposed amendment. 
ART. 177. In the following legislature, in the first session, the matter shall be introduced and discussed, and whatever is adopted will prevail for the addition to or alteration of the fundamental law; and being added to the constitution will be solemnly promulgated. 
ART. 178. Only that which relates to the limits and respective attributes of the public powers and to the political and individual rights of the citizens is constitutional; everything that is not constitutional may be changed, without the formalities referred to, by the ordinary legislatures. 
ART. 179. The inviolability of the civil and political rights of Brazilian citizens, which rest upon liberty, individual security, and property, is guaranteed by the constitution of the empire in the following manner: 
<list>
1. No citizen may be obliged to do or refrain from doing anything except by virtue of law. 
2. No law shall be enacted without a public benefit. 
3. Its effect shall not be retroactive. 
4. All are permitted to communicate their thoughts by words, writings and by publications in print without dependence upon censorship, the while they must respond for the abuses they may commit in the exercise of this right, in the cases and manner to be determined by law. 
5. No one may be persecuted by reason of religion, so long as he respects that of the state and does not offend public morals. 
6. Everyone is free to remain in or depart from the empire, taking with him his belongings, the police regulations being observed and saving damage to a third. 
7. Every citizen possesses in his home an inviolable asylum. At night no one may enter therein without his consent or to protect it from fire or flood; and by day entry shall be permitted only in the cases and manner established by law.
8. No one may be arrested without formal charge, except in the cases determined by law; and in such cases the judge shall by a writing signed by him inform the accused of the reason for his imprisonment, the names of his accusers and of any witnesses there may be, within 24 hours counting from his introduction into the jail, in cities, towns, and other places near the residence of the judge, and in the places remote from such residence within a reasonable time which will be fixed by law, having in view the extent of the territory. 
9. Even when formally charged, no one shall be taken to prison or kept there after being arrested if he offers the requisite bail in the cases in which the law permits it; and in general in the crimes which involve no penalties greater than six months of imprisonment or exile from the district, the accused may freely bail himself out. 
10. Except in flagrante delicto imprisonment can be executed only upon written order of the competent authority. If this imprisonment was an arbitrary one the judge who ordered it and the one who demands it shall be punished as determined by law. That which relates to arrest before formal accusation does not include military orders, established as necessary for discipline and recruiting in the army, nor cases that are not purely criminal but in which nevertheless the law orders the imprisonment of any person for disobeying the orders of a court or for failing to perform obligation within the time fixed. 
11. No one shall be sentenced save by the competent authority by virtue of an existing law and in the manner prescribed therein. 
12. The independence of the judicial power shall be maintained. No authority may remove from the courts a pending case, or quash it, or revive finally adjudicated cases. 
13. The law shall be equal for all, whether for protection or punishment, and shall reward each according to his merits. 
14. Every citizen can be admitted to public civil political or military offices without any other distinction than that based on his capacity or worth. 
15. No one shall be excused from contributing to the expenses of the state in proportion to his possessions. 
16. All special privileges are abolished which are not necessary and wholly bound up with the office for public purposes. 
17. Except in cases which by their nature fall to special judges, in conformity with the law, there shall be no exceptional tribunals nor special commissions for either civil or criminal cases. 
18. There shall immediately be enacted a civil and a criminal code, founded on the solid bases of justice and equity. 
19. From now on there are abolished scourging, torture, branding, and all other cruel punishments. 
20. No penalty shall extend beyond the person of the offender. Therefore, there shall in no case occur the confiscation of goods nor shall the infamy of the criminal be transferred to relatives in any degree whatsoever. 
21. The jails shall be safe, clean, and well-aired, there being separate buildings for the separation of offenders, according to their circumstances and the nature of their crimes. 
22. The right of property is guaranteed in its entirety. If the public good, legally established, requires the use or employment of the property of a citizen, he shall be previously indemnified for the value thereof. The law will determine the cases in which this single exception may occur, and will fix the rules for estimating the indemnity. 
23. The public debt is likewise guaranteed.
24. No kind of labor, cultivation, industry, or commerce may be forbidden, once it is not opposed to public customs, security, or health of the citizens. 
25. The professional corporations, their judges, clerks and masters are abolished. 
26. Inventors shall have the property in their discoveries or productions. The law will assure them a temporary exclusive privilege, or will reimburse them in reparation of the loss they may incur by reason of making them a general property. 
27. The secrecy of letters is inviolable. The administration of the posts is strictly responsible for any violation of this article. 
28. The rewards for services rendered the state, whether civil or military, are guaranteed, as also the right to them acquired in conformity with the laws. 
29. Public employees are strictly responsible for abuses and omissions practiced in the exercise of their functions and for not making the responsibility of their subordinates effective. 
30. Any citizen may present in writing to the legislature or to the executive, reclamations, complaints, or petitions, and even expose any infraction of the constitution, demanding before the competent authority the effective responsibility of the infractors. 
31. The constitution likewise guarantees public charity. 
32. Primary instruction is free to all citizens. 
33. Colleges and universities shall be established where the elements of science, literature, and arts shall be taught. 
34. The constitutional powers may not suspend the constitution in the parts referring to individual rights, except in the cases and circumstances specified in the following paragraph: 
35. In cases of rebellion or invasion by enemies, if the security of the state demands the suspension for a definite time of some of the formalities which guarantee individual liberty, this may be done by special act of the legislative power. If, however, the legislature is not in session at the time and the country is in imminent danger, the government may exercise this same power, as a provisional and indispensable measure, suspending it as soon as the urgent necessity which prompted it ceases, in either case submitting to the assembly, as soon as it meets, a report justifying the imprisonments and other preventive measures taken, and whatever authorities ordered their employment shall be responsible for the abuses practised in this regard.
</list>