Whereas, the legitimate aspirations of the Brazilian people for political and social peace, seriously disturbed by manifest factors of disorder, created by growing party dissensions, which a malicious demagogic propaganda attempted to transform into class warfare, and which, through the extreme force attained by the ideological conflicts, tended, in its natural process of development, to solve itself by violence, thus subjecting the Nation to the imminent threat of a disastrous civil war; 
Whereas, the state of apprehension caused throughout the country by the infiltration of communism, which was growing daily more widespread and deeper, calls forth for a remedy, both radical and permanent in character; 
Whereas, the previously existing institutions did not furnish the State with the normal means for preserving and defending the peace, the safety and the well-being of the people; 
With the support of the armed forces and yielding to the dictates of public opinion, both justifiably apprehensive of the dangers threatening the Union and of the swiftness with which our civil and political institutions were being undermined; 
Now, therefore, it is resolved to insure to the Nation its unity, its honor, and its independence and to the people of Brazil, under a regime of political and social peace, the necessary conditions for their security, their welfare, and their prosperity; 
The President of the Republic of the United States of Brazil decrees the following Constitution, which comes into effect as from this date, throughout the country;
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES OF BRAZIL<title>
The National Organization<title>
Art. 1. 
Brazil is a republic. Political power emanates from the people and is exercised in their name and in the interest of their well-being, their honor, their independence, and their prosperity. 
Art. 2. 
The use of the national flag, hymn, coat-of-arms and shield is obligatory throughout the country. There will be no other flags, hymns, shields, and coat-of-arms. The use of these national symbols will be regulated by law.Art. 3. 
Brazil is a Federal State, constituted by the indissoluble union of the States, the Federal District, and the Territories. The existing political and territorial divisions are maintained. 
Art. 4. 
The Federal Territory comprises the territories of the States and those directly administered by the Union, and may be increased with such new territories as may be acquired in accordance with the rules of International Law. 
Art. 5. 
The States may incorporate themselves, divide or dismember their territories in order to be annexed to another State or to form new States, after obtaining the consent of their respective Legislative Assemblies in two yearly consecutive sessions and with the approval of the National Parliament. 
Sole paragraph-The resolution of Parliament may be submitted by the President to a plebiscite of the inhabitants so concerned. 
Art. 6. 
The Union may create, in the interest of national defense, out of parts dismembered from the States, Federal Territories, whose administration will be regulated by a special law. 
Art. 7. 
The present Federal District, so long as it shall continue to be the seat of the Government of the Republic, will be administered by the Union. 
Art. 8. 
Each State is to organize its own services to meet its own particular interests and must pay for them out of its own resources. 
Sole paragraph-A State which, for three consecutive years fails to collect sufficient revenue to maintain these services, shall be transformed into a Territory until its financial capacity shall have been reestablished. 
Art. 9. 
The Federal Government may intervene in the State, through the nomination, by the President of the Republic, of an interventor, who will assume, in the State, those functions which according to its Constitution, belong to the Executive Power, or those which, in accordance with the necessities and the requirements of each case, are given him by the President of the Republic: 
<list_1>
a) to prevent the imminent invasion of the National Territory by a foreign country or of one State by another, as well as to repeal both forms of invasion; 
b) to reestablish order which has been seriously disturbed in those cases in which the State will not or cannot do so; 
c) to administer the State, when, for any reason whatsoever, one of its powers shall be prevented from functioning;
d) to reorganize the finances of a State which has suspended, for more than two consecutive years, the servicing of its funded debt, or which has failed to liquidate, after more than one year in arrears, the loan contracted with the Union. 
e) to assure the execution of the following constitutional principles: 
<list_2>
1. republican and representative form of government; 
2. presidential government; 
3. rights and guarantees assured by the Constitution. 
</list_2>
f) to insure the execution of Federal laws and sentences. 
</list_1>
Sole paragraph-The power to decree intervention rests with the President of the Republic in cases foreseen in sections, a, b, and c; with the Chamber of Deputies in cases foreseen in sections d and e; with the President of the Republic, when petitioned by the Supreme Federal Tribunal, in cases foreseen in section f. 
Art. 10. 
The State shall have the obligation to provide the necessary measures, within their respective jurisdictions, to carry out such commercial treaties as the Union may enter into. Should they fail to do this within a reasonable time, the legislative power for such measures will devolve upon the Union. 
Art. 11. 
A law, when initiated by Parliament, will be limited to regulate the matter, in general terms, passing only upon the substance and principles which constitutes its object. The Executive Power will issue the supplementary regulations. 
Art. 12. 
The President of the Republic may be authorized by the Parliament to issue decree-laws in accordance with the conditions and within the limits fixed by the act of authorization. 
Art. 13. 
The President of the Republic, during the recess of Parliament or during the dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies, may, if the necessities of the State should require such action, issue decree-laws regarding material within the legislative capacity of the Union, excepting the following: 
<list>
a) amendments in the Constitution; 
b) electoral legislation; 
c) budget; 
d) taxation; 
e) institute monopolies; 
f) currency; 
g) public loans; 
h) alienation and mortgaging the property of the Union.
</list>Sole paragraph-Decree-laws, in order to be issued, will depend upon the opinion of the National Economic Council, on those matters within its consultative capacity. 
Art. 14. 
The President of the Republic, when complying with the dispositions of the Constitution and within the limits of the respective budget appropriations, may freely issue decree-laws regarding the organization of the Government and of the Federal Administration, the supreme command and the organization of the armed forces. 
Art. 15. 
The Union will have sole jurisdiction: 
<list>
I, to maintain relations with foreign countries, to nominate the members of the diplomatic and consular corps, to enter into treaties and international conventions; 
II, to declare war and to make peace; 
III, to decide definitely regarding the limits of the National Territory; 
IV, to organize the external defense, the armed forces, the police, and the safety of the frontiers; 
V, to authorize the production of and to supervise the commerce of war material of whatever nature; 
VI, to maintain the postal service;
VII, to exploit or to give in concession the telegraph services, radio-communication and aerial navigation, including landing facilities, as well as the railway systems which directly link maritime ports with the national frontiers or which cross State limits; 
VIII, to create and to maintain Custom Houses and warehouses and to provide for the services of maritime and port police; 
IX, to determine the basis and fix the scope of national education, organizing the programs which should be followed for the physical, intellectual, and moral formation of childhood and youth; 
X, to take a general census of the population; 
XI, to grant amnesty. 
</list>
Art. 16. 
The Union shall have the sole jurisdiction to legislate on the following matters: 
<list>
I, the limits of the States between themselves, those of the Federal District and those of the National Territory with neighboring nations; 
II, the external defense, including the policing and safety of the frontiers; 
III, the naturalization, entry and departure from National Territory, emigration and immigration, passports, expulsion of foreigners from the National Territory and the prohibition of remaining or staying temporarily in same, extradition; 
IV, the manufacture and commerce of arms, munitions, and explosives; 
V, the public well being, order, tranquility and safety, when conditions demand a uniform regulation; 
VI, federal finances, questions of currency, of credit, of exchanges, and of banking; 
VII, foreign and inter-State commerce, exchange and transfer of funds abroad; 
VIII, monopolies or nationalization of industries; 
IX, the weights and measures, standards, title and guarantee of precious metals; 
X, mail, telegraph, and radio communications; 
XI, communication and transportation by rail, by water, by air, or highways, whenever they have either au international or inter-State character;
XII, coastwise transportation of merchandise, which will be permitted only on national ships; 
XIII, Custom Houses and warehouses; maritime, port, and river police; 
XIV, Federal property, mines, metallurgy, hydraulic power, water rights, forests, hunting and fishing, and their exploitation; 
XV, the unification and standardization of electrical establishments and installations, as well as safety measures to be adopted in the electric power industry; the high tension lines, when these cross-State limits; 
XVI, the civil, commercial, aerial, labor, penal, and judiciary codes; 
XVII, the insurance regulation and its supervision; 
XVIII, the theatrical and cinematographical regulation; 
XIX, cooperatives and institutions for keeping and investing the savings of the people; 
XX, Copyright law, the press, the rights of association, of meeting, of free circulation; questions of civil status, including civil registration and change of name; 
XXI, the rights of invention as well as patents, the protection of models, trademarks, and other designation of merchandise;
XXII, the judiciary division of the Federal District and of the Territories; 
XXIII, electoral matters affecting the Union, the States, and the Municipalities; 
XXIV, the control of national education;
XXV, amnesty;
XXVI, organization, training, justice, and guarantee of the police forces of the States and their use as Army reserves; 
XXVII, the fundamental rules of defense and protection of public health and particularly of the health of children. 
</list>
Art. 17. 
On matters of the exclusive jurisdiction of the Union, the law may delegate to the States the power to legislate either to regulate or to cover the omissions in the Federal legislation, in matters which concern predominantly one or more States. In this case the law voted by the State Assembly only comes into effect when approved by the Federal Government.
Art. 18. 
Independent of authorization, the States may legislate, even if there is a Federal law upon the subject, in order to cover the deficiencies or to meet local particularities, provided that such legislation does not dispense with, nor diminish the exigencies of the Federal law or, in the event that no Federal law exists, and until there is one, upon the following subjects: 
<list>
a) sub-soil resources, mining, metallurgy, water, hydroelectric power, forests, hunting and fishing, and their exploitation; 
b) radio communications; their regulation, excepting the provision set forth in section 75 of Article 16; 
c) public relief, public hygiene, sanitariums, clinics, health resorts, and medicinal springs; 
d) public organizations for the purpose of extra-judicial conciliation between litigants or arbitration; 
e) police measures for the protection of plants and herds, against disease or noxious agents; 
f) agricultural credit, including cooperatives for farmers; 
g) judicial or extra-judicial procedure; 
</list>
Sole paragraph-Both in the cases covered in this, as well as in the preceding Article, provided that the Federal Legislative Power or the President of the Republic shall have issued laws or regulations covering the subject matter, the State law will have no effect in those parts in which it is incompatible with the Federal law or regulation.
Art. 19. 
The law may establish that services under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government may be executed by the States; in this case the Federal Executive Power will issue the regulations and instructions which the States must observe in carrying out these services. 
Art. 20. 
The Union will have sole jurisdiction: 
<list_1>
I, to decree taxes: 
<list_2>
a) on the importation of merchandise from abroad; 
b) on the consumption of any kind of merchandise; 
c) on income or receipts of whatsoever nature; 
d) on the transfer of funds abroad; 
e) on services executed by its Government, business under its control, and its instruments or contracts regulated by Federal law; 
f) in the Territories, those which are allowed the States by the Constitution; 
</list_2>
II, collect telegraphic and postal taxes and those for other Federal services; for the entry and clearance of ships and airplanes; coastwise trade will be free for domestic merchandise and for foreign merchandise which has already paid the export duty. 
</list_1>
Art. 21. 
The States shall have sole jurisdiction: 
<list>
I, to decree the Constitution and the laws which are to govern them; 
II, to exercise all and every right which is not expressly or implicitly denied by the present Constitution. 
</list>
Art. 22. 
The States may enter into agreements with the Federal Government, to delegate to functionaries of the Union, the execution of laws, services, acts or decisions of their government. 
Art. 23. 
The States shall have exclusive jurisdiction: 
<list_1>
I, to decree taxes on: 
<list_2>
a) all territorial property, except urban; 
b) the transfer of property in "causa mortis"; 
c) the transfer of property "inter vivos," including its incorporation to the capital of a corporation; 
d) sales and consignments made by merchants or producers; in the case of sales by small producers, as defined in State laws, they will be exempt; 
e) on the exportation of merchandise of its own production up to a maximum of 10 percent "ad valorem," all additionals being forbidden;
f) on industries and professions; 
g) on acts emanating from their government, business under their control or regulated by State law; 
</list_2>
II, to collect taxes on State services. 
<list_3>
§ 1. Tax on sales shall be uniform, irrespective of the source, purpose, or type of merchandise. 
§ 2. The tax on industries and professions shall be assessed by the State, and collected by the State and Municipality in equal parts. 
§ 3. In exceptional cases, and with the consent of the Federal Council, the export tax may be temporarily increased beyond the limits of letter "e" of section I. 
§ 4. The tax on the transmission of corporeal property will belong to the State in whose territory it is located; and the transmission "causa mortis" of incorporeal property, including securities and credits to the State in which the succession occurs. When this has occurred in another State or abroad, the tax shall be payable to the State in whose territory the inheritance shall have been liquidated or transferred to the heirs. 
</list_3>
</list_1>
Art. 24. 
The States may create other forms of taxation. Double taxation is, however, forbidden, and the tax decreed by the Union will prevail where the jurisdiction is concurrent. It is within the province of the Federal Council, either on its own initiative or at the request of the tax-payer, to declare that there is double taxation, and suspend the collection of the State tax. 
Art. 25. 
The National Territory shall constitute one single unit, from the commercial, economic, and Customs point of view; no Customs barriers or other traffic restrictions may be established; States, as well as Municipalities, are therefore forbidden to collect, under any denomination whatsoever, inter-State, inter-Municipal, transit, or transport taxes, which will hinder the free circulation of goods and persons and the vehicles which transport them. 
Art. 26. 
The Municipalities are to be organized in such a manner as to assure them autonomy in all that concerns their special and peculiar conditions, particularly: 
<list>
a) the choice of councilors by direct suffrage o registered voters, according to law; 
b) to decree such taxes and imposts as provided by the present Constitution and the Constitution and Laws of the States; 
c) the organization of public services of local character.
</list>
Art. 27. 
The Mayors shall be nominated by the Governor of the State. 
Art. 28. 
Besides the attributes given to them by Article 23, paragraph 2, of the present Constitution and those which may be transferred to them by the State, the Municipalities shall have: 
<list>
I, license taxes; 
II, tenement tax, as well as urban land tax; 
III, taxes on public amusements; 
IV, taxes on municipal services.
</list>
Art. 29. 
Municipalities in the same region may join together for the installation, exploitation and administration of common public service. The group, thus formed, will be considered a judicial entity, limited to its purposes. 
Sole paragraph-The State will have the power to regulate the conditions in which such grouping can be made, as well as their administration. 
Art. 30. 
The Federal District will be administered by a Mayor, nominated by the President of the Republic, with the approval of the Federal Council, and who may be dismissed "ad nutum"; the Federal Council having the deliberative functions. The sources of revenue of the Federal District are the same as those of the States and Municipalities, it being responsible for all expenditures of local character. 
Art. 31. 
The administration of the Territories will be regulated by a special law. 
Art. 32. 
The Union, the States, and the Municipalities are forbidden: 
<list>
a) to create any distinction between natural born Brazilians or inequalities between the States and the Municipalities; 
b) to establish, subsidize, or hinder the exercise of religious cults; 
c) to tax goods, income, or services of each other. Sole paragraph-Public service concessions will enjoy no tax exemption, except those which may have been granted this privilege by special law and for the public welfare. 
</list>
Art. 33. 
No Federal, State or Municipal authority, may refuse to give full credit to the documents emanating from one another. 
Art. 34. 
The Union is forbidden to decree taxes which are not uniform throughout the National Territory or which discriminate in favor of the ports of one State against those of another.
Art. 35. 
It is forbidden to the States, to the Federal District and to the municipalities: 
<list>
a) to refuse to grant to other States or to the Territories, the extradition of criminals, when petitioned by their respective Courts to do so, in accordance with the laws of the Union; 
b) to establish tax discrimination or of any other sort between goods or merchandise because of its source of origin; 
c) to contract foreign loans without the previous consent of the Federal Council. 
</list>
Art. 36. 
The following are under the Federal dominion;
<list>
a) the property belonging to the Union under the terms of the laws now in force; 
b) lakes and streams on the lands of its dominion, or which touch more than one State, or serve as boundaries with other countries or which extend into foreign territories; 
c) river and lake islands in the frontier zones. 
</list>
Art. 37. 
The following are under state dominion: 
<list>
a) all property of the States, according to the terms of the present legislation, with the exception of the restrictions of the preceding article: 
b) the margins of navigable rivers and lakes, devoted to public use, provided they do not fall, by any title, to Federal, Municipal, or private dominion. 
</list>
The Legislative Power<title> 
Art. 38. 
The Legislative Power is exercised by the National Parliament, with the cooperation of the National Economic Council and that of the President of the Republic; the former by means of opinions and recommendations concerning subjects within its consultive province and the latter by the initiative and sanction of the projects and the promulgation of the decree-laws authorized by this Constitution. 
§ 1. The National Parliament is composed of two Chambers: the Chamber of Deputies and the Federal Council. 
§ 2. No one can belong to both the Chamber of Deputies and to the Federal Council at the same time. 
Art. 39. 
The Parliament shall meet in the Federal Capital, independently of convocation, on the third of May of each year, provided another date is not designated by law and shall last for a period of four months, counting from the day of its opening, and its sessions can only be extended, postponed, or extraordinarily convened, on the initiative of the President of the Republic. 
§ 1. During these extensions, as well as during the extraordinary sessions, Parliament may only legislate on matters indicated in the President's act prolonging or convening the session. 
§ 2. Each legislative term of office will last four years. 
§ 3. Vacancies which may occur will be filled by supplementary elections in the case of the Chamber of Deputies, and by nomination or election, as the case may be, with regard to the Federal Council. 
Art. 40. 
The Chamber of Deputies and the Federal Council are to function separately and, unless resolved to the contrary, by majority vote in public sessions. Decisions in both Chambers will be arrived at by majority vote; the presence of an absolute majority of members constitutes a quorum. 
Art. 41. 
Each of the Chambers will have the power: 
<list>
to elect its officers, and committees; 
to organize its Internal procedure; 
to establish its own internal police service; 
to nominate its own clerical staff; 
</list>
Art. 42. 
During the period in which Parliament meets, none of its members may be arrested or criminally indicted without the permission of the respective Chamber, except in cases "in flagrante" for crimes for which bail is refused by law. 
Art. 43. 
Only to his respective Chamber is a member answerable for the opinions expressed and the votes cast while in the exercise of his mandate; however, he will not be exempt from civil and criminal proceeding for acts of defamation, slander, libel, and outrage to public moral, nor for the public provocation to crime. 
Sole paragraph-In case of manifest acts against the existence or independence of the Nation or the incitement to violence, subversion of the political or social order, either of the Chambers may, by a majority vote, declare vacant the chair of the deputy or member of the Federal Council, author of such acts or incitement. 
Art. 44. 
Members of Parliament are forbidden: 
<list>
a) to enter into contracts with the Federal, State, or Municipal administration; 
b) to accept or exercise remunerative posts, except diplomatic missions of extraordinary character;
c) to occupy any administrative or consultive position, or to be the owner or partner in any corporation, concessionaire of any public service, or of any corporation, enterprise, or company which enjoys favors, privileges, exemptions, revenue guarantees or subsidies from the public power;
d) to occupy any post from which he may be dismissed "ad nutum "; 
e) to plead before the Courts against the Union, the States, or the municipalities. 
</list>
Sole paragraph-During the interval between sessions, a member of Parliament may reassume the public office which he may have occupied. 
Art. 45. 
Either of the Chambers or any of their committees may summon any Minister of State to furnish explanations as to matter subject to their jurisdiction. The Minister, independently of any convocation, may ask either of the Chambers of Parliament, or any of their committees, to designate a day and an hour to be heard upon questions subject to the deliberation of the Legislative Power. 
The Chamber of Deputies<title> 
Art. 46. 
The Chamber of Deputies is composed of the representatives of the people, elected by indirect suffrage. 
Art. 47. 
The voters are the Councilors of the Municipal Chambers and, in each municipality, ten citizens elected by direct suffrage at the time the Municipal Chamber is ejected. 
Sole paragraph-Each State shall constitute an electoral circumscription. 
Art. 48. 
The number of deputies for each State shall be in proportion to the population and will be fixed by law; it cannot exceed ten nor be less than three for each State. 
Art. 49. 
It is within the province of the Chamber of Deputies to initiate all debates and votings of tax laws and the determination of land and sea forces, as well as all laws which tend to increase expenditures. 
The Federal Council<title> 
Art. 50. 
The Federal Council is composed of representatives of the States and of ten members nominated by the President of the Republic. The term of office will be six years.
Sole paragraph-Each State, through its own Legislative Assembly, will elect one representative. The Governor of the State has the right to veto the Assembly's nominee; in such a case the veto can only be overridden and the nominee definitely confirmed by a majority of two-thirds vote of all the members of the Assembly. 
Art. 51. 
The representatives of the States must be natural born citizens and at least thirty-five years old, registered voters, and must have occupied, for a period of at least four years, a Government office in the Union or in the States. 
Art. 52. 
The appointments made by the President of the Republic must necessarily fall on natural born citizens, at least thirty-five years old who have distinguished themselves in some branch of national production or culture. 
Art. 53. 
The Federal Council has power to legislate for the Federal District and for the Territories, on matters of the interest which concerns them in particular. 
Art. 54. 
The Federal Council will introduce, debate, and vote on projects concerning: 
<list>
a) international treaties and conventions; 
b) international and inter-State commerce; 
c) port regulations and coastwise navigation. 
</list>
Art. 55. 
It is also within the province of the Federal Council to: 
<list>
a) approve the appointments of Justices to the Supreme Federal Tribunal and to the Tribunal of Accounts, of diplomatic representatives, except of envoys on extraordinary missions; 
b) approve the agreements entered into between the States. 
</list>
Art. 56. 
The Federal Council will be presided over by a Minister of State, designated by the President of the Republic. 
The National Economic Council<title>
Art. 57. 
The National Economic Council is to be composed of representatives of the various branches of national production, chosen from persons qualified by their special ability, by professional associations or syndicates recognized by law, and insuring an equal representation of employers and employees alike. 
Sole paragraph-The National Economic Council will be divided into five sections: 
<list>
a) the section of industry and crafts;
b) the section of agriculture; 
c) the section of commerce; 
d) the section of transportation; 
e) the section of credit. 
</list>
Art. 58. 
The designation of the representatives of the associations or syndicates is made by the respective superior deliberative bodies. 
Art. 59. 
The National Economic Council will be presided over by a Minister of State, designated by the President of the Republic. 
§ 1. The President of the Republic will also have the power to appoint three members for each section of the National Economic Council, selecting them from persons qualified by their special capacity. 
§ 2. At the meetings of the various sections, organs, and committees or in General Assembly of the Council, when special authorization is granted by the President of the Republic, the Members of his Cabinet, Directors of Ministries, representatives of the State Governments, may participate, but may not vote; likewise and without the right to vote, representatives of the associations and syndicates of high standing in some branch of national production may participate in the meetings when matters of their special interest are being considered. 
Art. 60. 
The National Economic Council will organize its permanent technical council, and may, further, contract the services of experts for the study of certain problems submitted to its opinion or concerning the investigations recommended by the Government or necessary in drafting projects of their own initiative. 
Art. 61. 
The following are attributes of the National Economic Council: 
<list_1>
a) to promote the corporative organization of national economy; 
b) to establish rules for the assistance given by associations, syndicates, or institutions; 
c) to draw up rules for collective contracts of labor between syndicates of the same category of production or between associations representing two or more categories; 
d) to report on all projects, whether initiated by the Government or by either of the Chambers, which directly interest national production; 
e) to organize, either by its own initiative or at the request of the Government, investigations concerning the conditions of labor, agriculture, industry, commerce, transportation, and credit, with a view of increasing, coordinating, and perfecting national production; 
f) to prepare the basis for the foundation of research institutes which, considering the diversity of the economic, geographic, and social conditions of the Country, shall have for their object: 
<list_2>
I, to rationalize the organization and administration of agriculture and industry; 
II, to study the problems of credit, distribution, and sale and those relating to the organization of labor; 
</list_2>
g) to report on all questions relative to the organization and recognition of syndicates and professional associations; 
h) to propose to the Government the creation of corporative institutions of professional activities. 
</list_1>
Art. 62. 
The basis referred to in letters "b" and "c" of the preceding Article, will only become effective if approved by the President of the Republic. 
Art. 63. 
At any time, powers may be vested in the National Economic Council, through a plebiscite to be regulated by law, to legislate on certain or all matters pertaining to their special province. 
Sole paragraph-The initiative in calling the plebiscite will be within the power of the President of the Republic, who will specify in the respective decree, the conditions under which and the matters upon which, the National Economic Council may legislate. 
Laws and Resolutions<title> 
Art. 64. 
The initiative for all projects belongs, in principle, to the Government. In no case, can any project or amendment be discussed if they concern taxation or if either would result in an increase in expenditures. 
§ 1. No one member may initiate a project of law. This initiative may only be taken by one third of the Deputies or by an equal number of members of the Federal Council. 
§ 2. Any project initiated in either of the Chambers will be suspended as soon as the Government communicates its intention of presenting a project treating the same matter. If, within a period of thirty days, the Government project does not reach the Chamber to which the communication was made, the project initiated by Parliament may be again discussed. 
Art. 65. 
All projects of law which affect national economy, in any of its branches, must be submitted to the National Economic Council before being discussed by Parliament. 
Sole paragraph-Projects initiated by the Government and which have been favorably reported on by the National Economic Council, will be submitted for a single reading by each Chamber. The Chamber to which the projects are submitted will limit its action to either accepting or rejecting them. Before discussion in the Legislative Chamber, the Government may withdraw the projects or amend them, consulting the National Economic Council once more, if the modifications entail substantial alterations. 
Art. 66. 
The project of law, adopted by one of the Chambers, will be submitted to the other and, the latter, if it gives its approval, will forward it to the President of the Republic, who, if he acquiesces, will sanction and promulgate it. 
§ 1. When the President of the Republic considers that a project is, totally or in part, unconstitutional or contrary to the best interest of the Nation, he may veto it "in toto" or in part, within thirty working days, counting from the day it was presented to him, provided that, within this same period, he returns the aforesaid project to the Chamber from which it was received, together with a statement giving his reasons for vetoing it. 
§ 2. The passage of the thirty-day period without action on the part of the President of the Republic will be equivalent to sanction of the project. 
§ 3. If the project is returned to the Chamber where it was initiated, it will be submitted to a single reading and vote and will be considered approved, ii it obtains two thirds of the votes of the members present. In this eventuality, the project will be remitted to the other Chamber, which, if approved by the same process, and by the same majority, will have its text published in the official paper as law. 
Preparation of the Budget<title> 
Art. 67. 
Under the Presidency of the Republic, there will be an Administrative Department, organized by decree of the President, with the following attributes: 
<list>
a) the detailed study of all Government departments, agencies, and establishments, in order to determine, from the standpoint of increased economy and efficiency, the changes which should be introduced in their organization, their distribution and arrangement, their budgetary provisions, methods of proper working order, their relationship with one another and with the public as well; 
b) to organize, in accordance with the instructions of the President of the Republic, the yearly budgetary estimates to be sent by him to the Chamber of Deputies; 
c) to supervise, by order of the President of the Republic, and in accordance with his instructions, the execution of the budget; 
</list>
Art. 68. 
There will be a single budget, obligatorily incorporating to the receipts, all sources of income, taxes, and the revenue of funds and, to the expenditures, all the necessary budgetary provisions to cover the cost of the Government. 
Art. 69. 
The apportionment or specific allotment of expenditures shall be detailed, individually, for each branch of the Government. 
§ 1. When organizing the budgetary estimates, the Administrative Department will prepare, for each branch of the Government, an itemized chart of the apportionment or specific allotment of the expenditures which each and every one is authorized to make. These charts will be sent to the Chamber of Deputies, attached to the Budget, merely for the Chamber's information and as an explanatory aid in voting the lump sums of the budgetary appropriations. 
§ 2. After the Budget has been voted upon, and if the Government's proposals have been altered, the charts referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be modified accordingly and, the President of the Republic, in accordance with the proposal furnished him by the Administrative Department, may, during the course of the year, authorize modifications of the charts of apportionments and specific allotments, by items, as long as the lump sum of the budgetary provisions, voted by Parliament, for each service, is not exceeded. 
Art. 70. 
The Budget may not contain any disposition other than those included in the estimated revenue and expenditure, fixed for each service and previously established; in this prohibition, the following measures are excluded: 
<list>
a) authorization to open supplementary credits and credit operations in anticipation of receipts; 
b) application of the balance and the method for covering deficits. 
</list>
Art. 71. 
The Chamber of Deputies will be granted forty-five days to vote on the Budget, counting from the date on which it receives the Government's proposal; the Federal Council, for the same purpose, will be granted a period of twenty-five days, counting from the day of expiration of the period granted to the Chamber of Deputies. The period granted to the Chamber o Deputies to make its pronouncement on any amendments made by the Federal Council, is fifteen days, counting from the date on which the period granted to the Federal Council terminates. 
Art. 72. 
The President of the Republic will publish the Budget: 
<list>
a) in the form in which it was sent him by the Chamber of Deputies, if both Chambers keep their deliberations within the periods specified above; 
b) in the form voted by the Chamber of Deputies, if the Federal Council fails to terminate its deliberations within the period specified above; 
c) in the form voted by the Federal Council, if the Chamber o Deputies has exceeded the period allocated to it for voting on the Government's proposals and the amendments made by the Federal Council; 
d) in the form of the proposals presented by the Government, if both Chambers have not terminated, within the prescribed period, the voting of the budget. 
</list>
The President of the Republic<title> 
Art. 73. 
The President of the Republic, the supreme authority of the State, will coordinate the activities of the representative organs, direct internal and external policy, and promote or direct the legislative policy judged best to the national interest and supervise the administration of the Country. 
Art. 74. 
The President of the Republic will have sole jurisdiction: 
a) to sanction, promulgate, and publish the laws and issue decrees and regulations for their execution; 
b) to issue decree-laws, in accordance with the terms of Articles 12 and 13. 
c) to maintain relations with foreign States; 
d) to enter into international conventions and treaties, "ad referendum" to the Legislative Power; 
e) to exercise the supreme command of the armed forces of the Union, by administering them through the organs of the high command;
f) to decree the mobilization of the armed forces; 
g) to declare war, after receiving authorization from the Legislative Power, and, independently of authorization, in the event of foreign invasion or aggression; 
h) to make peace" ad referendum" to the Legislative Power; 
i) to permit, upon authorization by the, Legislative Power, the passage of foreign force across National Territory; 
j) to intervene in the States and carry out the intervention therein, within the terms of the Constitution; 
k) to decree a state of emergency and a state of war, according to the terms of Article 166; 
l) to f1 Federal posts, save the exceptions foreseen in the Constitution and in the laws; 
m) to authorize Brazilian citizens to accept pensions, employment, or commissions from a foreign government; 
n) to determine the provisional execution, pending the approval of Parliament, of treaties and international conventions in the event of the Country's interests rendering such a course advisable. 
</list>
Art. 75. 
The following are prerogatives of the President of the Republic: 
<list>
a) to nominate one of the candidates to the Presidency of the Republic; 
b) to dissolve the Chamber of Deputies in the eventuality foreseen in the sole paragraph of Article 167; 
c) to appoint the Ministers of State; 
d) to designate the members of the Federal Council, which are to be chosen by him; 
e) to adjourn, prorogate, or convene Parliament; 
f) to exercise the right of pardon. 
</list>
Art. 76. 
The official acts of the President of the Republic must be subscribed by his Cabinet, except those performed by virtue of his prerogatives and which do not require "referenda." 
Art. 77. 
In cases of temporary incapacity or official visits to foreign countries, the President of the Republic will designate his substitute from among the members of the Federal Council. 
Art. 78. 
Should, for any motive, the Presidency of the Republic become vacant, the Federal Council will elect, from within its members, the provisional President, on the same day on which the vacancy occurs or on the day immediately following, who will convoke for the fortieth day, counting from the day of his election, the Electoral College of the President of the Republic. 
§ 1. In the event the election of the provisional President cannot be effected in the period specified above, the President of the Federal Council will assume the Presidency of the Republic, until the election of the provisional President, by the Federal Council, takes place. 
§ 2. The President-elect will commence a new Presidential term. 
§ 3. The provisional President cannot use the prerogative, of letter "a" of Article 75. 
Art. 79. 
If within a period of sixty days after his election, the President has not assumed his office, the Federal Council shall decree the vacancy of the Presidency and shall proceed to hold a new election. 
Art. 80. 
The presidential term of office is six years. 
Art. 81. 
The eligibility requirements of the President of the Republic are to be a natural born citizen and at least thirty-five years old. 
Art. 82. 
The Electoral College of the President of the Republic is composed of: 
<list>
a) the electors, designated by the Municipal Chambers, each State electing a number of electors in proportion to its population; however, no State may exceed the maximum number of twenty-five; 
b) fifty electors, designated by the National Economic Council chosen, in equal numbers, among employers and employees; 
c) twenty-five electors, designated by the Chamber of Deputies and twenty-five by the Federal Council, from among outstanding citizens. 
</list>
Sole paragraph-Members of the National Parliament or of the Legislative Assemblies of the States, cannot be designated as electors of the President of the Republic. 
Art. 83.
The Electoral College of the President of the Republic will be organized ninety days before the expiration of the Presidential term. 
Art. 84. 
The Electoral College shall meet in the Capital of the Republic twenty days before the expiration of the presidential term of office and shall choose its candidate to the Presidency of the Republic. In the event the President of the Republic does not use his prerogative of indicating a candidate, the choice of the Electoral College shall be declared elected.
Sole paragraph-In the event of the President of the Republic indicating a candidate, the election shall be by direct and universal suffrage, between the two candidates. In this case, the President of the Republic shall have his term of office prolonged until the conclusion of the elections and the inauguration of the President-elect. 
The Responsibilities of the President of the Republic<title> 
Art. 85. 
Acts of the President which will be considered crimes for which he must answer, are those defined in law which attempt against: 
<list>
a) the existence of the Union; 
b) the Constitution; 
c) the free exercise of political powers; 
d) the administrative probity and the care and/or employment of public funds; 
e) the execution of judicial decisions. 
</list>
Art. 86. 
The President of the Republic shall be arraigned before the Federal Council, after a two-thirds vote of the Chamber of Deputies approves the accusation. 
§ 1. The Federal Council can only apply one penalty: the loss of office with disqualification for a period limited to a maximum of five years, in which he cannot hold any public office, without prejudice to the civil and criminal prosecutions which may be warranted. 
§ 2. A special law will define the "crimes of responsibility" of the President of the Republic and will regulate his indictment, prosecution, and sentence. 
§ 3. The President of the Republic cannot, during his term of office, be held responsible for acts extraneous to the same. 
The Ministers of State<title> 
Art. 88. 
The President of the Republic will be assisted by Ministers of State, men of his confidence, who will jointly endorse his acts. 
Sole paragraph-Only natural born citizens, more than twenty-five years old, can be Ministers of State. 
Art. 89. 
The Ministers of State are not responsible either to Parliament or before the Tribunals, for advices given to the President of the Republic.
§ 1. They are responsible, however, as far as their acts are concerned, for crimes qualified in law. 
§ 2. In regard to common law crimes and those "of responsibility" they shall be indicted and judged by the Supreme Federal Tribunal and, in those relating to the President of the Republic, by the authority competent to judge him. 
The Judiciary<title>
PRELIMINARY DISPOSITIONS<title>
Art. 90. 
The following are the organs of the Judiciary Power: 
<list>
a) the Supreme Federal Tribunal; 
b) the Justices and Tribunals of the States, of the Federal District, and of the Territories; 
c) The Military Justices and Tribunals. 
</list>
Art. 91. 
Save for the restrictions expressly made in the Constitution, the Justices enjoy the following guarantees: 
<list>
a) life-long tenure of office, in virtue of which the appointment may only be terminated by judicial sentence, by resignation or retirement which becomes compulsory on attaining sixty-eight years of age or for reasons of proved physical incapacity through ill-health; it also becomes optional in cases of public service rendered to the State for more than thirty years, in accordance with the terms of the law; 
b) the irremovability of office, save by acceptance of promotion or by his own request, or by a two-thirds vote of the active Justices of the Tribunal immediately superior, in the public interest; 
c) the irreducibility of salary, which is, however, subject to taxation. 
</list>
Art. 92. 
Judges, even when not in active service, may not exercise any other public function. Violation of this provision entails the loss of office as a Justice and all the corresponding advantages. 
Art. 93. 
The Tribunals will have power to: 
<list>
a) elaborate the internal regulations, organize the clerical departments, the archives and other auxiliary services, and to propose to the Legislative Power the creation or suppression of positions and the establishment of the respective salaries; 
b) grant leave of absence, in accordance with the terms of the law, to their members, to the Judges and to the Court officials, which are directly subordinate to them.
</list>Art. 94. 
The Judiciary cannot pass upon questions which are exclusively political. 
Art. 95. 
The payments due by the Federal Treasury, in virtue of judiciary sentences, shall be effected in the chronological order in which the sentence is handed down and for the account of the respective credits; it is forbidden to designate either the case or the person on the credit opened for this purpose, or in the budgetary provisions. 
Sole paragraph-The budgetary provisions and the credits voted for payments due, by virtue of judiciary sentences, from the Federal Treasury, shall be consigned to the Judiciary Power and the sums thereof deposited in the public funds. The orders of payment will be issued by the President of the Supreme Federal Tribunal, for sums up to the limit of the deposit, and at the request of a creditor who has been disregarded in his right of precedence, authorize the seizure of the sum necessary to satisfy him, after having consulted the Attorney General of the Republic. 
Art. 96. 
Only by the absolute majority of the total vote of its Justices can the Tribunals declare laws or the acts of the President of the Republic unconstitutional. 
Sole paragraph-In the event of a law being declared unconstitutional which in the judgment of the President of the Republic is necessary to the well-being of the people, to the promotion or defense of a national interest of great importance, the President of the Republic may again submit it to Parliament; if this is confirmed by a two-thirds vote in both Chambers, the decision of the Tribunal will have no effect.
THE SUPREME FEDERAL TRIBUNAL<title>
Art. 97. 
The Supreme Federal Tribunal, whose seat is in the Capital of the Republic and whose jurisdiction is the whole of the National Territory, shall be composed of eleven Ministers. 
Sole paragraph-At the request of the Supreme Federal Tribunal, the number of Ministers may be legally increased to sixteen; it is forbidden, however, in any case, to reduce the number. 
Art. 98. 
The Ministers of the Supreme Federal Tribunal shall be nominated by the President of the Republic, and approved by the Federal Council; they must be natural born citizens, of outstanding legal knowledge and of immaculate reputation, and be over thirty-five and under fifty-eight years of age.
Art. 99. 
The Attorney General of the Republic will be the head of the Federal Public Ministry, which shall function in conjunction with the Supreme Federal Tribunal. His nomination and dismissal is the exclusive jurisdiction of the President of the Republic; the nominee must have the same qualifications as required for Ministers of the Supreme Federal Tribunal. 
Art. 100. 
For "crimes of responsibility" the Ministers of the Supreme Federal Tribunal shall be indicted and tried by the Federal Council. 
Art. 101. 
The Supreme Federal Tribunal will have power to: 
<list_1>
I, indict and judge in the first instance: 
<list_2>
a) the Ministers of the Supreme Tribunal; 
b) the Ministers of State, the Attorney General of the Republic, the Justices of the Tribunal of Appeal of the States, of the Federal District and of the Territories, the Ministers of the Tribunal of Accounts and the Ambassadors and Ministers of the diplomatic service in common law crimes and in those "o responsibility," save, in so far as Ministers of State and Ministers of the Supreme Federal Court are concerned, the exceptions foreseen in the final clause of section 2 of Article 89 and Article 100; 
c) suits and disputes between the Union and the States, or between the latter; 
d) litigation between foreign nations and the Union or the States; 
e) disputes as to jurisdiction between Justices and or Tribunals of the different States, including those of the Federal District and of the Territories; 
f) the extradition of criminals, requisitioned by other nations and the confirmation of foreign sentences; 
g) cases of "habeas-corpus," when the petitioner or the coercer, tribunal, functionary, or authority, whose acts are directly subordinate to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, or when it refers to a crime subject to this same jurisdiction without appeal; and, further, ii there is danger that a violence may be perpetrated before another Justice or Tribunal can hear the petition; 
h) the execution of sentences of their immediate jurisdiction with the option to delegate the indictment acts to a lower Justice. 
</list_2>
II, to judge: 
<list_3>
1, actions to set aside their judgments; 
2, ordinary appeals:
<list_4>a) in cases in which the Union is interested as plaintiff or defendant, as assistant or opponent; 
b) judgments from the final or sole instance denying the "habeas corpus "; 
</list_4>
</list_3>
III, to judge, on special appeal, cases decided by local Justices in sole or final instance; 
<list_5>
a) when he decision is against the letter of the treaty or Federal law, over whose application there is litigation; 
b) when there is litigation, as to the constitutionality of a Federal law and the decision of the local Tribunal has denied the application made against the law; 
c) when there is litigation as to the constitutional validity of a law or act of the local Government, or of a Federal law, and the decision of the local Tribunal has upheld the validity of the law or the act complained of; 
d) when the final decisions of the Tribunals of Appeal of the different States, including those of the Federal District or of the Territories, or when final decisions of one of these Tribunals and the Supreme Federal Tribunal give to the same Federal law different interpretation. 
</list_5>
</list_1>
Sole paragraph-In cases foreseen in No. II, letter "b," an appeal may also be made by the President of any of the Tribunals or by the Public Ministry. 
Art. 102. 
The President of the Supreme Federal Tribunal shall have power to concede "exequatur" to letters rogatory of foreign justices.
THE COURTS OF JUSTICE OF THE STATES, THE FEDERAL DISTRICT AND THE TERRITORIES<title>
Art. 103. 
The States shall have the power to legislate as to the division and organization of their Judiciary system and to fill the respective positions, observing the rules set forth in Articles 91 and 92 and also the following principles: 
<list>
a) ingress to the lower courts shall be made alter competitive examinations have been held by the Tribunal of Appeals, who will submit to the State Government a list containing the names of the three candidates who have obtained the highest classification, if those qualifying have exceeded this number;b) ingress to the higher courts shall be by promotions, either by seniority of class or merit, subject to the provisions of Article 105; 
c) the number of Justices of the Tribunal of Appeals can only be altered by motion of the Tribunal, duly justified; 
d) the salaries to be paid to the Justices of the Tribunal of Appeals may not be inferior to those paid to the Secretaries of the State; with regard to salaries of the other Justices, there must never be a difference greater than thirty per cent between one category and the next, nor shall the category immediately below that of the Justices of the Tribunal of Appeals be inferior to two thirds of the salary of the latter; 
e) the Tribunal of Appeals shall have sole jurisdiction to try and judge the Justices of lower Courts for common law crimes and for those "of responsibility"; 
f) in the event that the seat of the Court is moved, the Justice has the option, if he does not wish to accompany it, to withdraw from active service on full pay. 
</list>
Art. 104. 
The States may create elective Justices of the Peace and determine their powers; however, with the right to appeal from their sentences to Superior Courts. 
Art. 105. 
In organizing the higher Courts, one fifth of the membership shall be constituted by lawyers or members of the Public Ministry of outstanding merit and immaculate reputation; the Tribunal of Appeals shall draw up an appropriate list in triplicate of those qualified. 
Art. 106. 
The States may create Justices with their tenure of office limited both as to time and to scope, for the judging of petty cases, to prepare such cases as are beyond their province and to substitute life tenure judges. 
Art. 107. 
With the exception of cases which must be brought before the Supreme Federal Tribunal, all others shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Courts of the States, the Federal District, and Territories. 
Art. 108. 
When suit is brought by the Union, or against the Union, the trial must take place in the Court located in the Capital of the State in which the defendant, or the plaintiff, reside. 
Sole paragraph-When suits in which the Union is interested either as assistant or opponent are filed before other Justices, the trial must take place in one of the Courts located in the Capital of the Republic.
Art. 109. 
In decisions handed down by Courts of original jurisdiction in which the Union is interested either as plaintiff, or defendant, as assistant or opponent, appeal will be direct to the Supreme Federal Tribunal. Sole paragraph-The Law will regulate the jurisdiction and the procedure in suits brought by the Union to collect its active debts and may empower the Public Ministry of the States to represent, in Court, the National Treasury. 
Art. 110. The law may establish, in specific cases, the original jurisdiction of the Tribunals of Appeal.
MILITARY JUSTICE<title>
Art. 111. 
The military and persons having an equivalent status will have a special Court to try military offenses. The jurisdiction of these Courts may be extended to include civilians, in cases duly defined by law, for crimes committed against the external security of the country or against military institutions. 
Art. 112. 
The organs of Military Justice are the Supreme Military Tribunal and the lower Tribunals and Justices, created by law. 
Art. 113. 
The irremovability guaranteed to military Justices does not relieve them of the obligation to accompany the forces to which they are attached. 
Sole paragraph-It is within the province of the Supreme Military Tribunal to determine the removal of military Justices when the public interest so demands.
THE TRIBUNAL OF ACCOUNTS<title>
Art. 114. 
A Tribunal of Accounts is created, whose members are nominated by the President of the Republic with the approval of the Federal Council, to accompany, either directly or through delegations, organized according to the terms of the law, the execution of the Budget, to pass judgment on the accounts rendered by those responsible for public monies or properties, and the legality of all contracts made by the Union. The Ministers of the Accounting Tribunal will have the same guarantees extended to the Ministers oí the Federal Supreme Tribunal. 
Sole paragraph-The organization of the Tribunal of Accounts is to be regulated by law.
Nationality and Citizenship<title> 
Art. 115. 
The following are Brazilians: 
<list>
a) those born in Brazil, even of a foreign parent, except when residing in the Country in service of his Government; 
b) the children of Brazilians, man or woman, born in a foreign country while the parents are residing there in the service of Brazil and, in cases other than these, if, on attaining majority, they chose Brazilian nationality; 
c) those who acquired Brazilian nationality in the terms of Article 69, Nos. 4 and 5, of the Constitution of February 24th, 1891; 
d) naturalized citizens. 
</list>
Art. 116. 
A Brazilian loses his nationality: 
<list>
a) when he voluntarily acquires another nationality by naturalization; 
b) when, without permission of the President of the Republic, he accepts a remunerative commission or employment from a foreign government; 
c) when, after due legal process, he has his naturalization revoked for exercising political or social activity, noxious to the national interest. 
</list>
Art. 117. 
Brazilians of both sexes, who have attained the age of eighteen, are voters, if they have been registered according to the law. Sole paragraph-The following may not be registered as voters: 
<list>
a) the illiterate; 
b) the military on active service; 
c) the beggars; 
d) those who have been deprived either temporarily or definitely, of political rights. 
</list>
Art. 118. 
Political rights may be suspended: 
<list>
a) for civil incapacity;
b) for sentence of a crime, while its effects are in force. 
</list>
Art. 119. 
Political rights are lost: 
<list>
a) for the motives set forth in Article 116; 
b) for the refusal, arising from religious, philosophical, or political convictions, to accept any post, service, or obligation imposed by law upon Brazilians; 
c) for the acceptance of a title of nobility or foreign decoration, when this implies a restriction to the rights assured by this Constitution or is incompatible with the duties imposed by law.
</list>Art. 120. 
The law will establish the conditions for the reacquisition of political rights. 
Art. 121. 
Persons not allowed to register are ineligible for office, except officers of the armed forces on active service who, although are not registered, are eligible to office. 
Individual Rights and Guarantees<title> 
Art. 122. 
The Constitution assures to all Brazilians and foreigners, residing in the country, the right to liberty, to individual security, and to ownership, under the following terms: 
<list_1>
I, all are equal before the law; 
II, all Brazilians enjoy the right of free circulation throughout the National Territory and can fix their residence at any point and there acquire real estate and freely exercise their activities; 
III, public offices are equally accessible to all Brazilians, observing the requirements as to capacity prescribed in the laws and regulations; 
IV, all individuals and religious sects may freely and publicly exercise their cult, meet for this purpose and acquire real estate, observing the provisions of common law, and the requisites of public order and good usage; 
V, the cemeteries shall be secular in character and shall be administered by the municipal authorities; 
VI, the inviolability of domicile and correspondence, save in those cases expressly excepted in law; 
VII, the right to denounce or petition the authorities, in defense of rights or general interests; 
VIII, freedom of choice as to profession or type of work, industry, or commerce, observing, however, the conditions of capacity and the restrictions imposed by law for the general welfare; 
IX, liberty of association, as long as the objectives are neither contrary to the penal code nor to good usage;" 
X, all have the right to organize public meetings, if peaceful and without weapons. Open air meetings may be required to submit to the formality of declaring their purpose and may be prohibited in case of imminent danger to public safety; 
XI, except in the case of "flagrante delicto," arrest can only be effected after indictment, save in specific cases in law, and with a written warrant issued by a competent authority. No one may be kept in prison without due process of law and in the form regulated by law; at the preliminary criminal hearing, the parties must be heard, assuring, both before and after the indictment, the necessary defensive guarantees; 
XII, no Brazilian may be extradited at the request of a foreign government; 
XIII, there will be no life sentences. The penalties established or set forth in a new law, cannot be retroactive. In addition to cases foreseen in the military legislation during war time the law may apply the death penalty for the following crimes: 
<list_2>
a) to attempt to surrender the Nation's territory or a part of it to the sovereignty of a Foreign State; 
b) to attempt, with the aid or subsidy of a Foreign State, or of organization of international character, against the unity of the Nation, seeking to dismember the territory subject to its sovereignty; 
c) to attempt, by means of an armed movement, the dismemberment of the National Territory, provided that war measures are necessary to repress it; 
d) to attempt, with the help or subsidy of a Foreign State or of an organization of international character, to change the political or social order established by the Constitution; 
e) to attempt by violent means to subvert the political and social order, with the purpose o gaining possession of the State, for the establishment of the dictatorship of a social class; 
f) for homicide committed from futile motives or with extreme perversity. 
</list_2>
XIV, the right to own property, save for disappropriation for public needs or public good or utility and then only by previous indemnization. Its nature and limits shall be defined in the laws which regulate its use; 
XV, all citizens have the right to express their thoughts, orally, in writing, in print or pictorially, within the conditions and limits fixed by law. The law may prescribe: 
<list_3>
a) in order to guarantee peace, order, and public safety, the censorship of the press, of the theater, of the cinema, and radio broadcasting; the competent authority having the right to prohibit the circulation, the broadcast, or the performance; 
b) measures to prevent meetings contrary to public morals and good usage, as well as those especially directed against the protection of childhood and youth; 
c) measures for the protection of the public interest, the well-being of the people and the safety of the State. 
</list_3>
A special law will regulate the press, in accordance with the following principles: 
<list_4>
a) the functions of the press will be considered as of a public character; 
b) no journal can refuse to publish Government communications, within the limits fixed by law;
c) to every citizen is guaranteed the right to have printed, gratuitously, in any paper which slanders or defames him, a reply, defense, or correction; 
d) anonymity is prohibited; 
e) the responsible director will be subject to prison sentence and the publishing company to a fine, for violations; 
f) the machinery, types, and other typographical equipment, used in the printing of the paper, constitute the guarantee for the payment of the fine, reparation, or indemnity and for the expenses of the suit in which publication is condemned for violation of the law, except such eventual benefits as may be enjoyed, in virtue of a labor contract between the publishing company with its employees. The guarantee may be substituted by a bond deposited at the beginning of each year, the amount of which will be fixed by the competent authority, in accordance with the nature, the importance and the circulation of the paper; 
g) foreigners as well as companies whose shares are issued to bearer, cannot be owners of journalistic enterprises; it is also forbidden the former, as well as judicial entities, to be shareholders of such companies. The management of papers, as well as their intellectual, political, or administrative direction, may only be exercised by natural born Brazilians. 
</list_4>
XVI, "habeas-corpus" will always be granted when anyone who suffers or finds himself in imminent danger of suffering violence or illegal coercion, as to his liberty of coming and going, save in the case of disciplinary punishment; 
XVII, crimes directed against the existence, the safety, or the integrity of the State, the care and investment of the savings of the people, shall be submitted to trial and judgment before a special tribunal in the form which the law may prescribe.
</list_1>
Art. 123. 
The specification of guarantees and rights mentioned above does not exclude other guarantees and rights, resulting from the form of government and the principles set forth in the Constitution. The use of these rights and guarantees shall be limited to the public welfare, the rights and the necessities for the protection of the well-being of the country, the general peace and order, as well as the demands of the Nation's safety and that of the State. 
The Family<title> 
Art. 124. 
The family, constituted by indissoluble marriage, is under the special protection of the State. Large families will be granted compensation in proportion to their necessities. 
Art. 125. 
The complete education of their offspring is the first duty and the natural right of parents. The State will not hold itself aloof to this duty, but will collaborate, either in a principal or secondary manner, in order to facilitate the execution or to meet the deficiencies and omissions of private education. 
Art. 126. 
To natural children, in order to facilitate their recognition, the law will grant them equality with legitimate children, extending to the former the same rights and duties which the parents have to the latter. 
Art. 127. 
Childhood and youth must be the object of special care and guarantee on the part of the State, which will take all measures to assure them physical and moral conditions of healthy life and the harmonious development of their faculties. 
The moral, intellectual, or physical abandonment of childhood and youth indicates a grave fault on the part of those who are responsible for their safeguard and education and imposes, of the State, the burden of providing the necessary comfort and care of their physical and moral preservation. Indigent parents have the right to invoke the aid and protection of the State for the maintenance and education of their offspring. 
Education and Culture<title> 
Art. 128. 
Art, science, and their teachings are open to the initiative of the individual or to that of associations, both public and private. 
It is the duty of the State to contribute, both directly and indirectly toward the stimulation and development of them, assisting or founding artistic, scientific, and educational institutions. 
Art. 129. 
To the childhood and youth who lack the necessary resources to obtain an education in private institutions, it is the duty of the Nation, the States, and the Municipalities, to assure them, by founding public educational institutions of all grades, the possibility of receiving an education adequate to their abilities, aptitudes, and vocational tendencies. Pre-vocational and professional education designed for the classes less favored, is the first duty of the State. It should carry out this duty by founding institutions of professional instruction and subsidizing those established on the initiative of States, Municipalities, and individuals or private or professional associations. 
It is the duty of industrial and economic syndicates to create, in its own particular sphere, apprentice schools for the children of their workmen or their associates. The law will regulate the fulfillment of this duty, the power which belongs to the States regarding such schools, as well as the assistance, facilities, and subsidies which the public authorities will grant them. 
Art. 130. 
Primary education is obligatory and free. Those better favored are not thereby excluded from the duty of helping those less favored; thus, on matriculation, each student will be asked to make a moderate monthly contribution for the school fund, unless he alleges, or it is evident, that he is unable to do so. 
Art. 131. 
Physical education, civic teachings, and manual training, will be obligatory in all primary, normal, and secondary schools; no school of any of these grades will either be approved or recognized without meeting this requirement. 
Art. 132. 
The State will found institutions or will give assistance and protection to those founded by civic associations, both with the same objective of organizing, for the youth, annual period of work in the fields and workshops, so as to promote moral discipline and physical development, in such a manner as to fit them to fill their duties toward the well-being and defense of the Nation. 
Art. 133. 
Religious instruction can be included in the curriculum of primary, normal, and secondary schools. However, it may not be made au obligatory subject for teachers or professors, nor attendance be made compulsory for the pupils. 
Art. 134. 
The historical, artistic, and natural monuments, as well as the scenery or the localities particularly favored by nature, will enjoy the protection and special care of the Nation, of the States, and of the Municipalities. Offenses committed against these, will be considered equivalent to offenses committed against national property.
The Economic Order<title> 
Art. 135. 
In private initiative, in the creative power of the individual to organize and to invent, exercised within the limits of the public welfare, lies the richness and prosperity of the Nation. The intervention of the State in the economic field is only legitimate in so far as it supplies the deficiencies of private initiative and coordinates the factors of production, in such a manner as to avoid or solve their conflicts and to introduce, into the play of individual competition, the thought of the interests of the Nation, represented by the State. 
The intervention in the economic field may be either direct or indirect, in the form of control, incentive or direct management. 
Art. 136. 
Labor is a social duty. Intellectual, technical and manual labor has the right to the protection and special care of the State. 
To all is guaranteed the right to exist by means of their honest toil, which, as the means of individual subsistence, constitutes an asset which is the duty of the State to protect, guaranteeing to him favorable conditions and means of protection. 
Art. 137. 
Labor legislation will observe, in addition, the following principles: 
<list>
a) collective labor contracts made with legally recognized associations of employers, workers, artists, and experts, shall be binding to all the employees, workers, artists, and experts which they represent; 
b) collective labor contracts must stipulate their duration, the amount and form of wage, the internal discipline and the hours of work; 
c) the form of wage shall be that which is most appropriate to the requirements of the workers and the company; 
d) the workman shall have the right to a weekly rest on Sundays, and, when the technical requirements or needs of the company will allow, on civic and religious holidays, in accordance with local tradition; 
e) after one year of uninterrupted service in a company, the worker shall have the right to an annual vacation with pay; 
f) in continually operating companies, the cessation of employment, to which the worker has not been the cause, and when the law does not guarantee him stability of employment, entitles him to a compensation proportionate to his years of service; 
g) in continually operating companies, the change in ownership does not rescind the labor contract; the employees retaining, in relation to the new employer, the rights which they had in relation to his predecessor; 
h) a minimum wage, which will satisfy, in accordance with the conditions of each region, the normal necessities of labor; 
i) a working day of eight hours, which may be reduced but can only be increased in the cases provided by law; 
j) night work, except in cases where it is done regularly by shifts, shall be remunerated with a rate superior to that of day work; 
k) prohibition of work by children less than fourteen years of age; of night work by children under sixteen and, in industries detrimental to health, of children under eighteen and women; 
l) medical and hygienic assistance to the worker and to the pregnant mother, assuring to the latter a period of rest before and after the confinement, without loss of salary; 
m) the institution of old age, invalid, and life insurance and insurance for accident in line of duty; 
n) workmen's associations are obliged to render their associates aid and assistance, in regard to administrative and judicial procedure relating to work accident insurance and social insurance. 
</list>
Art. 138. 
Professional or trade association is free. However, only a syndicate legally recognized by the State, has the right to be the legal representative of those who participate in that category of production for which it was constituted, and to defend their rights before the State and the other professional associations, to enter into collective labor contracts, binding on all their associates, to levy contributions and to exercise towards them the functions delegated by the public authority. 
Art. 139. 
In order to diminish disputes arising between employers and employees, regulated in the social legislation, there is created a labor judicial procedure which will be regulated by law and to which will not apply the provisions of this Constitution, as to province, enrollment, and the prerogatives of common justice. 
The strike and lock-out are declared anti-social instruments, harmful to labor and to capital and incompatible with the superior interests of national production. 
Art. 140. 
Production will be organized in corporations and these, as representative entities of the forces of national labor, placed under the aid and protection of the State, are the organs of the State and exercise functions delegated by the public authority.Art. 141. 
The law will encourage savings by the people, assuring to them special guarantees. Crimes committed against the savings of the people, are considered equal to crimes committed against the State, the law imposing grave penalties and prescribing a form of indictment and trial, which will assure its prompt and adequate punishment. 
Art. 142. 
Usury shall be punished. 
Art. 143. 
Mines and other sub-soil wealth, as well as waterfalls, constitute property distinct from ownership of the soil for purposes of exploitation or industrial use. The industrial use of mines and mineral deposits, of streams and waterpower, even when privately owned, is dependent on federal authorization. 
I, this authority may only be given to Brazilians; or to organizations composed of Brazilian shareholders, the proprietor having the preference in the exploitation or in the participation in the profits; 
II, the use of waterpower of small output and for the sole use of the owner does not require authorization; 
III, the States with their respective territories will exercise the attributes of this article provided that they satisfy the conditions established by law among which that of possessing the necessary technical and administrative services; 
IV, waterfalls already in industrial use on the date of this Constitution, as well as the exploitation of mines under the same conditions, even if temporarily closed down, do not require authorization. 
Art. 144. 
The law will regulate the progressive nationalization of mines, mineral deposits and waterfalls or other sources of power, as well as these industries considered basic or essential to the economic or military defense of the Nation. 
Art. 145. 
Banks of Deposit and Insurance Companies may only operate in Brazil if their shareholders are Brazilians. Banks of Deposit and Insurance Companies already authorized to operate in the country will be given a reasonable period in which to comply with the requirements of this article. 
Art. 146. 
Organizations which are concessionaries of Federal, State or Municipal services, must have their management contain a majority of Brazilians or to delegate all the powers of management to Brazilians. 
Art. 147. 
The federal law will regulate the supervision and revision of the rates of public services, operated by virtue o concessions, so that capital may receive, for the general good, a just and adequate return and also attend properly to the demands for expansion and betterment of the services. 
The law will apply to concessions made during the previous regime as to the contractual rates fixed for the entire life of the contract. 
Art. 148. 
Any Brazilian who, not being either a rural or urban landowner, shall occupy continuously, for ten years, without opposition nor recognition of other ownership, a plot of land not exceeding ten hectares, and makes it productive with his own labor, and having his dwelling thereon, will acquire ownership, through a declaratory judgment, duly registered. 
Art. 149. 
The proprietors, charterers and commanders of national ships, as well as the crews, on a two-thirds basis, must be natural born citizens; harbor, port, river, and lake pilots must be, likewise, natural born citizens. 
Art. 150. 
The liberal professions can only be exercised by natural born and naturalized citizens who have done their military service in Brazil, excepting those who are legally exercising their profession on the date of this Constitution and the cases of international reciprocity admitted by law. Only natural born citizens are allowed to revalidate professional diplomas, issued by foreign institutions of learning. 
Art. 151. 
The entry, distribution, and settlement of immigrants on National Territory will be subject to the requirements and conditions which the law shall determine; in no case may the immigration from each country exceed, in any one year, the limit of two per cent of the total of its nationals residing in Brazil during the previous fifty years. 
Art. 152. 
Inheritance of property of foreigners, situated in Brazil, shall be regulated in the national law in favor of the Brazilian spouse and of the children of the marriage, provided that the statute of "de cujus" is not more favorable. 
Art. 153. 
The law will determine the percentage of Brazilian employees which must, necessarily, be maintained in the public services, operating under a concession, and in industrial and commercial firms and establishments. 
Art. 154. 
The rights of Indians to the possession of the lands on which they are permanently located, will be respected; they are, however, forbidden to alienate them.
Art. 155. 
No concession of lands of more than ten thousand hectares may be made, without obtaining, in each case, previous authorization of the Federal Council. 
Public Employees<title> 
Art. 156. 
The Legislative Power will organize a Statute of Public Employees, which will obey the following principles, and which are in force, as from this date: 
<list>
a) the roster of public employees includes all persons occupying public positions, created by law, irrespective of the form of payment; 
b) the first appointment in career posts will be made by competitive examination or by diplomas; 
c) public employees, after two years' service, when nominated by virtue of competitive examinations, and in all other cases, after ten years of service, can only be dismissed by virtue of a judicial sentence or administrative process, in which he may have the right to be heard and allowed to defend himself; 
d) public employees, on attaining the age of sixty-eight years, shall be compulsorily retired; the law may reduce the age limit for special categories of employees, in accordance with the nature of the service; 
e) incapacity preventing the discharge of his duty or position, shall determine his retirement, which will be granted on full pay, if the employee has more than thirty years of effective service; the period for the granting of the retirement for incapacity, may be reduced in cases defined in the law; 
f) employees, who shall have been incapacitated as a result of an accident in the pursuit of his duties, shall be retired with full pay, whatever the length of his service may be; 
g) the benefits of retirement may never and shall under no circumstances, exceed those of active service; 
h) employees shall have the right to yearly vacations, without loss of pay, and the pregnant mother shall have three months' leave on full pay. 
</list>
Art. 157. 
If, in the opinion of a disciplinary commission, appointed by the Minister or Head of the Department, a civil employee, who is enjoying the guarantee of stability of employment should be removed from active employment for the good of the service, he may be placed on the retirement list, with pay proportional to his length of service, provided that the case is not such as to warrant the penalty of dismissal. 
Art. 158. 
Public employees are jointly responsible to the National, State or Municipal Treasuries, for any loss due to negligence, omission or abuse in the exercise of the duties of their post. 
Art. 159. 
The accumulation of remunerated public positions in the services of the Union, of the States, and of the Municipalities, is forbidden. 
Military Forces<title> 
Art. 160. 
The law will organize the regulations for the Army and Navy, obeying, among others, the following principles, which go into effect as from this date: 
<list>
a) any member of the military who, while in the active service of the armed forces, accepts elective office or any permanent public position, outside of those of his career, shall be transferred to the reserve list.
b) commissions and rank are fully guaranteed, to active, reserve, and retired officers of the Army and of the Navy. 
Sole paragraph-An officer of the armed forces, save as provided in Article 172, section 2, may only lose his commission and rank, through a judgment duly rendered carrying a penalty restricting his liberty for a period exceeding two years, or when a competent military Tribunal, in cases defined by law, declares him unworthy of the service. 
c) the titles, ranks, and uniforms of the armed forces are the sole privilege of career officers in active service, in the reserve or on the retired list. 
</list>
National Security<title> 
Art. 161. 
The armed forces are permanent national institutions, organized on the basis of hierarchical discipline and of faithful obedience to the authority of the President of the Republic. 
Art. 162. 
All questions relating to national security shall be studied by the National Security Council and by the special organs created to attend to the emergency of mobilization. 
The National Security Council will be presided over by the President of the Republic and will be composed by the Ministers of State and by the Chief of the General Staff of the Army and of the Navy.Art. 163. 
The President of the Republic shall have the general direction of war; military operations falling within the jurisdiction and responsibility of the commanding officers, freely chosen by him. 
Art. 164. 
All Brazilians are obliged, in accordance with the law, to render military service and the other duties necessary for the defense of the country, in accordance with and under the terms of the law. 
Art. 165. 
Within a strip of territory one hundred and fifty kilometers wide along the frontiers, no concession of lands or means of communication can be made without a hearing of the Supreme Council of National Security and the law will provide that in the industries located within the limits of the strip referred to, there must be a predominance of Brazilian capital and labor. 
Sole paragraph-Industries which concern national security, may only be established within this hundred and fifty kilometer strip along the frontiers, after consulting the National Security Council, which will draw up a list of them, and may, at any time, revise and change it. 
The Defense of the State<title> 
Art. 166. 
In the event of a foreign menace or the imminence of internal disturbances, or the existence of a concerted effort, plan or conspiracy, which tends to disturb the public peace or to place in danger the structure of the institutions, the security of the State or of its citizens, the President of the Republic may declare a state of emergency throughout the whole territory of the country or in that portion of the territory particularly threatened. 
Once it becomes necessary to use the armed forces for the defense of the State, the President of the Republic shall declare a state of war for the whole National Territory or a part thereof. 
Sole paragraph-The authorization of the National Parliament will not be necessary to carry out any of these measures, nor can the Parliament suspend the state of emergency or the state of war declared by the President of the Republic. 
Art. 167. 
The causes which determined the declaration of the state of emergency or of the state of war having ceased to exist, the President of the Republic will advise the Chamber of Deputies of the measures taken during the period of the one or the other. 
Sole paragraph-The Chamber of Deputies, if it does not approve such measures, shall hold the President of the Republic responsible; the latter, will have, however, the right to appeal to the country from the decision of the Chamber, by dissolving it and holding new elections. 
Art. 168. 
During the state of emergency, the measures which the President of the Republic is authorized to take are limited to the following: 
<list>
a) detention in buildings or places not used for prisoners of common law crime; banishment to other parts of the National Territory or compulsory residence in specified localities of the aforesaid territory, with restriction of the liberty to go and come; 
b) censorship of correspondence and of all written or oral communications; 
c) suspension of the right to organize public meetings; 
d) search and seizure in the domicile. 
</list>
Art. 169. 
The President of the Republic, during the state of emergency, and in circumstances demand such action, may request the Chamber or the Federal Council to suspend the immunities of any of its members, who have been involved in a concerted effort, plan or conspiracy against the structure of the institutions, the security of the State or of its citizens. 
I, in the event that the Chamber or the Federal Council shall not decide within twelve hours or shall refuse this permission, the President, if he deems the measure indispensable, may detain the members of either one of them implicated in the concerted effort, plan, or conspiracy, and may also do so on his own responsibility, and independently from any communication to either Chamber, if the detention is o manifest urgency; 
II, in all these cases the decision of the Chamber of Deputies will only take place after the termination of the state of emergency. 
Art. 170. 
During the state of emergency or the state of war the acts practiced in virtue of them cannot be brought before the Judges or Tribunals.
Art. 171. 
During the existence of the state of war the Constitution ceases to be in force in those parts indicated by the President of the Republic. 
Art. 172. 
Crimes committed against the security of the State and its institutions will be subjected to the indictment and special judgment which the law shall prescribe.
§ 1. The law shall determine the application of the penalties of the Military Legislation and the jurisdiction of the military Tribunals in the zone of operations during the grave internal commotion. 
§ 2. Any officer, whether active, reserve, or retired, or any public employee who has been involved in a crime against the security of the State or its institutions, or who has influenced in its intellectual or material preparation, shall lose his commission, rank, or position, if condemned to any penalty by a sentence of the court of justice, referred to in this Article. 
Art. 173. 
The state of war arising through a conflict with a foreign country will be declared in the decree of mobilization. During its duration, the President of the Republic is vested with powers conferred in Article 166 and the crimes committed against the institutions, the security of the State and of its citizens shall be tried by military Tribunals. 
Amendments to the Constitution<title> 
Art. 174. 
The Constitution may be amended, modified or altered through the initiative of either the President of the Republic or of the Chamber of Deputies: 
<list>
§ 1. When the project is brought before Parliament on the initiative of the President of the Republic, it must be voted on en b10c by an ordinary majority vote of the Chamber of Deputies and of the Federal Council, without any changes or with such modifications as have been proposed by the President of the Republic, or which have his approval, if suggested by either of the Chambers. 
§ 2. When a project to amend, modify, or alter the Constitution, is brought before Parliament on the initiative of the Chamber of Deputies, it must, in order to be approved, have a majority vote of both houses of Parliament. 
§ 3. A project amending, modifying, or altering the Constitution, when initiated by the Chamber of Deputies, and after it has been approved by a vote of the majority of Houses o Parliament, will be sent to the President of the Republic. Within thirty days, he may return it to the Chamber of Deputies with the request that it be submitted to a new passage through both Chambers. This new passage may only be carried on during the succeeding term of the legislature.§ 4. In the event that the project of the initiative of the President of the Republic is rejected, or in case that Parliament, in spite of the opposition of the President of the Republic, approves the project initiated by the Chamber of Deputies, the President of the Republic may, within thirty days, decide that one or the other project shall be submitted to a national plebiscite which must take place ninety days alter publication of the President's resolution. The project will only become Constitutional law if the plebiscite is favorable. 
Transitory and Final Dispositions<title> 
Art. 175. 
The first presidential term of office will start on the date of this Constitution. The President of the Republic, actually in Office, has his term renewed until the plebiscite, referred to in Article 187, takes place; the presidential term to terminate at the time fixed in Article 8, if the result of the plebiscite is favorable to this Constitution. 
Art. 176. 
The terms of the present Governors of the States, upon confirmation by the President of the Republic within thirty days from the date of this Constitution, will be extended for the first period of the Government, as shall be determined by the State Constitutions. This term of office shall be counted from the date of this Constitution and under no circumstances exceed that fixed for the President of the Republic. 
Sole paragraph-The President of the Republic shall decree interventions in the States whose Governors have not had their mandates confirmed. The intervention will continue until the elected Governors take office, which will terminate the first term of office, as fixed in the States Constitutions. 
Art. 177. 
Within a period of sixty days from the date of this Constitution, civil and military functionaries may be retired or withdrawn from active service in accordance with the legislation in force, if in the exclusive opinion of the Government, their withdrawal is for the interest of the public service and the convenience of the regime. 
Art. 178. 
As of this date, the Chamber of Deputies, the Federal Senate, the Legislative Assemblies of the States and the Municipal Chambers, are dissolved. The elections for the National Parliament will be set by the President of the Republic, after the plebiscite referred to in Article 187 has taken place. 
Art. 179. 
The National Economic Council must be organized before the elections of the National Parliament.
Art. 180. 
Until the National Parliament convenes, the President of the Republic shall be empowered to issue decree-laws on all legislative matter of the Union. 
Art. 181. 
The Constitutions of the States must be approved by their respective Governments, which, until the Legislative Assemblies convene, shall exercise the functions of these, in matters which come within the jurisdiction of the States. 
Art. 182. 
The functionaries of the Federal Judiciary, who are not admitted into the new judicial organization, and who enjoy life tenure, will be retired on full pay, if they have more than thirty years of service, and if they have less, they will be retired with pay proportionate to their length of service, until such time as they are given other posts of equivalent rank. 
Art. 183. 
Laws which are not in contradiction, either explicitly or implicitly, to the provisions of this Constitution, shall continue in force until revoked. 
Art. 184. 
The States are to continue in possession of all territory over which they presently have jurisdiction; any territorial readjustments between them are forbidden. 
§ 1. The questions regarding limits between the States are hereby ended even though already proceeding or awaiting judgment in the Supreme Federal Tribunal or in a Court of Arbitration. 
§ 2. The Geographic Service of the Army will proceed to survey and describe the limits about which doubts exist or which are the subject of litigation and will effect the necessary demarcations. 
Art. 185. 
The judgment of cases now pending in the former Federal Courts and in the present Supreme Federal Tribunal shall be regulated by a special decree which Vii prescribe the most convenient manner looking towards their prompt settlement and the transitory procedure to be followed between the old judiciary organization and the new, established in this Constitution. 
Art. 186. 
A state of emergency is declared for the whole country. 
Art. 187. 
This Constitution comes into effect on the day it is dated and will be submitted to a national plebiscite in the form regulated in a decree of the President of the Republic.
Officers of the armed forces, in active service, are considered as duly registered for effects of the plebiscite, independent of any formality.