THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COMMUNIST WORLD,
Edited by

WILLIAM B. SIMONS

SIJTHOFF & NOORDHOFF

1980

Germantown, Slphen aan den Rijn The Netherlands Maryland U.S.A.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 80-65005 ISBN 90 286 0070 1 Copyright © 1980 Sijthoff & Noordhoff International Publishers B.V., Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Printed in The Netherlands.

CONSTITUTION OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA*
Durzhaven Vestnik 1971 No. 39.

We, the citizens of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, heirs to great revolutionary traditions, forged in age-long struggles for freedom and human rights, for people's power and a socialist reorganization of society, whereas we base ourselves on the historic victory of the Ninth of September Socialist Revolution of 1944, won under the leadership of the Bulgarian Communist Party and with the decisive help of the Soviet army—liberator of the working class, the toiling peasants, and the people's intelligentsia, united in the Fatherland Front; on the successful development of our people's democratic state; on the historically created unity of purpose and action between the Bulgarian Communist Party and the Bulgarian National Peasants' Union; on the victory of socialism, which established complete supremacy of public property over the means of production and forever abolished the exploitation of man by man; on the developed modern industry and developed cooperative rural economy, built with the heroic labor of a free people, which secure conditions for a constant increase of the people's well-being; on the great successes, achieved in the field of education, science, and culture; whereas we rely on the cooperation and mutual assistance with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the other countries of the socialist community; on the support of the international communist and workers' movement and on all progressive forces in the world; firmly resolved to build under the leadership of the Bulgarian Communist Party and in fulfillment of its Program, a developed socialist society in our country, to increase by our labor the socialist property, the material and spiritual wealth of the people, to develop and delve socialist

democracy, to create ever more favorable conditions for the versatile blossoming of the free human personality; to strengthen and expand the indissoluble alliance, friendship, and all-round cooperation with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the other fraternal socialist countries; to support the just struggle of the people for independence and social progress; to cooperate for the consolidation of world peace, for understanding among all peoples of the earth; whereas we point out the importance of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria of 1947, and whereas we further develop its fundamental principles in view of the new stage in the building of a socialist society in our Homeland have adopted in an all-people voting the present Constitution.

Chapter I. Socio-Political Organization Article 1. (1) The People's Republic of Bulgaria is a socialist state of the working people from town and village, headed by the working class. (2) The leading force in society and the state is the Bulgarian Communist Party. (3) The Bulgarian Communist Party shall direct the building up of a developed socialist society in the People's Republic of Bulgaria in close fraternal cooperation with the Bulgarian National Peasants' Union. Article 2. (1) In the People's Republic of Bulgaria, all power emanates from the people and belongs to the people. (2) The people shall exercise this power through freely elected representative organs—a National Assembly and people's councils— or directly. Article 3. (1) The state shall serve the people by: defending their interests and socialist achievements; guiding in a planned manner the socio-economic development of the country; creating conditions for a continuous improvement of the wellbeing, education, and public health of the people, as well as for the

all-round development of science and culture; securing man's free development, guaranteeing his rights and protecting his dignity; organizing the defense of the nation's independence, and state sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country; developing and consolidating friendship, cooperation, and mutual assistance with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the other socialist countries; pursuing a policy of peace and understanding with all countries and peoples. (2) In carrying out its tasks, the state shall rely ever more widely on the public organizations. Article 4. (1) The main directions in the development of the state in the building of a developed socialist society are: constant broadening of democracy; improvement of the organization and activities of the state apparatus; strengthening of the people's control over the work of the state organs. (2) The socialist state shall contribute in the development of the socialist society into a communist one. Article 5. The fundamental principles on which the political system of society is built and functions are: national sovereignty, unity of power, democratic centralism, socialist democratism, legality, and socialist internationalism. Article 6. (1) The representative organs shall be elected on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot. (2) The term of the mandate of the National Assembly shall be five years and of the people's councils, two and a half years. (3) Eligible to vote and to be elected shall be all citizens of the People's Republic of Bulgaria who have completed eighteen years of age, irrespective of sex, ethnic origin, race, creed, education, occupation, official or social status, and property situation, with the exception of those placed under complete tutelage. (4) The manner of electing the representative organs shall be determined by law. Article 7. (1) The deputies and the councillors shall be responsible and accountable to their electors. They may be recalled even before the expiry of the term for which they are elected.

(2) The recall of deputies shall take place by decision of the electors in the manner determined by the law. Article 8. (1) The People's Republic of Bulgaria shall be governed strictly in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the country. (2) Strict observance of the Constitution and the laws shall be a basic duty of all state organs, officials, public organizations, and of the citizens. (3) The consolidation of legality and the prevention of crimes and violations of the laws shall be the duty of the state, public organizations, and citizens. Article 9. (1) The rights, freedoms, and duties provided in the Constitution shall be exercised and implemented on the basis of the latter, except when it stipulates that the conditions and manner for their realization shall be determined by the law. (2) Rights and freedoms shall not be exercised to the detriment of public interests. Article 10. (1) The public organizations shall unite and enlist the different strata of the population in socialist building, express and defend their specific interests, and work for raising their socialist consciousness. (2) The public organizations shall ever more assist the state organs in the implementation of their tasks. (3) The public organizations shall also perform state functions entrusted to them with their consent. Article 11. The Fatherland Front is an embodiment of the alliance of the working class, the toiling peasants, and the people's intelligentsia. It is the social support of the people's power, a mass school for the patriotic and communist education of the population and the enlisting of the working people into the government of the country. Article 12. The People's Republic of Bulgaria belongs to the world socialist community, which is one of the main conditions for its independence and all-round development. Chapter II. Socio-Economic Organization Article 13. (1) The economic system of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is socialist. It is based on the public ownership of the means

of production, excludes the exploitation of man by man, and develops into a communist economy in a planned manner. (2) The development of the socialist economy is basis for the all-round progress of society and of the free human personality, for the broadening of socialist democracy, for the people's well-being and the upswing of the Homeland. (3) The economy of the People's Republic of Bulgaria develops as part of the world socialist economic system.

Article 14. The forms of ownership in the People's Republic of
Bulgaria are: state (all-people's) ownership, cooperative ownership, ownership of the public organizations, and personal ownership.

Article 15. (1) State (all-people's) ownership is a higher form of
socialist ownership and constitutes a unified fund. It determines the socialist character of the ownership of the cooperative and public organizations and enjoys special protection. (2) The forms of public ownership gradually develop and draw closer together, eventually to evolve into a unified all-people's ownership.

Article 16. (1) Plants and factories, banks, underground resources,
natural sources of power, nuclear energy, forests, pastures, waters, roads, railway, water and air transport, posts, telegraphs, telephones, radio and television are state (all-people's) ownership. (2) In cases provided by the law, the cooperatives and public organizations may possess means of production and other property.

Article 17. (1) The state shall exercise its right of ownership by
setting up economic and other organizations and participate in state-cooperative enterprises to which it grants property to be managed and administered, as well as through the activity of these organizations aimed at attainment of their granted or acquired rights. (2) The state may grant to cooperative and public organizations and to citizens the right to use certain state property. (3) The use of forests, pastures, waters, and quarries by cooperative organizations and citizens shall be regulated by law.

Article 18. The state economic organizations shall exercise their
activity in accordance with the principles of self-support.

Article 19. (1) Cooperative ownership belongs to the collectives of

working people, voluntarily united for the joint performance of economic activities, to cooperative unions, and to inter-cooperative organizations. (2) The right of cooperative ownership shall be exercised in the interest of society and of the cooperators. Article 20. (1) The ownership of the public organizations shall serve for the achievement of their tasks, including the implementation of the activities entrusted to them by state organs, as well as for the satisfaction of public interests. (2) The public organizations may perform economic activities in accordance with their tasks in cases permitted by the law. Article 21. (1) The citizens of the People's Republic of Bulgaria shall enjoy the right of personal ownership over property and objects for meeting their own needs and those of their families. (2) Personal ownership are also the small means of production and the output of the households of cooperators and other working people from the land, placed at their disposal for personal use, as well as the small means of production used by the working people for the performance of other auxiliary activities and the output therefrom. The kind and number of the small means of production which may be possessed in an auxiliary economy shall be determined by law. (3) For the purpose of satisfying the housing needs of the citizens, the state shall concede the right of construction on state lands and grant credits. (4) The state shall protect personal ownership acquired by work and in any other lawful manner, including savings. (5) The right of personal ownership may be entailed or restricted only by a law or with the consent of the owner. (6) Citizens may not exercise their right of personal ownership and their other property rights to the detriment of the public interest. Article 22. (1) The state shall direct the people's economy and the other sectors of public life on the basis of unified plans for socioeconomic development with a view to meeting ever more fully the constantly growing material and cultural needs of the citizens. (2) In its activity, the state shall rely on the initiative and .the creative activities of the labor collectives, research institutes, and public organizations, and shall make use of moral stimuli and collective and individual material incentives.

(3) In elaborating and executing the plans for the socio-economic development, the state shall make effective use of the achievements of science and technology, the labor and material resources, and the advantages of the international socialist division of labor. (4) The state budget shall be drawn up on the basis of the unified plan for socio-economic development. Article 23. (1) The state shall encourage the cooperatives and their unions and support their activities. (2) The state shall render all-round support to the labor-cooperative agricultural forms. Article 24. The collectives of the working people shall participate directly and through organs elected by them in the management of the economic activity. Article 25. The citizens may engage in farming, artisan, and other economic activities with their personal labor and with the labor of the members of their families, under conditions determined by the law. The law shall determine what means of production may be owned by these citizens. Article 26. (1) Copyrights of works of science, literature, and art, as well as the rights of inventors and innovators shall be protected by the state. (2) The state, cooperative, and public organizations shall create conditions conducive to the development of the creative activity and to using the works of authors, inventors, and innovators for the economic and cultural development of society. (3) Authors, inventors, and innovators may not use their rights inconsistent with the public interests. Article 27. The right of inheritance shall be recognized and guaranteed. Article 28. The state may expropriate or restrict the right of ownership over the property of citizens, cooperatives, and public organizations for state and public needs against just compensation. The procedure of expropriation and the manner of compensation shall be determined by law. Article 29. (1) The state may be granted by law the exclusive right to engage in certain kinds of economic activity.

(2) Foreign trade shall be an exclusive right of the state. Article 30. (1) The land as a basic natural resource and means of production shall be protected and utilized in a manner most useful to society. (2) The labor-cooperative agricultural farms shall use gratuitously the lands pooled by the cooperators, by other persons and organizations, or placed at their disposal by the state. (3) The purpose of arable farm lands, pastures, and forests may be changed in the manner established by law. Article 31. The protection and preservation of the nature and natural resources, the water, air, and soil, as well as the cultural monuments shall be an obligation of the state organs and enterprises, the cooperatives and public organizations, as well as a duty of every citizen. Article 32. (1) Labor is a basic socio-economic factor. (2) In the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the socialist principle "From each according to his abilities, to each according to his work" shall be applied. The public funds for satisfying the needs of the citizens shall be continuously increased. (3) The state shall 'attend to the raising of the labor qualification and productive experience of the citizens. The protection of labor shall be regulated by law. Article 33. (1) The state shall create the necessary conditions for the development of science and technology with a view to securing a scientific management of society, scientific and technical progress, and all-round economic and cultural growth. (2) The state organs, the economic and other organizations, and all citizens shall be obliged to introduce the achievements of science mid technology in all fields of public life.

Chapter III. Basic Rights and Duties of the Citizens Article 34. Bulgarian citizenship shall be acquired and lost in the manner established by law.
Article

be equal

35. (1) All citizens of the People's Republic of Bulgaria shall before the law. (") No privileges or limitations of rights based on ethnic belong-

ing, origin, creed, sex, race, education, social and material status shall be allowed. (3) The state shall secure the equality of the citizens by creating conditions and opportunities for the exercise of their rights and the fulfillment of their duties. (4) Every propagation of hatred or humiliation of man because of race, national or religious affiliation shall be forbidden and shall be punishable. Article 36. Women and men shall have equal rights in the People's Republic of Bulgaria. Article 37. Women-mothers shall enjoy protection and care on behalf of the state, the economic, and public organizations by securing a leave of absence before and after childbirth, by preserving her labor remuneration, free obstetric and medical care, maternity homes, alleviation in her work, and extension of the network of children's establishments, of the enterprises for communal and folk-life services, and of the public catering. Article 38. (1) Marriage and family shall be under the protection of the state. (2) Civil marriage solely shall be legal. (3) The spouses shall have equal rights and obligations in marriage and in the family. Parents shall have the right and obligation to attend to the upbringing of their children and to their communist education. (4) Children born out of wedlock shall enjoy equal rights with those born in wedlock. Article 39. (1) The education of the young people in a communist spirit is a duty of the entire society. (2) The family, the school, the state organs, and the public organizations shall devote special care to the intellectual, moral, aesthetic, cultural, and physical development of the young people, and to their labor training and polytechnical education. (3) Youth shall enjoy special protection. Article 40. (1) Citizens shall have the right to work. (2) Every citizen shall have the right freely to choose his profession. (3) The state shall guarantee the right to work by developing the socialist socio-economic system.

Article 41. (1) Work shall be remunerated in accordance with its quantity and quality. (2) Working people shall have the right to safe and hygienic conditions of labor, which is secured by the introduction of the achievements of science and technology. Article 42. (1) Citizens shall have the right to rest. (2) This right shall be secured by reducing their working days without diminishing their labor remuneration or infringing upon other labor rights, by paid annual leave, and by a wide network of holiday houses, clubs, public libraries, houses of culture, and other places for leisure and culture. Article 43. (1) Citizens shall have the right to insurance, pensioning, and assistance in case of incapacity for work due to sickness, accident, maternity, disability, old age, or death, and when bringing up a child, as well as to allowances in the cases established by law. (2) This right shall be implemented by a unified system of social insurance and by setting aside the necessary funds from the national income for financing the insurances. (3) The insured shall take part in the management of social insurance. Article 44. Minor, underage, incapacitated, and old people, who have no relatives or have been deprived of the care of their relatives, shall enjoy the special protection of the state and of society. Article 45. (1) Citizens shall have the right to free education in all types and grades of educational establishments under conditions determined by law. (2) The educational establishments shall belong to the state. (3) Education shall be based on the achievements of modern science and the Marxist-Leninist ideology. (4) Primary education shall be compulsory. (5) The state shall create conditions for the introduction of secondary education for all. (6) The state shall further education, improve the general conditions for work at the educational establishments, grant scholarships, and encourage students who have displayed particular talents. (7) Citizens of non-Bulgarian origin, in addition to the compulsory study of the Bulgarian language, shall have the right to study also their own language.

Article 46. (1) Creativeness in the field of science, art, and culture shall serve the people and develop in a communist spirit. (2) The state shall devote special care to the development of science, art, and culture by setting up higher educational establishments, scientific-research institutes, publishing houses, libraries, museums, art galleries, theaters, cinemas, radio, and television. Article 47. (1) The state shall devote all-round care to the people's health by organizing therapeutic, preventive, and other health establishments and services. (2) The state and the public organizations shall disseminate health education and culture among the people and encourage physical culture and tourism. (3) Every citizen shall have the right to free medical care. (4) The state and the public organizations shall devote special care to the health of children and adolescents. Article 48. (1) The freedom and inviolability of the person shall be guaranteed. (2) No one can be detained for more than twenty-four hours without a decision of the court or the public prosecutor. Article 49. The home shall be inviolable. Without the consent of the dweller no one can enter the dwelling or its premises, nor make a search there, except in the cases and under the conditions provided in the law. Article 50. Every citizen shall have the right of defense against illegal interference in his personal or family life and infringement upon his honor and good name. Article 51. The secrecy of correspondence, telephone conversations, and telecommunications shall be inviolable except in case of mobilization, state of war, or when authorized by the court or the public prosecutor. Article 52. (1) Citizens may form organizations for political, professional, cultural, artistic, scientific, religious, sports, and other non-economic purposes. (2) Citizens may unite in cooperatives for joint economic activity. (3) Organizations directed against the socialist order of the People's Republic of Bulgaria and the rights of the citizens, which

propagate a fascist or other anti-democratic ideology, shall be prohibited. (4) The public organizations and cooperatives may form unions or other associations. Article 53. (1) The citizens shall be guaranteed freedom of conscience and of creed. They may perform religious rites and conduct anti-religious propaganda. (2) The church shall be separated from the state. (3) The legal status, the questions concerning the material support, and the right of internal organization and self-government of the different religious communities shall be regulated by law. (4) The misuse of the church and religion for political purposes, as well as the setting up of political organizations on a religious basis, shall be prohibited. (5) Religion shall be no justification for refusing to fulfill duties imposed by the Constitution or the laws. Article 54. (1) Citizens shall enjoy freedom of speech, press, assembly, meetings, and demonstrations. (2) These freedoms shall be guaranteed by placing the necessary material conditions for that purpose at the disposal of the citizens. Article 55. Citizens shall have the right to make requests, complaints, and petitions. This right shall be implemented in the manner established by law. Article 56. (1) The state shall be responsible for the damages caused by illegal acts or illegal official actions of its organs or officials. (2) Every citizen shall have the right to initiate court proceedings against officials for crimes committed while performing their duties. (3) Citizens shall have the right, in accordance with the conditions established by law, to compensation by officials for damages inflicted on them by the illegal performance of their duties. Article 57. Bulgarian citizens abroad shall enjoy the protection of the People's Republic of Bulgaria and shall be obliged to fulfill their duties towards it. Article 58. Citizens shall be obliged strictly and in good faith to observe and enforce the Constitution and the laws of the country.
A rticle 59. (1) Every able-bodied citizen shall be obliged to do

socially useful work in accordance with his abilities and qualification. (2) The fulfillment of the labor obligations shall be a matter of honor for every member of the socialist society. Article 60. Citizens shall be obliged to guard and increase socialist property as an inviolable foundation of the socialist system, and to cooperate in strengthening the political, economic, and defensive might of the Homeland, the development of culture, and the prosperity of the people. Article 61. (1) The defense of the Fatherland is a supreme duty and a matter of honor for every citizen. (2) Treason and betrayal of the Fatherland are the gravest crimes against the people. They shall be punished with all the severity of the law. Article 62. Military service shall be compulsory for all citizens in accordance with the law. Article 63. (1) Every citizen shall be obliged to help preserve and consolidate peace. (2) War incitement and propaganda shall be prohibited and punishable by law as grave crimes against peace and mankind. Article 64. The tax duties of citizens shall be determined by law according to their income and property. Article 65. The People's Republic of Bulgaria shall grant the right of asylum to foreigners persecuted for defending the interests of the working people, for participating in the national-liberation struggle, for progressive political, scientific, and artistic activity, for fighting racial discrimination or in defense of peace.

Chapter IV. National Assembly Article 66. (1) The National Assembly is the supreme representative organ which expresses the will of the people and their sovereignty. (2) The National Assembly is the supreme organ of state power. Article 67. The National Assembly shall combine the legislative and executive activity of the state and exercise supreme control.

Article 68. The National Assembly shall consist of 400 deputies elect-

ed in constituencies with an equal number of inhabitants.
Article 69. (1) The mandate of the National Assembly shall end with the expiry of the term for which it was elected. (2) The National Assembly may dissolve itself even before the expiry of the term of its mandate. In that case, it shall continue to perform its functions until the election of a new National Assembly. (3) If the term of the mandate of the National Assembly expires during war time or in other exceptional circumstances, it may prolong it. It may also prolong the term of its mandate if a state of war is declared or if other exceptional circumstances set in during the time of elections. In those cases, elections for a new National Assembly shall be held within six months after the causes which necessitated the prolongation of its mandate have ceased to exist. (4) The National Assembly may also prolong the term of its mandate up to one year for other important reasons.

70. (1) Elections for the National Assembly shall be held two months after the expiry of its mandate at the latest. (2) The newly-elected National Assembly shall be summoned for sessions one month after the elections at the latest.
Article

71. (1) The National Assembly shall be summoned for sessions by the State Council at least three times a year. (2) The State Council shall also summon the National Assembly for session when over one-fifth of the deputies demand it.
Article

72. The first session of the newly-elected National Assembly shall be opened by the eldest deputy. Under his chairmanship, the deputies shall elect the President and the Deputy-Presidents of the National Assembly.
Article Article

73. (1) The President of the National Assembly shall: a) preside over the sessions of the National Assembly; b) submit a draft agenda of the sessions of the National Assembly;

Ai tide 74. (1) The National Assembly itself shall check the legality

of the elections of the deputies. For that purpose, at its first session it shall elect from among its midst a Committee for Auditing the Elections, which at the second session after the election, at the latest, shall come forward with a conclusion before the National Assembly about their legality. The Committee shall do this also in case of partial elections of deputies. (2) When the National Assembly finds that an election was held in violation of the law, it shall cancel it. (3) The deputies shall take an oath before the National Assembly.

Article 75. The National Assembly itself shall establish its internal
organization and the order of its work by a regulation.

Article 76. (1) The National Assembly shall elect from among its
members standing and interim committees as its organs. It shall direct and control their activity. (2) The committees shall be responsible for their activity and render an account to the National Assembly. (3) The standing committees shall help the activity of the National Assembly, exercise on its behalf control over the ministries and the other departments and the local state organs, and assist in the enforcement of the laws and other acts adopted by the National Assembly. (4) Interim committees shall be elected for issues which are not permanent in character, as well as for investigations and inquiries. (5) All state organs, officials, public organizations, and citizens shall be obliged to present to the committees all the necessary information and documents related to their work.

Article 77. The National Assembly is the sole legislative organ of the
People's Republic of Bulgaria and supreme organizer of the planned direction of social development.

Article 78. The National Assembly shall:
1. Implement the supreme direction of the state's domestic and foreign policy. 2. Adopt and amend the Constitution. 3. Determine which questions and in what order they are to be decided by referendum. 4. Adopt, amend, and repeal the laws. 5. Take measures for the enforcement of the laws and its other acts.

6. Adopt the unified plans for the socio-economic development of the country and the reports on their execution. 7. Adopt the state budget and the government report on the execution of the budget for the preceding year. 8. Establish taxes and fix their rates. It may entrust the Council of Ministers with fixing the rates of taxes owed by state organizations. 9. Grant amnesty. 10. Decide the questions of the declaration of war and the conclusion of peace. 11. Appoint and remove from office the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces. 12. Decide questions about changing the frontiers of the People's Republic. 13. Ratify and denounce international treaties. 14. Establish, close down, merge, and rename ministries and other departments of ministerial rank. It may also create state and public organs of ministerial rank. 15. Determine the tasks and the organizations of the State Council, the Council of Ministers, the people's councils, the courts, and the Public Prosecutor's Office. Within the system of the Council of Ministers, it may set up its own organs for direction and coordination in the administration of the state, and may determine the decisions as to which of them shall have the authority of government acts. 16. Elect and remove from office the State Council, the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Court, and the Chief Public Prosecutor of the People's Republic. 17. Exercise supreme control over the observance of the Constitution and the laws. 18. Exercise supreme control over the activity of the state organs. 19. It may entrust consenting public organizations with the performance of certain state functions.

Article 79. (1) The National Assembly shall adopt laws, decisions, declarations, and addresses. (2) The laws and decisions of the National Assembly shall be binding for all state organs, public organizations, and individuals. Article 80. (1) The right of legislative initiative shall be vested in the Stair Council, the Council of Ministers, the standing committees of the National Assembly, the deputies, the Supreme Court, and the chief Public Prosecutor.

(2) The public organizations, in the person of the National Council of the Fatherland Front, the Central Council of Trade Unions, the Central Committee of the Dimitrov Young Communists League, and the Administrative Council of the Central Cooperative Union, shall also have the right of legislative initiative on questions pertaining to their activities. Article 81. The National Assembly may be convened for a session if more than half of all deputies are present. Its decisions shall be taken by a simple majority of the deputies present, except when the Constitution requires another majority. Article 82. The sittings of the National Assembly shall be public, except when it decides that important state interests require that some of the sittings be held behind closed doors. Article 83. (1) Bills shall be adopted after two votings, which are to be carried out at different sittings. After being adopted at the first voting, the bill shall be sent to the respective committees for additional discussion before being put forward for a second voting. (2) Upon decision of the National Assembly, the two votings of the bill may, as an exception, take place at one sitting and without additional discussion in the committees. Article 84. (1) The laws, decisions, declarations, and addresses adopted by the National Assembly shall be published by the State Council in the State Gazette not later than 15 days after their adoption. (2) The law shall enter into force three days after its publication, except when another term is specified in the law itself. (3) The other acts of the National Assembly shall enter into force upon their adoption by the National Assembly. Article 85. (1) The National Assembly shall see to it that the laws do not contradict the Constitution. (2) It alone shall decide whether a law contradicts the Constitution and whether the conditions for its issuance required by the Constitution have been observed. Article 86. The deputies shall be guided in their activity by the all-people interests and by the interests of their electors. Article 87. (1) The deputies shall have the right to address inter-

pellations to the Council of Ministers or to its individual members who shall be obliged to reply. (2) Interpellations made at a session shall be answered at the same session or, upon decision of the National Assembly, at the following session. (3) Interpellations made between sessions shall be answered at the following session. (4) If the National Assembly so decides, discussions may take place on the interpellations and a decision may be taken.

Article 88. The deputies may not be detained and penal proceedings may not be initiated against them, except for grave offenses and this with the authorization of the National Assembly and if it is not in session, of the State Council. No authorization for detainment shall be required when a deputy is caught in the very act of a flagrant grave offense, in which case the National Assembly and, if it is not in session, the State Council shall be immediately informed.

Article 89. The deputies shall not be held criminally and disciplinarily responsible for the opinions expressed by them and for their voting in the National Assembly.

Chapter V. State Council Article 90. (1) The State Council of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is the supreme continuously functioning organ of state power, which combines the taking of decisions with their execution. (2) The State Council, as a supreme organ of the National Assembly, shall secure the unity of the legislative with the executive activity. (3) It shall be responsible and give account to the National Assembly on its entire activity.

Article 91. Within the framework of the Constitution, the State
Council shall organize and control the fulfillment of the basic tasks deriving from the laws and decisions of the National Assembly, exercise general direction and control over the work of the Council of Ministers and of the remaining state organs, take decisions, and implement executive and administrative activity on fundamental questions of the state government.

Article 92. (1) The State Council shall consist of a President,
Deputy-Presidents, a Secretary, and members.

(2) The National Assembly shall elect the State Council from among the deputies at its first session with a majority of more than half of all deputies. (3) The mandate of the State Council shall continue until the newly-elected National Assembly elects a State Council. (4) The members of the State Council shall take an oath before the National Assembly. Article 93. The State Council shall: 1. Call elections for a National Assembly and people's councils. 2. Determine the date for holding a referendum when there is a decision of the National Assembly on what question and in what order the referendum should be held. 3. Summon the National Assembly to sessions. Summon the National Assembly whose mandate has expired, in order to decide the question of prolonging the term of its mandate. 4. Exercise the right of legislative initiative. 5. Determine with regard to which bills, introduced into the National Assembly, a referendum should be held. 6. Publish the acts adopted by the National Assembly in the State Gazette. 7. Issue edicts and other legal acts on the basic questions deriving from the laws and decisions of the National Assembly. 8. Interpret the laws and normative edicts which are binding for all. 9. Implement the general direction of the defense and security of the country. 10. Appoint and remove from office the members of the State Defense Committee. 11. Appoint and remove from office the staff of the high command of the Armed Forces and award high military titles. 12. Represent the People's Republic of Bulgaria in its international relations. 13. Appoint, recall, and remove from office, on the proposal of the Council of Ministers, the diplomatic and consular representatives of the People's Republic of Bulgaria in other countries. 14. Ratify and denounce international treaties. 15. Establish diplomatic and consular ranks. 16. Set up and close down departments of non-ministerial rank, and appoint and remove from office their heads. 17. Exercise control over the activity of the Council of Ministers and the heads of the ministries and other departments. 18. Exercise control over the strict observance of the laws and

other acts of the National Assembly, as well as over acts issued by itself. 19. Repeal the illegal or irregular acts of the Council of Ministers and the heads of the ministries or other departments. 20. Repeal the illegal or irregular acts of the people's councils and their executive and administrative organs. 21. Exercise the right of granting pardon. 22. Remit uncollectable debts to the state. 23. Establish orders and medals and award them. 24. Introduce honorary titles and bestow them. 25. Set up and close down administrative-territorial units. Change the boundaries of municipalities, town wards, and districts, and determine their administrative seats. 26. Grant, restore, and deprive of Bulgarian citizenship. 27. Grant the right of asylum.

Article 94. The State Council, in addition to the authorities under
Article 93, during the period between sessions of the National Assembly, shall: 1. Implement the general direction of the domestic and foreign policy of the state. 2. In urgent cases, amend or supplement individual provisions of the laws by edicts. Issue edicts on questions of a matter of principle, affecting the executive and administrative activity of the state. The State Council shall submit the edicts issued under this paragraph to the National Assembly for approval at its following session. 3. Hear reports on the work of the Council of Ministers, or of any of its individual members, and take the appropriate decisions. 4. Upon recommendation of the President of the Council of Ministers, remove from office and appoint individual members of II Council of Ministers. The State Council is obliged to submit this decision to the National Assembly for approval at its next session. 5. Appoint and release from duty the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. This decision is submitted to the National Assembly approval at its next session. 6. Implement the general direction and coordinate the work of the people's councils and the executive and administrative organs of he the state. Exercise Prosecu general control over the activity of the Public

8. Proclaim general or partial mobilization, martial law, or any other state of emergency. 9. Take measures for collective defense jointly with other countries. 10. Proclaim a state of war in the case of an armed attack against the People's Republic of Bulgaria, or in the case where an international obligation for mutual defense has to be promptly carried out. The State Council shall summon the National Assembly to session to make a pronouncement on its own decisions. Article 95. In case of war, if there is no possibility of convening the National Assembly, in addition to the mandate given to it, the State Council shall: 1. Issue edicts whereby laws may be repealed or amended, or legislatively unsettled matters may be settled. The State Council shall submit these edicts to the National Assembly for approval at its next session. 2. Adopt the unified plans for socio-economic development and the budget, as well as the reports on their execution. 3. Elect and remove from office the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Court, and the Chief Public Prosecutor. Article 96. (1) The President of the State Council shall: 1. Organize and direct the work of the State Council. 2. Receive the credentials and recall letters of the foreign diplomatic representatives in the country. (2) The State Council may entrust the President of the State Council with the implementation of some of its rights in the manner and in the cases determined by the law. Article 97. (1) The State Council shall issue edicts and adopt decisions, addresses, and declarations. (2) The normative edicts of the State Council shall enter into force three days after their publication in the State Gazette, except when another term is specified in the edict. (3) The remaining enactments of the State Council shall enter into force from the day of their adoption, except when another term is specified in them. Chapter VI. Council of Ministers (Government) Article 98. The Council of Ministers (the Government) is the supreme executive and administrative organ of state power.

Article 99. (1) The Council of Ministers shall consist of a President of the Council of Ministers, Deputy-Presidents of the Council of Ministers, ministers, and heads of departments with the rank of ministries. (2) The members of the Council of Ministers shall head a ministry or department, respectively. On decision of the National Assembly, individual members of the Council of Ministers may not be in direct charge of a ministry or department. Article 100. The National Assembly shall determine the number, kind, and names of the ministries and of other departments with the rank of ministries. Article 101. (1) The National Assembly shall elect the President of the Council of Ministers and on his proposal, the Deputy-Presidents, and the remaining members of the Council of Ministers. (2) Members of the Council of Ministers may also be persons who are not deputies. (3) The members of the Council of Ministers shall take an oath before the National Assembly. Article 102. (1) The Council of Ministers shall implement its activity under the direction and control of the National Assembly, and, when it is not in session, under the direction and control of the State Council. (2) The Council of Ministers shall be responsible for its entire ac tivity to the National Assembly and shall be obliged to report to it a annually. (3) When the National Assembly shall not be in session, the Council of Ministers shall be responsible and report to the State Council. Article 103. The Council of Ministers shall: I. organize the implementation of the domestic and foreign poli-cy of the state. 2. Exercis the right of legislative initiative. up the drafts of the unified plans for socio-economic development Assembly. of the country and submit them to the National

3. Draw

4. Elaborate the draft of the annual state budget and submit it to National 5. Organize, Assembly. direct, and control the fulfillment of the unified plasectonansmifodbrvulpgci.f-hecontryad

6. Ensure the conditions for the realization of the rights and freedoms of the citizens. 7. Maintain public order and security in the country. 8. Implement the general command of the Armed Forces. 9. Conclude international treaties. 10. Approve and denounce international treaties which are not subject to ratification. 11. Direct, coordinate, and exercise immediate control over the activity of the ministries and the other departments. 12. Implement direction and control over the executive committees of the people's councils. 13. Organize the execution of the acts of the National Assembly, the State Council, as well as of the acts issued by it. 14. Repeal the illegal or irregular acts and actions of ministers and heads of other departments. 15. Repeal the illegal or irregular acts and actions of the executive committees of the people's councils. 16. Suspend the execution of illegal or irregular acts and actions of the people's councils and refer the question of their repeal to the State Council. Article 104. (1) The Council of Ministers shall adopt regulations, resolutions, and decisions. (2) The normative acts of the Council of Ministers shall be published in the State Gazette and shall enter into force three days after their publication, except when another term is specified in them. All other acts of the Council of Ministers shall enter into force from the day of their adoption, except when another term is specified in them. Article 105. The Council of Ministers may assume direct control of certain sectors of the administration by forming for this purpose commissions, councils, general directorates, and offices which do not have the rank of ministries. Article 106. The members of the Council of Ministers shall direct the respective ministries or other departments on the basis of the acts of the National Assembly, the State Council, and the Council of Ministers. Article 107. (1) The ministers and heads of departments with the rank of ministries shall have the right, within the limits of their competence, to issue orders and to repeal the illegal or irregular acts

and actions of the respective special organs of the people's councils. (2) Under the same conditions, they shall have the right to suspend the acts and actions of the executive committees of the people's councils. If the executive committee does not cancel the suspended act, the Council of Ministers shall decide over the dispute. Article 108. (1) The ministers and heads of other departments shall issue regulations, directives, instructions, and orders. (2) The regulations, directives, and instructions shall enter into force three days after the date of their publication in the State Gazette, except when another term has been set in them, and the orders from the date of their issuance except when another is specified.

Chapter VII. People's Councils Article 109. (1) The territory of the People's Republic of Bulgaria shall be divided into municipalities and districts. Sofia shall be divided into administrative-territorial city districts. (2) Other administrative-territorial units may be set up by law. Article 110. Organs of the state power and people's self-government in the municipalities, the city districts, and the districts shall be the municipal, city district, and district people's councils. Article 111. (1) The people's councils shall consist of councillors who in their activity shall be guided by the all-people interests, the interests of population in the districts and municipalities, as well as by the interests of the population in their electoral districts. (2) The representation provisions for the election of councillors shall be determined by law. Article 112. The people's councils shall implement the state policy within their territory. They shall engage in activities aimed at the implementation of all-people tasks and decide upon questions of local significance. Article 113. The people's councils shall combine the work on taking decisions and their enforcement. Article 114. (1) The people's councils, within the limits of their competence, shall direct the development of the economy, and the

health-social, communal folk-life, and cultural-educational activities within their territory. (2) They shall carry out their activities by a proper coordination of the all-state and local interests, of the branch and territorial planning for the complex development of the respective administrativeterritorial unit. (3) The people's councils shall work out and adopt their own plan for a socio-economic development and a budget in accordance with the unified plan for the socio-economic development and with the state budget, and organize and control their fulfillment. (4) Within the limits of their competence they shall direct, coordinate, and control the activity of the economic organizations, as well as that of the departments located within their territory. (5) Within the limits of their competence, the people's councils shall supervise the observance of public order, as well as legality and the protection of the citizens' rights, the protection of socialist property, and the strengthening of the country's defense capacity.

Article 115. The people's councils shall adopt decisions, ordinances,
regulations, and instructions.

Article 116. The district people's councils shall be summoned to
sessions not less than four times a year, and the municipal and city district councils—not less than six times.

Article 117. When deciding more important questions within their
competence, affecting the interests of the population of the respective administrative-territorial unit and an individual inhabited area, the people's councils may take decisions on holding a plebiscite, including a referendum.

Article 118. (1) The people's councils shall elect and remove from
office executive committees, and set up standing or interim committees and special organs. (2) The executive committee shall be an executive and administrative organ of the people's council, elected from among the councillors. (3) The members of the committees shall be elected and removed from office by the people's council.

Article 119. Executive and administrative organs in the districts and
municipalities outside the system of the people's councils may be set up only by law.

Article 120. In their activity, the people's councils shall rely on the initiative and broad participation of the population, and shall work in close interaction with the political, trade union, and other public organizations. Article 121. The people's councils shall render an account on their activity to the electors at least once a year, in the manner and order determined in the law. Article 122. The people's councils shall direct and control the activities of their organs and repeal their illegal or irregular acts and actions. Article 123. The hierarchically-superior people's councils shall direct and control the activity of the hierarchically-inferior people's councils. Article 124. (1) The hierarchically-superior people's councils may repeal the illegal or irregular acts and actions of the hierarchicallyinferior people's councils. (2) The executive committees of the hierarchically-superior people's councils may suspend the enforcement of illegal or irregular acts and actions of the hierarchically-inferior people's councils, as well as repeal the illegal or irregular acts and actions of the executive committees of same people's councils. (3) The organ which has suspended an illegal or irregular act or action of a people's council shall refer it for cancellation to the respective hierarchically-superior organ of state power. (4) Disputes arising between ministries and heads of other departments, and executive committees of district people's councils shall be settled by the Council of Ministers.

Chapter VIII. Courts and Public Prosecutor's Office Article 125. (1) The administration of justice in the People's Republic of Bulgaria shall be vested in the courts. They shall protect the social and state order established by the Constitution, the socialist property, the life, the freedom, the honor, the rights, and the legal interests of the citizens, as well as the rights and legal interests of the socialist organizations. (2) The courts shall consolidate socialist legality and help the prevention of crimes and other law violations, and educate the

citizens in a spirit of loyalty to the Homeland and the socialist cause, of a conscious implementation of the laws, and of labor discipline. (3) Within the limits of the law, the courts shall exercise judicial supervision over the acts of the administrative organs and the special jurisdictions. Article 126. (1) In the People's Republic of Bulgaria, there shall be a Supreme Court, district courts, city district courts, and military courts. (2) For certain kinds of cases, other organs administering justice may also be set up by law. (3) No extraordinary courts shall be allowed. Article 127. (1) Assessors shall take part in the administration of justice, except when otherwise provided in the law. (2) In hearing the cases, the assessors shall have equal rights with the judges. Article 128. Judges and assessors shall be elected. They may be recalled before the expiry of the term for which they were elected. Article 129. (1) In implementing their functions, judges and assessors shall be independent and subject only to the law. (2) Decisions and sentences shall be pronounced in the name of the people. Article 130. The courts shall apply the laws strictly and equally with regard to all citizens and juridical persons. Article 131. The organization of the courts, their subordination and jurisdiction, the order of determining the districts of the courts, the procedure of adjudicating the cases, the conditions, order, and term for the election, rendering an account, and recall of the judges and assessors shall be regulated by law. Article 132. (1) The Supreme Court is the highest judicial organ and is elected for a period of five years. It shall exercise supreme judicial supervision over the activity of all courts and secure the strict and equal application of the laws by them. (2) The Supreme Court shall also exercise judicial supervision over the activity of the special jurisdictions, unless otherwise provided in the law. (3) The Supreme Court shall be responsible for and shall render an

account on its activity to the National Assembly and, between sessions, to the State Council.
Article 133. (1) Supervision over the strict and equal application of

the laws by the ministries and other departments, the local state organs, economic and public organizations, officials, and citizens shall be implemented by the Chief Public Prosecutor. (2) The Public Prosecutor's Office shall protect the rights and legal interests of the citizens. It shall organize and direct the struggle against crimes and other law violations by taking measures for their prevention and shall bring the perpetrators of the crimes to responsibility. (3) The Public Prosecutor's Office shall be obliged to be particularly vigilant and to bring before the court and punish the perpetrators of crimes, which are detrimental to the independence and sovereignty of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, as well as to its political and economic interests. (4) The public prosecutors shall take measures for the repealing of illegal acts and for the restoration of infringed rights.
Article 134. (1) The Chief Public Prosecutor shall be elected for a

period of five years. He may be recalled even before the expiry of this period. (2) All other public prosecutors shall be appointed and removed from office by the Chief Public Prosecutor and shall be subordinate to him. (3) The Chief Public Prosecutor shall be responsible to the National Assembly and shall render an account on the activity of the public prosecutors to it, and between sessions, to the State Council.
Article 135. (1) When carrying out their official duties, the public

prosecutors shall be independent and act only on the basis of the law. (2) The organization of the Public Prosecutor's Office and the manner of the implementation of its activities shall be regulated by law.
Article 136. (1) Crimes and penalties shall be established only by law.

(2) No law establishing the punishability of an act or increasing the criminal responsibility shall have retroactive force. (3) Penalties shall be personal and shall correspond to the crimes. (4) Penalties for crimes may be imposed only by the established courts.
Article 137. (1) In the proceedings before the courts, the discovery of the objective truth shall be guaranteed.

(2) The hearing of the cases in all courts shall be public, except when the law provides otherwise. Article 138. (1) In the realization of administration of justice, the citizens shall have the right of defense. (2) The accused shall have the right to defense.

Chapter IX. Coat-of-Arms, Seal, Flag, Capital Article 139. The coat-of-arms of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is round, with a lion rampant on a cog-wheel in the center of a sky-blue background. The background is flanked on both sides by wheat ears, enveloped in the middle in a national tricolor band; above the lion there is a red five-pointed star and below, where the wheat ears intertwine, the years of the foundation of the Bulgarian state and of the victory of the socialist revolution in Bulgaria are written in gold on a red band. Article 140. The state coat-of-arms is depicted on a state seal. Around it there is an inscription "People's Republic of Bulgaria", and in the lower part "State Seal". Article 141. The flag of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is tricolor— white, green, and red, placed horizontally. The state coat-of-arms is depicted in the left-hand upper corner of the white field. Article 142. The capital of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is the city of Sofia.

Chapter X. Creation and Amendment of the Constitution Article 143. (1) The adoption of a new Constitution and the amendment of the Constitution in force shall occur upon proposal of the State Council, the Government, or at least one-quarter of the deputies. (2) The draft of a new Constitution and the bill for the amendment of the Constitution in force shall be placed on the agenda not earlier than one month and not later than three months after being submitted to the National Assembly. (3) They shall be adopted when two-thirds of all deputies vote in their favor. (4) The new Constitution and the law amending the Constitution in

force shall enter into force from the day of their publication in the State Gazette.

Transitional Provision The Presidium of the Fifth National Assembly shall implement the rights of the State Council until the election of a State Council by the next National Assembly. The present Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria was adopted in all-people voting—referendum—on 16 May 1971, and was proclaimed on 18 May 1971, by the Fifth National Assembly at its 16th session in a solemn sitting.

G. Traikov
President of the Presidium of the National Assembly M. Minchev Secretary of the Presidium of the National Assembly

