We, the Sovereign People of Burkina Faso, 
- Aware of our responsibilities and our rights before History and before Humanity, 
- Fort of the democratic experience of the laboring masses of our towns and our fields, 
- Inspired with a will to build a State of revolutionary rights, anti-imperialist, democratic, secular and social, guaranteeing the exercise of collective and individual rights, liberty, safety, well-being, development, equality and justice as the fundamental values of a pluralistic society, of progress and disposing of all prejudice, 
- Desirous of promoting peace, international cooperation, the peaceful regulation of disputes between States, with justice, equality, liberty and sovereignty of the people, 
- Searching for economic and political integration with the other African peoples with a view to the construction of a united African federation, proclaiming our attachment to self-determination, independence and the liberty of the peoples, 
- Subscribing to the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of 1948 and to the international instruments concerning economic, political, social and cultural problems, 
- Aware of the absolute necessity of protecting the environment, 
- Solemnly reaffirming our commitment vis-a-vis the African Charter of the Rights of Man and of the Peoples of 1981, 
We approve and adopt the present Constitution as the Fundamental Law of Burkina Faso.Title I: Fundamental Rights and Duties<title>
Chapter I: Civil Rights and Duties<title> 
Article 1: 
All the Burkinabians shall be born free and equal in rights. 
All shall have an equal right to enjoy all the rights and all the freedoms guaranteed by the present Constitution. 
Discrimination of all sorts, notably those founded on race, ethnic background, region, color, sex, language, religion, caste, political opinions, wealth and birth, shall be prohibited. 
Article 2: 
The protection of life, safety, and physical integrity shall be guaranteed. 
Slavery, slave practices, inhuman and cruel, degrading and humiliating treatment, physical and moral torture, mistreatment inflicted upon children and all forms of deprecation of man shall be forbidden and punishable by law. 
Article 3: 
No one may be deprived of his liberty if he is not prosecuted for acts foreseen and punishable by the law. 
No one may be arrested, kept, deported or exiled except in virtue of the law. 
Article 4: 
All the Burkinabians and every person living in Burkina Faso shall benefit from equal protection under the law. All shall have the right to have their case heard by an independent and impartial department. 
All accused shall be presumed innocent until their guilt is established. 
The right to a defense including that of freely choosing a defense attorney shall be guaranteed under all jurisdictions. 
Article 5: 
All who are not defended by the law cannot be enjoined and no one can be constrained to do that which is not ordered. 
The penal law shall not have retroactive effect. No one shall be judged and punished except in virtue of a law promulgated and published before the punishable act. 
Punishment shall be personal and individual. 
Article 6: 
The private residence, the domicile, private and family life, secrecy of correspondence of every person shall be inviolable. 
It shall not be impaired except according to the manner and in the cases foreseen by the law. 
Article 7: 
The freedom of belief, of non-belief, of conscience, of religious, philosophical opinion, of religious exercise, the freedom of assembly, the free practice of custom as well as the freedom of procession and its demonstration shall be guaranteed by the present Constitution subject to respect of the law, of the public order, of good morals and of the human person. 
Article 8: 
The freedom of opinion, of the press and the right to information shall be guaranteed. 
Every person shall have the right to express and to disseminate his opinions according to the laws and regulations in force. 
Article 9: 
The free circulation of persons and goods, the free choice of residence and the right of asylum shall be guaranteed subject to the laws and regulations in force. 
Article 10: 
Every Burkinabian citizen shall have the duty to contribute to the defense and to maintaining the territorial integrity. 
CHAPTER II: POLITICAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES<title> 
Article 11: 
All Burkinabians shall enjoy civil and political rights according to the conditions foreseen by the law. 
Article 12: 
All Burkinabians without any distinction shall have the right to participate in the conduct of the affairs of the State and of society. 
Under this title, they shall be electors and eligible according to the conditions foreseen by the law. 
Article 13: 
Political parties and formations shall be freely created. They shall contribute to the spirit of political life, to the formation and to the education of the people as well as to the expression of the franchise. 
They shall freely conduct their activities with respect to the laws. 
All political parties and formations shall be equal in rights and duties. 
However, tribalist, regional, confessional, or racist political parties or formations shall not be permitted.
CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC RIGHTS AND DUTIES<title> 
Article 14: 
The wealth and natural resources shall belong to the people. They shall be used for the amelioration of their conditions of life. 
Article 15: 
The right to property shall be guaranteed. It shall not be exercised contrary to social utility or in a manner which brings prejudice to the security, liberty, or to the existence or the property of others. 
It shall not be impaired except in cases of public necessity and in accordance with legal procedures. 
No one shall be seized of his possession if it is not for reason of public necessity and under the condition of just indemnification fixed conforming to the law. This indemnification must be given before expropriation except in case of urgency or of force majeure (superior force). 
Article 16: 
The freedom of enterprise shall be guaranteed with respect to the laws and rules in force. 
Article 17: 
The right to discharge oneself of ones obligations in conformity with the law shall be available to everyone. 
CHAPTER IV: SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES<title>
Article 18: 
Education, instruction, formation, employment, social security, housing, leisure, health, protection of motherhood and of infancy, assistance to the aged or handicapped persons and in social cases, artistic and scientific creation shall constitute the social and cultural rights recognized by the present Constitution which aims to promote them. 
Article 19: 
The right to employment shall be recognized and shall be equal for all. 
It shall be prohibited to discriminate on the basis of sex, color, social origin, ethnicity or political opinion in the manner of employment and remuneration. 
Article 20:
The State shall see to the constant amelioration of working conditions and to the protection of the worker. 
Article 21: 
The freedom of association shall be guaranteed. Every person shall have the right to form associations and to participate freely in the activities of the associations created. The functioning of associations should conform to the regulations in force. 
The freedom to form unions shall be guaranteed. Unions shall exercise their activities without restraint and without limitation other than those foreseen by the law. 
Article 22: 
The right to strike shall be guaranteed. It shall be exercised in conformity with the laws in force. 
Article 23: 
The family is the basic cell of society. The State owes it protection. 
Marriage shall be founded on the free consenting of the man and of the woman. Every discrimination founded on race, color, religion, ethnicity, caste, social origin, fortune shall be forbidden in the matter of marriage. 
Children shall be equal in rights and in duties within their familial relations. The parents shall have the natural right and the duty to bring up and to educate their child. They should give them respect and assistance. 
Article 24: 
The State shall work to promote the rights of the child. 
Article 25: 
The right to transfer goods by succession or gift shall be recognized in conformity with the laws and regulations in force. 
Article 26: 
The right to health shall be recognized. The State shall work to promote it. 
Article 27: 
Every citizen shall have the right to instruction. 
Public education shall be secular. 
Private education shall be recognized. The law shall fix the conditions of its exercise. 
Article 28: 
The law shall guarantee intellectual property. 
The freedom of creation and artistic, scientific and technical works shall be protected by the law. 
The manifestation of cultural, intellectual, artistic and scientific activity shall be free and shall be exercised in conformity with texts in force. 
Article 29: 
The right to a healthy environment shall be recognized; the protection, defense and promotion of the environment shall be a duty for all. 
Article 30: 
Every citizen shall have the right to initiate an action or to join a collective action under the form of a petition against these acts: 
<list>
- harming the public heritage; 
- harming the interests of social communities; 
- harming the environment or the cultural or artistic heritage. 
</list>
TITLE II: OF THE STATE AND THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE PEOPLE<title> 
Article 31:
Burkina Faso shall be a democratic, politically united secular state. Burkina Faso shall be a republican form of state. 
Article 32: 
Sovereignty shall belong to the people. 
The power of the people shall be exercised under the conditions prescribed by the present Constitution and by law.
Article 33: 
Suffrage may be direct or indirect according to the conditions set forth by the law. It shall always be universal, equal and secret.Article 34: 
The symbols of the Nation shall constitute an emblem, a crest, a national anthem and a motto. 
The emblem shall be the tri-colored flag in the shape of a rectangle red and green with, in its center, a yellow five-point star. 
- The law shall determine the crest. 
- The national anthem shall be the DYTANIE. 
- The motto shall be: THE FATHERLAND OR DEATH, WE SHALL CONQUER! 
Article 35: 
The official language shall be French. 
The law shall determine the manner of promotion and of official designation of national languages.TITLE III: OF THE PRESIDENT OF FASO<title> 
Article 36: 
The President of Faso shall be the Head of State. He shall guard the respect of the Constitution. He shall fix the major policies of the State. 
He shall embody and assure the national unity: in such capacity, he cannot be a directing member of a political party or a political formation during his commission. 
Article 37: 
The President of Faso shall be elected for seven years by universal, direct, equal and secret vote. He shall be re-eligible one time. 
Article 38: 
Every candidate for the office of President of Faso must be a Burkinabian by birth and born of parents themselves Burkinabians by birth, have completed thirty-five years of age upon the declaration of candidacy and meeting all the conditions of balloting required by the law. 
Article 39: 
The President of Faso shall be elected by an absolute majority of the votes cast. 
If this majority is not obtained in the first round of balloting, a second round shall be held fifteen (15) days later. Only if the more favored candidates have resigned may two candidates who in the latter case shall be found to have received the greatest number of votes in the first round, present themselves. 
The President of Faso shall be then elected by a simple majority. 
Article 40: 
The elections shall be fixed twenty-one days at the least and forty days at the most prior to the expiration of the term of the President in office. 
Article 41: 
The law shall determine the procedure and conditions of eligibility and of filing of candidatures in presidential elections, of the unfolding of the ballots, of the counting of the votes and of the announcement of the results. The law shall prescribe all the provisions required so that the elections shall be free, legitimate and regular. 
Article 42: 
The duties of the President of Faso shall be incompatible with the exercise of any other elected office on the national level, of any public employment and of every professional activity. 
The provisions of articles 72, 73, 74 and 75 of the present Constitution shall be applicable to the President of Faso. 
Article 43: 
While the President of Faso is hindered in a temporary manner from fulfilling his duties, his powers shall be provisionally exercised by the Prime Minister. 
In case of vacancy of the Presidency of Faso for whatever case, or absolute or definitive hindrance declared by the Supreme Court of arrest of the Government, the duties of the President of Faso shall be exercised by the President of the Assembly of the Deputies of the People. 
It shall take proceedings for the election of a new President for a new period of seven years. 
The election of a new President shall be held at the least twenty-one days and at the most forty days after the official declaration of the vacancy or the definitive character of the hindrance. 
In every case, articles 46, 49, 50, 59, and 161 of the present constitution shall not apply during the vacancy of the Presidency. 
Article 44: 
Before entering in duty, the President elected shall swear before the Supreme Court the following oath: "I swear before the Burkinabian people and on my honor to preserve, to respect, to make respected and to defend the Constitution and the laws, and to work to guarantee justice to all the inhabitants of Burkina Faso." 
In the course of the ceremony of investiture, the President of the Supreme Court shall receive the written declaration of the goods of the President of Faso. 
Article 45: 
The law shall fix the list of the civil servants of the President of Faso. It shall organize the service of a pension for the benefit of former Presidents. 
Article 46: 
The President of Faso shall name the Prime Minister and shall terminate his duties, either on the presentation by himself of his resignation or on his own authority in the higher interest of the nation. 
On the proposal of the Prime Minister, he shall name the other members of the Government and put an end to their office. 
Article 47: 
The President of Faso shall preside over the Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister shall take his place according to the conditions fixed by the present Constitution. 
Article 48: 
The President of Faso shall promulgate the law within the 21 days which follow the transmission of the text adopted definitively. This delay shall be reduced to 8 days in case of emergency declared by the Assembly of the Deputies of the People. 
The President of Faso can, during the delay of promulgation, demand a second reading of the law or certain of its articles; the demand cannot he refused. This procedure shall suspend the delays of promulgation. 
For lack of the promulgation due to the required delays, the law shall enter into force automatically after the establishment by the Supreme Court. 
Article 49: 
The President of Faso shall, on the advice of the Prime Minister, submit to referendum every project of the law carrying above all questions of national interest. 
In case of the adoption of said law, it shall proceed to its promulgation according to the delays set forth in Article 49. 
Article 50: 
The President of Faso can, after consultation with the Prime Minister, pronounce the dissolution of the Assembly of the Deputies of the People. 
In such case, the legislative elections shall take place at least 21 days and at most 40 days after the dissolution. 
A new dissolution cannot be processed during the year which follows these elections. 
Article 51: 
The President of Faso shall communicate with the Assembly of Deputies of the People and with the House of Representatives in person, or by way of message which shall be read by the President of the Assembly of Deputies of the People or by the President of the House of Representatives. If not in session, the Assembly of Deputies of the People or the House of Representatives shall meet specially to this end. 
Article 52: 
The President of Faso shall he the Supreme Chief of the People's Armed Forces; in this capacity, he shall preside over the Superior Council of Defense. 
He shall name the Commander in Chief of the People's Armed Forces. 
Article 53: 
The President of Faso shall be the President of the Superior Council of the Magistrature.
Article 54: 
The President of Faso shall dispense the right of pardon. He shall propose the laws of amnesty. 
Article 55: 
The President of Faso shall make appointments to positions in the High civil and military administration, as well as in Associations and companies of a strategic character as determined by law. 
He shall name the Ambassadors and the Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers and international organizations. 
The foreign ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary shall he accredited by him.He shall name the Grand Chancellor of Burkinabian Orders. 
Article 56: 
The law shall determine the other posts for which the Council of Ministers may provide, as well as the conditions pursuant to which the presidential nomination powers may be exercised. 
Article 57: 
The Acts of the President of Faso other than those set forth in Articles 46, 49, 50, 54 and 59 shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister, and should circumstances so require, by the ministers concerned. 
Article 58: 
The President of Faso shall decree, after deliberation in the Council of Ministers, the state of siege and the state of emergency. 
Article 59: 
When the Institutions of Faso, the independence of the Nation, the integrity of its territory or the execution of its obligations is threatened in a grave and immediate manner and/or the regular functioning of public constitutional powers is interrupted, the President of Faso shall take, after deliberation in the Council of Ministers, after official consultation of the Presidents of the Assembly of Deputies of the People, the House of Representatives and the Supreme Court, the measures warranted by these circumstances. He shall inform the nation of these measures by a speech. In no case may the President call foreign Armed Forces to intervene in a domestic conflict. The Assembly of Deputies of the People shall convene of right and may not be dissolved during the exercise of exceptional powers. 
Article 60: 
The President of Faso can delegate certain of his powers to the Prime Minister. 
TITLE IV: OF THE GOVERNMENT<title> 
Article 61: 
The Government is an Executive organ. 
It shall direct the policies of the Nation; in this capacity, it shall be obliged to undertake:	 
<list>
- projects of international agreements; 
- projects and propositions of law; 
- projects of regulatory texts. 
</list>
It shall have at its disposal the Administration and the Forces of Defense and of Security. 
Article 62: 
The Government shall be responsible before the Parliament for the following conditions and following the procedures foreseen by the present Constitution. 
Article 63: 
The Prime Minister shall be the Chief of the Government; in this title, he shall direct and coordinate governmental action.He shall be responsible for the execution of the politics of the national defense defined by the President of Faso. 
He shall exercise regulatory power in conformity with the law, shall assure the execution of the laws, shall name to civil and military post others depending on the competence of the President of Faso.
Article 64: 
The Prime Minister shall assure the presidency of Council of
Ministers by delegation and by an order of a determined date.
Article 65: 
The Prime Minister shall determine the attributions of the members of the Government. These attributions shall be determined by decree taken in the Council of Ministers.
Article 66: 
The acts of the Prime Minister shall be, in that case, countersigned by the members of the Government charged with their execution.
Article 67: 
The Prime Minister can delegate certain of his powers to members of the Government.
Article 68: 
The members of the Government shall be responsible for the direction of their respective departments before the Prime Minister. They shall be collectively responsible for the decisions of the Council of Ministers.
Article 69: 
Every vacancy of the post of Prime Minister shall automatically terminate the functions of the other members of the Government. 
In case of vacancy, the other members of the Government shall expedite current affairs until the formation of a new government.
Article 70: 
The duties of the members of the Government shall be incompatible with the exercise of every parliamentary mandate, with every remunerated professional activity, and with every professional representative function. 
At the same time, the exercise of professional representative functions with an international character shall be possible with the preliminary agreement of the Government.
Article 71: 
Every person called to exercise ministerial functions shall obligatorily benefit from a detachment or a suspension of contract of employment as the case may be.
Article 72: 
The members of the Government should not expose themselves to any situation susceptible of creating conflicts between their duties and functions and their private interests.
Article 73:
During the duration of their duties the members of the government cannot directly or indirectly buy or lease anything which belongs to the domain of the State. The law shall prescribe the cases in which the Government may deviate from this provision. 
They cannot take part in sales and in adjudications held by the administration or by the institutions relating to the state or submitted to its control. 
Article 74: 
No member of Government may derive a profit from his position, nor put directly or indirectly to personal use information that is communicated to him. 
Article 75: 
The provisions of Article 73 shall remain applicable to members of the Government during the six months following the cessation of their functions. 
The provisions of Article 74 shall remain applicable during the two years following the cessation of their functions. 
Article 76: 
Every member of the Government shall be responsible for crimes and offense committed by him during the exercise of their functions. 
Article 77: 
From their entry into duty and to the end of their exercise, the members of the Government shall be required to set forth a list of their personal goods before the Supreme Court. 
TITLE V: OF THE ASSEMBLY OF THE DEPUTIES OF THE PEOPLE<title> 
Article 78: 
The Parliament shall consist of two chambers: the Assembly of Deputies of the People and the House of Representatives. 
Article 79: 
The members of the Assembly of Deputies of the People shall bear the title of "Deputy" and the members of the House of Representatives shall bear the title of "representative". 
Article 80: 
Deputies shall be elected by direct, equal and secret universal suffrage. Deputies shall exercise legislative power. Representatives shall be elected by indirect suffrage. The House of Representatives shall have a consultative role. Rules relative to the composition and functioning of the House of Representatives shall be determined by law. Every person elected deputy should benefit, should circumstances so require, from a detachment or a suspension of employment contract as the case may be. 
Article 81: 
The duration of the legislature shall be five (5) years. 
The House of Representatives shall be renewed every three (3) years. 
Relations between the two Houses shall be determined by this constitution and by law. 
Article 82: 
The law shall determine: 
<list>
- the electoral districts; 
- the number of seats and their division among the districts;	
- the mode of ballot; 
- the conditions of the election and of replacement by new elections in the case of vacancy of a seat, as well as the rule of ineligibilities and incompatibilities. 
</list>
Article 83: 
Partial elections may not proceed during the last third of the legislature. 
Article 84: 
The Assembly of the Deputies of the People` shall vote the law, shall consent to the taxation and shall control the action of the Government in conformity with the dispositions of the present constitution. 
Article 85: 
All the deputies shall have a deliberative voice. The right of the deputies to vote shall be personal. During the proxy, the vote shall be permitted so long as the absence of the deputy is justified. No one can validly receive for a given ballot more than One proxy vote. 
Article 86: 
Every new Assembly shall proclaim the validity of the election of its members notwithstanding the control of regularity exercised by the Supreme court. 
It shall establish its interior rules. 
Article 87: 
The Assembly shall meet in full right every year in two ordinary sessions. The duration of each shall not exceed sixty days. The first session shall open the last Wednesday of March and the second, the last Wednesday of October. If the last Wednesday of March or of October is a holiday, the session shall commence the first open day which follows. 
Article 88: The Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session by convocation of the President, at the demand of the Prime Minister or on that of an absolute majority of the deputies on an order of the determined day. The extraordinary session shall be closed after the exhaustion of the agenda of the day. 
Article 89: The meetings of the Assembly shall be public. In case of need, the Assembly may meet in closed session. 
Article 90: 
Except in the case of force majeure (superior force) certified by the Supreme Court, the deliberations of the Assembly shall not be valid unless they have taken place within the precincts of the Parliament.Article 91: 
The President and the members of the Office of the Assembly of the Deputies of the People shall be elected for the duration of the legislature by an absolute majority of the first round or by a simple majority in the second round. 
Each time, an end can be put to his' duties during the course of the legislature at the demand of two fifths and after a vote of an absolute majorities of the members of the Assembly. 
The absolute majority extends to more than half of the voices. 
Article 92: 
In case of the vacancy of the President of the Assembly by death, resignation or for any other cause, the Assembly shall elect a new President according to the conditions defined in Article 91. 
Article 93: 
The Assembly shall enjoy financial autonomy. Its President shall direct the credits which shall be allotted to it for its operation. 
The President shall be responsible for the conduct of the Assembly; it can overrule him by an absolute majority of the members of the Assembly for grave error. 
Article 94: 
Every deputy called to a high position shall be replaced in the Assembly by his substitute. 
If he ceases the exercise of his position before the end of the legislature he may retake his seat in the Assembly. 
Article 95: 
No deputy can be pursued, searched, arrested, detained or condemned because of opinions, or votes, issued by him during the exercise of his official duties. 
Article 96: 
Except in the case of flagrante delicto, no deputy can be pursued or arrested in a correctional or criminal matter during the sessions, or in the office of the Assembly outside its sessions, except with the authorization of at least one-third the Assembly.
TITLE VI: OF THE RESPECTIVE DOMAINS OF THE LAWS AND REGULATIONS<title> 
Article 97: 
The law shall be a deliberation, regularly promulgated, by the Assembly of Deputies of the People. 
The law to which the Constitution confers organic character shall be a deliberation of the Assembly of Deputies of the People having, for its object the organization or functioning of its Institutions. It shall be voted by an absolute majority and promulgated after a declaration of its conformity with the Constitution by the Supreme Court. 
The initiative of the law shall belong concurrently to the Deputies and to the Government. The projects of texts emanating from the deputies shall be called "propositions of law" and those emanating from the Government "projects of law." 
The propositions and draft laws shall be deliberated in the Council of Ministers before their submission to the office of the Assembly of Deputies of the People. The Office of the Assembly shall forward a copy to the House of Representatives. 
The initiative to charge the House of Representatives to undertake a consultative opinion on a proposition or project of law judged of national importance belongs: 
<list>
-to the Government; 
-to the Assembly of Deputies of the People; 
-to the Permanent Office of the House of Representatives.
</list>
Article 98: 
The people shall exercise the initiation of laws by means of petition constituting a proposition drawn and signed by at least fifteen (15) thousand persons having the right to vote under the conditions prescribed by law. 
The petition shall be filed in the Office of the Assembly of Deputies of the People. 
The right of amendment belongs to the Deputies and to the Government regardless of the origin of the text.
Article 99: 
The ordinance shall be an act signed by the President of Faso, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, with the domains reserved to the law within the cases foreseen in articles 103, 107 and 119 of the present Constitution. It shall enter into force from its publication. 
Article 100: 
The simple decree shall be an act signed by the President of Faso or by the Prime Minister after the advice of the Council of Ministers; it shall be countersigned the competent member of the Government. 
Article 101: 
The law shall determine the rules concerning:
<list>
- citizenship, civic rights and the exercise of political rights; 
- matters related to the necessities of national defense; 
- nationality, the status and legal capacity of persons, matrimonial systems, inheritance and donations; 
- the procedure according to which customs shall be established and harmonized with the fundamental principles of the Constitution; 
- the determination of crimes and offenses, as well as the applicable punishments, the penal procedure, amnesty; 
- the organization of judicial and administrative tribunals and jurisdictional procedure, the status of magistrates, of ministerial and auxiliary officers of justice; 
- the basis, the rate and the manner of collecting taxes of all kinds; 
- the system of issuance of money; 
- the electoral system of the Assembly of Deputies of the People and of local Assemblies; 
- nationalization of enterprises and the transfer of property of enterprises from the public sector to the private sector; 
- the creation of categories of public establishments; 
- the state of siege and the state of emergency. 
</list>
The law shall determine the fundamental principles: 
<list>
- of protection and promotion of the environment; 
- of elaboration, execution and follow up of national plans and programs of development; 
- of protection of freedom of the press and of access to Information; 
- of the general organization of the Administration; 
- of the general status of public Office; 
- of organization of national Defense; 
- of Training and scientific research; 
- of integration of national cultural values; 
- of the property system, of the rights of real property, and of civil and commercial obligations; 
- of the right of Employment, of unionization, and of social institutions; 
- of conveyance and management of the domain of the State; 
- of the penitentiary regime; 
- of insurance and savings; 
- of the organization of production; 
- of the systems of transportation and communication; 
- of the free administration of territorial collectives, of their competencies and their resources. 
</list>
Article 102: 
The law of finances shall determine, for each year, the resources and the duties of the State. The project of the law of finances should set forth the receipts necessary to the integral coverage of expenses. 
Article 103: 
The Assembly of the Deputies of the People shall be seized of the project of the law of finances from the opening of the second ordinary session. 
The dispositions of the project can be put in force by ordinance if the Assembly has not so pronounced during a delay of forty-five days following the deposit of the project and the fiscal year is going to expire. In such case, the Government shall convene an extraordinary session after demanding the ratification. If the budget is not voted at the end of the extraordinary session, it shall be definitively established by ordinance. 
If the project of the law of finances cannot be disposed of in time to be voted and promulgated before the beginning of its exercise, the Prime Minister shall demand an emergency authorization from the Assembly to re-institute the budget of the preceding year by provisory twelfths. 
Article 104: 
In the course of the execution of the budget, while circumstances warrant, the Government shall propose to the Parliament the adoption of rectifying financial laws. 
Article 105: 
The Assembly the Deputies of the People shall regulate the accounts of the Nation, according to the manner set forth by the law on finance. 
It shall be, to this effect, assisted by the Chamber of Accounting of the Supreme Court which shall be in charge of all inquisitions and studies relating to the execution of public receipts and expenditures, or the management of the national treasury, of territorial collectives, of administrations or institutions relating to the State or submitted to its control. 
Article 106: 
The Assembly shall meet in full right in case of a state of siege, if it is not already in session. The state of siege cannot be promulgated beyond fifteen days except after authorization of the Assembly. 
The declaration of war and the sending of troops abroad shall be authorized by the Assembly. 
Article 107: 
The Government can, by the execution of its programs, demand of the Assembly authorization to take by ordinance, after a limited delay, measures which are normally within the domain of the law. 
The ordinances shall be taken in the Council of Ministers after the advice of the Supreme Court. They shall enter into force from their publication, but shall become null and void if the project of the law of ratification is not placed before the Assembly before the date fixed by the law of habilitation. 
Upon the expiration of the delay mentioned in the first line of this article, the ordinances can no longer be modified except by the law of their disposition which shall be of the domain of the legislature. 
Article 108: 
Matters other than those relating to the domain of the law shall have regulatory character.
TITLE VII: OF RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND THE ASSEMBLY OF THE DEPUTIES OF THE PEOPLE<title>
Article 109: 
The Prime Minister shall have access to the Assembly of the Deputies of the People. He can charge a member of the Government with to represent himself before the Assembly; in the course of debates or in the commission, by members of the Government, counselors or experts of his choice.The Prime Minister shall expose directly to the deputies the situation of the Nation during the opening of the first session of the Assembly. 
Article 110: 
The members of the Government shall have access to the Assembly, its commissions and consultative organs. They can be assisted by counselors or by experts. 
Article 111: 
During the sessions, a weekly meeting shall be reserved for the questions of the deputies and the responses of the Government. 
The Assembly may address to the Government its written or oral question, with or without debate. 
Article 112: 
The Government shall propose projects of the laws before the Assembly of the Deputies of the People. 
It shall present and defend before it governmental policies, the budget of the State, the plans for the nation's economic and social development. 
It shall participate in the debates concerning their policies, the legitimacy, the merit and the efficacy of the policies of the Government. 
Article 113: 
The Government shall furnish to the Assembly all explanations which shall be demanded of it concerning the management and concerning its acts. 
The Assembly may form Commissions of Inquiry. 
Article 114: 
The reciprocal relations of the Assembly and of the Government shall be rendered equally by: 
<list>
- the motion of censure; 
- the question of confidence; 
- the dissolution of the Assembly; 
- the procedure of parliamentary discussion. 
</list>
Article 115: 
The Assembly of the Deputies of the People may present a motion of censure at the deference of the Government. The motion of censure shall be signed by at least a third of the Deputies of the Assembly. To be adopted, it should be voted by an absolute majority of the members composing the Assembly. In the case of rejection of the motion of censure, its signatories may not present another before a delay of one year. 
Article 116: 
The Prime Minister may, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, engage before the Assembly of the Deputies of the People the responsibility of the Government in a program or a declaration of general policy. 
The confidence shall be refused to the Government if the text presented does not receive an absolute majority of the voices of the members composing the Assembly.The vote on the question of confidence may not be taken less than 48 hours after the deposit of the text. 
The Prime Minister may, after deliberation of the Council of ministers, engage the responsibility of the Government before the Assembly on the vote of the text. In this case, this text shall be considered adopted except if a motion of censure, deposited within the twenty-four hours which follow, is voted within the conditions foreseen in the lines below. 
Article 117: 
If the motion of censure is voted or the confidence refused, the President of Faso shall put an end, during the delay of eight days, to the official duties of the Prime Minster. He shall name a new Prime Minister according to the procedure set forth in Article 46. 
Article 118: 
The agenda of the Assembly shall be comprised of, in order of priority determined by the Government, the discussion of popular petitions, of projects filed by the Government and propositions accepted by it. 
Nevertheless, every proposition of law may be discussed two months after its submission to the Government without application of the rule set forth in the preceding paragraph and in Articles 121 and 122 of the present Constitution. 
Article 119: 
In case of emergency declared by the Government, the Assembly should pronounce a delay of fifteen days on its projects of law. This delay shall be extended to forty days for laws of finances. If, prior to the expiration of the delay no vote occurs, the project of law shall be promulgated as is, on the proposition of the Prime Minister by the President of Faso, under the form of an ordinance. 
Article 120: 
The propositions and amendments deposited by the deputies shall be inadmissible when their adoption will result in a diminution of the public resources, the creation or the aggravation of a public charge, (unless) they are accompanied by a proposition of augmentation of receipt or of equivalent economies. 
Article 121: 
If the government demands of it, the Assembly shall pronounce by a sole vote on all or part of a text in discussion and retaining any except the amendments proposed or accepted by it. 
Article 122: 
When the Assembly has committed an examination of a project of text to a commission, the Government can, after the opening of debates oppose the examination of the entire amendment which has not been preliminarily submitted to this commission. 
Article 123: 
The propositions and amendments which are not of the domain of the law shall be inadmissible. The inadmissibility shall be pronounced by the President of the Assembly. 
In the case of contest, the Supreme Court, on the arrest of the Prime Minister or of the President of the Assembly, shall declare by, ordinance a delay of eight days.
TITLE VIII: OF THE JUDICIAL POWER<title> 
Article 124: 
The Judicial Power shall be confined to judges; it shall be exercised over all the territory of Burkina Faso by the jurisdictions of the judicial order and administrative order determined by the law. 
Article 125: 
The Judicial Power shall be the guardian of individual and collective liberties. 
It shall watch over the respect the rights and liberties defined within the present Constitution. 
Article 126: 
The jurisdictions of Burkina Faso shall be: 
<list>
- the Supreme Court; 
- the courts and the tribunals. 
</list>
These jurisdictions shall apply the law in force. 
Article 127: 
The Supreme Court shall be the higher jurisdiction. 
It shall consist of four chambers: 
<list>
- the Constitutional Chamber; 
- the Judicial Chamber; 
- the Administrative Chamber; 
- the Chamber of Accounts. 
</list>
The composition, the attributes, the functioning of the Supreme Court and of its Chambers shall be determined by the law. 
Article 128: 
The law shall fix the seats, the strength, the competence and the composition of courts and of tribunals. 
Article 129: 
The Judicial Power shall be independent. 
Article 130: 
The seated magistrates shall not submit in the exercise of their duties to any other authority except the law. They shall be irremovable. 
Article 131: 
The President of Faso shall be guaranteed independence from the Judicial Power. 
He shall be assisted by the Superior Council of the Magistrature. 
Article 132: 
The President of Faso shall be the President of the Superior Council of the Magistrature. The Keeper of the Seal and the Minister of Justice shall be the Vice-President.
Article 133: 
The Superior Council of the Magistrature shall give advice on all questions concerning the independence of the magistrature and concerning the exercise of the right of pardon. 
The law shall fix the organization, its composition, its attributes, the duties of the Superior Council of the Magistrature. 
Article 134: 
The Superior Council of the Magistrature shall make nominations and set the responsibilities of the magistrates of the Supreme court and of those of the Premier Presidents of the Courts of Appeal. 
It shall give advice on the nominations of the Minister of Justices, relative to the nominations of other magistrates of the seats. 
The magistrates of the prosecutor shall be named and appointed on the nomination of the Minister of Justice. 
Article 135: 
One organic law shall bind the magistrature by ordinance to the principles contained within the present Constitution. 
It shall provide for and organize the security and independence of the Magistrature. 
Article 136: 
The hearings with all the courts and with all the tribunals shall be public. Closed hearings shall not be held except with cases defined by the law. 
The decisions of the departments shall be explained, except in the cases where the law disposes of this otherwise.
TITLE IX: OF THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE<title> 
Article 137: 
There shall be instituted one High Court of Justice. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of the deputies which the Assembly of the People shall elect after every general renewal just as the magistrates are designated by the President of the Supreme Court. It shall elect its President from among their members. 
The law shall fix its composition, the regulations and the duties and the procedure applicable before her. 
Article 138: 
The High Court of Justice shall be competent to examine the acts committed by the President of Burkina Faso during the exercise of his duties and constituting high treason, violating the Constitution or embezzling public funds. The High Court of Justice shall be equally competent to judge the members of Government in reason of their committing crimes or offenses during the exercise of their duties. In all the cases, they shall remain triable by the department under the common law. 
Article 139: 
The indictment of the President of Faso shall be voted by a majority of 4/5 of the votes of the Deputies composing the Assembly. The indictment of members of the Government shall be voted by a majority of two thirds of the votes of the Deputies composing the Assembly. 
Article 140: 
The High Court of Justice shall be bound by the definition of crimes and offenses and by the determination of punishments resulting from the penal laws in force at the time when the deeds had been committed. 
TITLE X: OF THE ORGANS OF CONTROL, AUTHORITY, AND CONSULTATIVE ORGANS<title> 
Article 141: 
The Organs of control, of authority and consultative organs shall be created by law. 
Their competence covers economic, social, and cultural questions of national interest. 
The composition, attributes and functioning of these organs of control, authority and consultative organs shall be determined by law. 
Article 142: 
At the demand of the President of Faso, of the Government, of the Assembly of Deputies of the People: 
<list>
-the authorities and consultative organs shall give technical advice and recommendations within the domain of their competence; 
-the organs of control shall conduct investigations and issue reports.
</list>
TITLE XI: OF COLLECTIVE TERRITORIES<title> 
Article 143: 
Burkina Faso shall be organized in collective territories where local organs of popular power shall be seated. 
Article 144: 
The creation, the elimination, and the carving out of collective territories shall be with resort to law. 
Article 145: 
The law shall organize the democratic participation of populations in the free administration of collective territories. 
TITLE XII: OF AFRICAN UNITY<title> 
Article 146: 
Burkina Faso may conclude, with every African state, agreements of association or of community implying a total or partial abandonment of sovereignty. 
Article 147: 
The agreements consecrating the entry of Burkina Faso within a Confederation, a Federation or a Union of African states shall he submitted to the people for approval by referendum. 
TITLE XIII: OF TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS<title> 
Article 148: 
The President of Faso shall negotiate, sign and ratify international treaties and agreements. 
Article 149: 
Peace treaties, treaties of commerce, treaties that which engage the finances of the State, those that modify legislative provisions, and those that relate to the status of persons, may not be ratified or approved except by virtue of law. 
They shall not take effect except after having been ratified or approved. 
Article 150: 
If the Constitutional Chamber, charged in conformity with Article 157 declares that an international agreement includes a provision contrary to the Constitution, authorization to ratify or approve it can only take place after a revision of the Constitution. 
Article 151: 
Treaties or agreements regularly ratified or approved shall be, from their publication, an authority superior to those of the laws, with reserve, for each agreement or treaty, of its application for the other party. 
TITLE XIV: OF THE CONTROL OF THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF LAWS<title> 
Article 152: 
The control of the constitutionality of laws shall be assured by the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court. 
The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court shall he presided over by the President of the Supreme Court. 
Article 153: 
The Constitutional Chamber shall consist of, (other than the President of the Supreme court), three (3) magistrates named by the President of Faso on the proposition of the Minister of Justice, three (3) persons named by the President of the Assembly of the Deputies of the People. 
Except for the President of the Supreme Court, the members of the Constitutional Chamber shall be named for a single mandate of nine (9) years. However, they shall be renewable by one-third (1/3) every three (3) years under conditions determined by law.The functions of the members of the Constitutional Chamber shall be incompatible with those of the members of Government or of the Parliament. 
The other incompatibilities shall be fixed by the law. 
Article 154: 
The Constitutional Chamber shall supervise the regularity of presidential elections. It shall examine election petitions and announce the election results. 
In electoral matters, the Constitutional Chamber may be charged by any interested candidate. The Constitutional Chamber shall pass an ordinance, in case of contest, on the regularity of the elections of the deputies. 
It shall watch the regularity of referendum operations and shall proclaim the results of them. 
The Constitutional Chamber shall watch with respect to the procedure of Constitutional revision. 
Article 155: 
Organic laws and regulations of the Assembly of Deputies of the People and those of the House of Representatives must be submitted to the Constitutional Chamber before their promulgation or application. 
To the same ends, ordinary laws and treaties submitted for ratification, may be referred to the Constitutional Chamber, before their promulgation. 
Article 156: 
The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court shall also be charged with controlling the respect by political parties of the provisions of Article 13, line 5 of this constitution. 
Article 157: 
The Constitutional Chamber shall be charged by: 
<list>
- the President of Faso; 
- the Prime Minister; 
- the President of the Assembly of Deputies of the People; 
- the President of the House of Representatives; 
- One fifth at the least of the members of the Assembly of Deputies of the People. 
</list>
Article 158: 
The arrest of the Constitutional Chamber shall suspend the delay of the promulgation of texts which are deferred to it. 
Article 159: 
A disposition declared unconstitutional cannot be promulgated nor put into application. 
The decisions of the Constitutional Chamber shall not be susceptible to any appeal. They shall be imposed on all public powers and on ill the administrative and jurisdictional authorities. 
Article 160: 
An organic law shall fix the organization and the functioning of the Constitutional Chamber and shall determine the procedure applicable before it.TITLE XV: OF REVISION<title> 
Article 161: 
The initiative of the revision of the Constitution shall belong concurrently: 
<list>
- to the President of Faso; 
- to a majority of the members of the Assembly of the Deputies of the People; 
- to the people where a faction of at least thirty thousand (30,000) persons having the right to vote, introduces before the Assembly of the Deputies of the People a petition constituting a proposition drafted and signed. 
</list>
Article 162: 
The law shall fix the conditions and shall put into work a procedure of revision. 
Article 163: 
The project of revision shall be, in all cases, submitted preliminarily to the evaluation of the Assembly of Deputies of the People, upon recommendation; of the House of Representatives. 
Article 164: 
The project of the text shall also be submitted to referendum. When it shall have obtained a majority of the votes cast, it shall be considered to have been adopted. 
The President of Faso shall proceed with its promulgation within the conditions defined by article 48 of the present Constitution. 
At all times, the project of revision shall be adopted without recourse to referendum if it is approved by the majority of 3/4 of the members of the Assembly of the Deputies of the People. 
Article 165: 
No project or proposition of revision of the Constitution shall be admissible when it places in question: 
<list>
- the republication nature and form of the State; 
- the multiparty system; 
- the integrity of national territory. 
</list>
No procedure of revision can be engaged nor pursued when it impairs territorial integrity. 
TITLE XVI: FINAL DISPOSITIONS<title> 
Article 166: 
Treason against the Fatherland and the Constitution shall constitute the most severe crimes committed against the people. 
Article 167: 
The source of all legitimacy arises from the present Constitution. 
All power which doesn't take its source from this Constitution, notably those stemming from a coup d'Etat or from a putsch, shall be illegal. 
In this case, civil disobedience shall be recognized from all the citizens.Article 168: 
The Burkinabian people forbid all idea of personal power. They forbid equally all oppression of a faction of people by another. 
TITLE XVI: TRANSITORY DISPOSITIONS<title> 
Article 169: 
The promulgation of the Constitution should intervene in the 21 days following its adoption by referendum. 
Article 170: 
The Head of State and the Government shall be competent to take the measures necessary to put in place the Institutions. 
Article 171: 
The presidential and legislative elections shall take place within the six months which follow the adoption of the Constitution. 
Article 172: 
Until the Institutions are put in place, the Head of State and the Government shall continue to operate and to take the measures necessary to the functioning of public powers, to the life of the Nation, to the protection of citizens and to safeguard liberties. 
Article 173: 
The legislation in force shall remain applicable so long as it has nothing contrary to the present Constitution, until the intervention of new texts.