The people of Upper Volta proclaims its attachment to the principles of democracy and the rights of man as defined by the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen of 1789, by the Universal Declaration of 1948, and as they are guaranteed by the present constitution. It affirms its desire to co-operate in peace and friendship with all peoples who share its ideal of justice, liberty, fraternity and human solidarity. TITLE I: THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY<title>
Art. 1. 
The State of Upper Volta is an independent and sovereign Republic. 
The national emblem is the tricolor flag, black, white and red in equal horizontal stripes. 
The national anthem is "La Volta." 
The motto of the republic is "Unity, Work, Justice." 
The official language is French. 
Art. 2. 
The Republic of Upper Volta, is one and indivisible, secular, democratic and social. 
Its principle is government of the people, by the people and for the people. 
Art. 3. 
Sovereignty belongs to the people. 
No section of the people nor any individual may usurp the exercise of this right. 
Art. 4. 
The people shall exercise its sovereignty through its representatives and by means of referendum. The conditions for recourse to referendum shall be determined by law. 
The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of referendum operations and shall proclaim the results. 
Art. 5. 
Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret. 
All Volta citizens of both sexes who have reached their majority and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the conditions to be determined by law. 
Art. 6 
The Republic shall ensure equality before the law to all without distinction of origin, sex, race or religion. It shall respect all beliefs. 
Any particularist propaganda of a racial, ethnic or regional character as well as any manifestation of racial discrimination shall be punished by law. 
Art. 7. 
Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the expression of the suffrage. They shall be formed freely and shall carry on their activities freely on condition that they respect the principles of national sovereignty and democracy and the laws of the Republic. 
TITLE II: THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC AND THE GOVERNMENT<title>
Art. 8. 
The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State. He shall embody the national unity. He shall watch over the respect of the Constitution. He shall ensure the continuance of the State. He shall be the guarantor of national independence, of 'the integrity of the territory and of respect for treaties and international agreements.
Art. 9. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected for five years by universal suffrage. He shall be eligible for reelection. 
Art. 10. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected by an absolute majority on the first ballot. If this is not obtained, the President of the Republic shall be elected on a second ballot, which shall take place fifteen days after the first ballot, by a relative majority. 
The voting shall begin at the summons of the Council of Ministers. 
The first ballot for the election of the President of the Republic shall take place on the same day as that fixed for the general elections. 
These elections shall take place twenty days at the least and fifty days at the most before the expiration of the powers of the incumbent President and legislature.
A law shall establish the conditions of eligibility, the presentation of candidatures, the voting, counting and proclamation of the results. The Supreme Court shall control the regularity of these operations. 
Art. 11. 
In the event that the Presidency of the Republic has been vacated, by death, resignation or an absolute impediment in its functioning, the functions of the President of the Republic shall be exercised provisionally by a person chosen by the President of the National Assembly, from among its members. 
The President appointed by the President of the National Assembly shall become by right the President of the Republic with the rank, powers and prerogatives belonging to this title, until the election of a new President. The election of a new President shall take place under the conditions and in the manner provided in Article 10 above. It shall take place twenty days at the least and fifty days at the, most after the date on which the Presidency of the Republic became vacant. 
The term of the new President of the Republic shall expire at the same time as the term of the National Assembly. 
Art 12. 
The President of the Republic shall be the exclusive holder of the executive power. 
He shall appoint the members of the Government and determine their powers. 
The members of the Government shall be responsible to him. He shall terminate their functions. 
Art. 13. 
The President of the Republic together with the members of the National Assembly shall have the right to initiate legislation. 
He shall promulgate the laws within fifteen days following their transmission to him by the President of the National Assembly. 
This time limit shall be reduced to five days in eases of urgency; so declared by the National Assembly. 
He may, before the expiration of this time limit, ask the National Assembly for a second reading of the law or of certain of its articles. The second reading may not be refused. 
He may also, within the same time limit ask that the second reading not take place until the next ordinary session following the session during which the text was adopted in first reading. This may not be refused.
A text, to be accepted on second reading, must be passed by a majority of two thirds of the members of the National Assembly. 
Art. 14. 
The President of the Republic, with the agreement of the secretariat of the National Assembly, may submit to referendum any text which seems to him to require direct consultation with the people. 
When a bill is adopted by a referendum, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it within the time limit provided in the preceding article. 
Art. 15. 
The President of the Republic shall ensure the implementation of the laws and of the decisions of the judicial authority. He shall issue the regulations which are applicable throughout the territory of the Republic. 
Art. 16. 
The President of the. Republic shall accredit Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers. Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to him. 
Art. 17. 
The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Administration. He shall make the civil and military appointments of the State. 
Art. 18. 
The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Armed Forces. 
Art. 19. 
When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the Nation, the integrity of its territory or the execution of its international commitments are threatened by a clear and present danger, the President of the Republic shall take the exceptional measures commanded by the circumstances after official consultation with the President of the National Assembly. 
He shall inform the nation by a message. 
The National Assembly shall meet by right. 
Art. 20. 
The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon.
Art. 21. 
The President of the Republic shall determine and conduct the policy of the nation. 
Art. 22. 
The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers. The Council of Ministers must consider: 
<list>
- decisions determining the general policy of the State; 
- government bills; 
- ordinances and regulatory decrees; 
- appointments to the higher offices of the State the list of which shall be established by law.
</list> 
Art. 23. 
Bills, ordinances and regulatory decrees may be examined by the Supreme Court for an opinion before being submitted to the Council of Ministers. 
Art. 24. 
The President of the Republic may delegate certain of his powers to the ministers. 
Art. 25. 
The functions of President of the Republic and of member of the Government shall be incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, any public employment and any professional activity. 
Art. 26. 
The President of the Republic shall communicate with the National Assembly either directly or by messages which he shall cause to be read by the President of the National Assembly and which shall not be followed by any debate. 
TITLE III: THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY<title>
Art. 27. 
Parliament shall be composed of a single assembly called the National Assembly, the members of which shall bear the title of deputies. 
Art. 28. 
The National Assembly shall pass the laws and vote taxation.Art. 29. 
Deputies in the National Assembly shall be elected by universal direct suffrage from a complete national list. 
The term of the legislature shall be five years. 
A law shall establish the number of members of the National Assembly, the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility, the offices, incompatible with membership, the method of voting and the conditions under which new elections shall be organized in cases of vacancies in the seats of deputies.
In case of dispute the Supreme Court shall rule on the eligibility of candidates. 
Art. 30. 
The National Assembly shall be the final judge of the validity of the elections of its members. 
Art. 31. 
The National Assembly shall meet in two ordinary sessions a year. 
The first session shall open on the last Wednesday of April and may not last longer than three months. 
The second session shall begin on the first Wednesday of October and shall end on the third Friday of December. 
Art. 32. 
The National Assembly shall be convened in extraordinary sessions by its President at the request of the President of the Republic or of an absolute majority of deputies, to consider a specific agenda. 
Extraordinary sessions shall be closed as soon as the agenda is exhausted. 
Art. 33. 
The President of the Assembly shall be elected for the duration of the legislature. 
Art. 34. 
A complete report of the debates shall be published in the Journal Officiel. 
The Assembly may sit in secret committee at the request of the President of the Republic or of one third of the deputies. 
Art. 35. 
Each deputy shall represent the entire nation. 
Any binding instruction upon deputies shall be null and void. 
The right to vote of deputies shall be personal. However, the delegation of a vote shall be permitted when a deputy is absent because of sickness, to execute a mandate or mission assigned by the Government or the Assembly, or to fulfill his military obligations. No one may be delegated more than one vote. 
Art. 36. 
No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or tried as a result of the opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise of his functions. 
Art. 37. 
No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for criminal or minor offenses without the authorization of the National Assembly except in flagrante delicto. When the Assembly is not in session no deputy may be arrested without the authorization of the secretariat of the National Assembly except in flagrante delicto, in case of authorized prosecution or of final conviction.The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the National Assembly so demands. 
Art. 38. 
Deputies shall receive remuneration the amount of which shall be fixed by law. 
Art. 39. 
The National Assembly shall draw up its rules of procedure. 
TITLE IV: RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ASSEMBLY AND THE GOVERNMENT<title> 
Art. 40. 
Members of the Government shall have access to the commissions of the National Assembly. They shall be heard at the request of the commissions. They may be assisted by Government Commissioners.
Section I: Respective Domains of Law and Regulation<title>
Art. 41. 
Laws shall establish the regulations concerning: 
<list>
- citizenship, civil rights and the fundamental guarantees granted to citizens for the exercise of their public liberties. 
- nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts, inheritance and gifts;
- the procedure by which customs shall be recorded and harmonized with the fundamental principles of the Constitution; 
- determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties imposed therefore, criminal procedure, amnesty; 
- the organization of judicial and administrative tribunals and the procedure to be followed before them, the status of magistrates, of ministerial officers and assistants of the judicial authority; 
- the basis, rate and the methods of collecting taxes of all types; 
- the issuance of currency; 
- the electoral system of the National Assembly and the local assemblies; 
- the general status of the public service; 
- the general organization of the Administration; 
- martial law and siege law. 
</list>
Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of: 
<list>
- the organization of national defense; 
- education; 
- property rights, civil and commercial obligations; 
- legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social security; 
- nationalization and the administration of the State domain; 
- benefit societies and savings;
- the organization of production; 
- the system of transportation and telecommunications.
</list> 
The financial laws shall determine the resource and obligations of the State. 
Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives of the economic and social action of the State. 
Art. 42. 
The National Assembly shall authorize the declaration of war. 
Art. 43. 
Martial law shall be decreed in the Council of Ministers. The National Assembly shall meet at once automatically if it is not already in session. 
Prorogation of martial law beyond fifteen days may be authorized only by the National Assembly. 
Art. 44. 
Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law shall be of a regulatory character.
Legislative texts concerning these matters passed before the entry into force of this Constitution may be modified by decree issued after consultation with the Supreme Court.
Art. 45. 
The President of the Republic, in order to carry out his program, may ask the National Assembly to authorize him, for a limited period, to take through 'ordinances measures that are normally within the domain of law. 
The ordinances shall be enacted in the council of Ministers after consultation with the Supreme Court. They shall come into force upon their publication but shall become null and void if the bill for their ratification is not submitted to the National Assembly before the date fixed by the enabling Act. 
At the expiration of the time limit referred to in the first paragraph of the present article, the ordinances may be modified only by law in those matters which are within the legislative domain. 
Art. 46. 
Bills which do not fall within the domain of law shall be inadmissible. Inadmissibility shall be pronounced by the President of the National Assembly. 
In case of dispute, the Supreme Court, the matter having been referred to it by the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly, shall rule within a time limit of eight days. 
Section II: The Preparation of the Laws<title> 
Art. 47. 
Bills and amendments introduced by deputies shall not be considered when their adoption would have as a consequence either a diminution of public financial resources, or the creation or increase of public expenditure, unless they are accompanied by proposals for revenues or economies to an equivalent amount.Art. 48. 
The discussion of Government bills shall pertain to the text presented by the Commission. 
The Commission shall inform the Assembly, at the request of the Government, of the points on which it disagrees with the Government. 
Art. 49. 
Deputies shall have the right of amendment. 
Art. 50.
The National Assembly shall pass the finance bill in the conditions stipulated by law. 
Art. 51. 
The finance, bill shall be filed with the National Assembly at the beginning of the October session. The finance bill must provide for the revenues necessary fully to cover expenditures. 
The National Assembly shall pass the budget in balance. 
If the National Assembly has not acted within seventy days of the filing of the bill, its provisions may be put into force by ordinance. 
The Government shall inform the National Assembly, convened in extraordinary session within a time limit of fifteen days for the purpose of ratification. 
If the National Assembly has not passed the budget by the end of the extraordinary session it shall be definitively established by ordinance. 
If the finance bill has not been filed in time to be promulgated before the beginning of the financial year, the President of the Republic shall urgently request the National Assembly for the authorization to continue the budget of the preceding year by provisional monthly credits. 
Art. 52. 
The National Assembly shall administer the accounts of the Nation in accordance with the forms provided by the finance law. 
TITLE V: TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS<title> 
Art. 53. 
The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements. 
Art. 54. 
Peace treaties, treaties or agreements relative to international organization, those that modify the internal laws of the State may be ratified only by a law. 
Art. 55. 
If the Supreme Court, the matter having been referred to it by the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly, shall declare that an international commitment contains a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify this commitment may be given only after amendment the Constitution. 
Art. 56. 
Treaties or agreements duly ratified or approved shall, upon their publication, have an authority superior to that of laws, subject, for each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.TITLE VI: THE SUPREME COURT<title>
Art. 57.
The Supreme Court shall comprise four Chambers: the Constitutional Chamber, the Judicial Chamber, the Administrative Chamber and the Accounts Chamber. 
A law shall determine the composition, organization, powers and procedure of the Supreme Court. 
TITLE VII: THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY<title> 
Art. 58. 
Justice shall be rendered throughout the territory of the State in the name of the people. 
Art. 59. 
Judges, in the exercise of their functions, shall be subject only to the authority of the law. 
The President of the Republic shall be the guarantor of the independence of the judges. He shall be assisted by a High Council of the Judiciary. 
Art. 60. 
A law shall determine the composition, organization and procedure of the High Council of the Judiciary. 
Art. 61.
Magistrates shall be appointed by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the Minister of Justice and with the advice of the High Council of the Judiciary. 
Art. 62. 
No one may be arbitrarily detained. 
The accused shall be presumed innocent until his guilt has been established as the result of a procedure which provides him the guarantees necessary to his defense. The judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure respect for this principle under the conditions stipulated by law. 
TITLE VIII: THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE<title> 
Art. 63. 
The High Court of Justice shall be composed of deputies elected by the National Assembly after each general election. It shall elect its President from among its members. 
A law shall determine the number of its members, its rules and the procedure to be followed before it. 
Art. 64. 
The President of the Republic shall not be held accountable for actions performed in the exercise of his office except in the case of high treason. 
The High Court shall be competent to judge members of the Government for actions performed in the exercise of their office and deemed to be crimes or misdemeanors, as well as their accomplices in case of a conspiracy against the security of the State. 
Art. 65. 
Indictment of the President of the Republic and of members of the Government shall be passed by open ballot and a majority of two thirds of the deputies to the National Assembly. 
Art. 66. 
The High Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as by the determination of penalties, as they are established by the criminal laws in force when the acts are committed. 
TITLE IX: THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL<title> 
Art. 67.
The Economic and Social Council shall give its opinion on the Government bills, ordinances and decrees, as well as on the Parliamentary bills submitted to it. 
Bills dealing with a plan of an economic or social character shall be submitted to it for its advice. 
The President of the Republic may consult the Economic and Social Council on any problem of an economic or social character. 
The composition of the Economic and Social Council and its rules of procedure shall be determined by law. 
TITLE X: TERRITORIAL UNITS<title> 
Art. 68. 
The territorial units of the State shall be created by law. 
A law shall determine the fundamental principles of the free administration of the territorial units, their powers and their resources. 
TITLE XI: ASSOCIATION AND CO-OPERATION BETWEEN STATES<title> 
Art. 69. 
The Republic of Upper Volta may conclude agreements of association with other States. 
It agrees to create with other states intergovernmental organizations of common administration, co-ordination and free co-operation.Art. 70. 
Such organizations may have, in particular, the following purposes: 
- harmonization of monetary, economic and financial policy; 
- establishment of customs unions; 
- creation of joint funds; 
- harmonization of development plans; 
- harmonization of foreign policy; 
- common measures for national defense; 
- co-ordination of the judicial organization; 
- co-operation in questions of higher education; 
- harmonization of rules concerning the status of the government service and the right to work; 
- co-ordination of transportation, communications and telecommunications; 
- health co-operation and co-ordination. 
TITLE XII: AMENDMENT<title> 
Art. 71. 
The President of the Republic and the members of the National Assembly alike shall have the right to initiate amendment of the Constitution. 
Art. 72. 
A bill of amendment, in order to be taken under consideration, must be passed by a majority of three fourths of the members of the National Assembly. 
An amendment shall not enter into force before it has been approved by referendum unless the bill in question has been approved by a majority of four fifths of the members of the Assembly. 
Any amendment, however, which would modify the respective powers of the executive and legislative powers, or which would threaten the principle of the separation of these powers, must be submitted to referendum. 
Art. 73.
No amendment procedure may be undertaken or pursued which threatens the integrity of the territory. 
The republican form of Government may not be the subject of amendment. 
TITLE XIII: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS<title> 
Art. 74. 
The National Assembly shall pass the necessary laws for the application of this Constitution, which abrogates the Constitution promulgated by Decision No. 157/PRES of March 19, 1959. 
The present National Assembly shall be prolonged for five years counting from the date of approval of this Constitution by the electorate. 
The President of the Republic, Head of State, shall be elected for five years by the Assembly prolonged in this manner. 
Art. 75. 
The established authorities of the Republic shall continue to exercise their functions and the existing institutions shall be, maintained until new authorities and institutions have been set up. 
Art. 76. 
The legislation presently in force in Upper Volta shall remain applicable except where there are new texts, insofar as it is not contrary to the present Constitution.
