<preamble> 
August 4, 1983, the day of the triumph of the democratic and popular Revolution, marks for our people the beginning of a new era in its historical evolution. 
The taking of the power of the State on that historic day by the oppressed social classes and strata (workers, peasants, soldiers, city laborers, intellectual revolutionaries) created the conditions essential for overthrowing the neocolonial domination and the construction of a society of peoples' democracy in Burkina Faso. 
However, the negation of the role of the avant-garde organization in the direction and consolidation of the revolutionary process and the overestimating of the role of the individual in the orientation of this process led in four years of experience to the development of an anti-organizational attitude through: 
<list>
- the rejection of organizational tasks; 
- scorning organizational principles in favor of an autocratic direction of the revolution. 
</list>
Such a concept of the organizational question and more particularly of the question of the direction of the revolution gave rise to a fascist-tending and populist deviationist line in the midst of the revolutionary process. 
The predominance of this deviationist line at the very summit of the political direction of the revolution led to the application of a policy that was in the final analysis pro-imperialist and anti-popular. 
However, conscientious revolutionaries and our people resisted the development of this deviation and brought about its defeat on October 15, 1987, through the unleashing of a vast Movement of Rectification. 
Conscious of this necessity for rectification in every direction in order to preserve the work of implanting the Revolution and constructing our country.
Thoroughly convinced that the tasks inherent in the rectification of the process, the consolidation of the revolution and the construction of our country can be accomplished only by the entirety of the social classes and strata of our people through their political organizations as a whole. 
The organized revolutionaries, patriots and anti-imperialist democrats of Burkina Faso agree to work together within a revolutionary front called the Popular Front (PF) and promise to observe the following provisions. 
</preamble>
TITLE I: DEFINITION AND OBJECTIVES OF THE POPULAR FRONT<title>
CHAPTER I: DEFINITION OF THE POPULAR FRONT<title> 
Art. 1: 
The Popular Front is the union of the anti-imperialist democratic political organizations of the people of Burkina Faso, convinced of the necessity of uniting the people in the struggle against imperialism and all the forces of internal domination, having in view a true social and economic development for the benefit of the large masses of the people. 
CHAPTER II: OBJECTIVES OF THE POPULAR FRONT
Art. 2: 
The Popular Front sets as objectives for itself: 
<list>
- the realization of the unity of the people around the Popular Front with a view to the harmonious development of Burkina Faso. 
- the improvements of living conditions of the social classes and strata of the people (workers, peasants, soldiers, revolutionary intellectuals, artisans, small businessmen, pupils and students). 
- the consolidation of political independence and the realization of economic independence. 
- the maintenance and reinforcement of democratic freedoms. 
- the strengthening of relations among the member political organizations of the Popular Front with a view to ever greater unitary action. 
- the creation of conditions for the solution of the problem of the emancipation of women. 
- the promotion of a rich national culture from the mixing of the revitalized cultures of the various nationalities. 
- the development of cooperation with all countries and states on the basis of mutual respect and advantages between the people of Burkina Faso and the other peoples of the world.
TITLE II: ORGANIZATION OF THE POPULAR FRONT<title> 
CHAPTER I: MEMBERS OF THE POPULAR FRONT<title>
Section I: Adhesion<title>
Art. 3: 
The Popular Front (PF) unites political organizations and revolutionary masses that are democratic and anti-imperialist and subscribe to its program and to the present articles. 
Art. 4: 
There may be as member of the Popular Front any political organization or organization of the masses which assembles Burkinese people and which accepts the broad orientations contained in the Discourse of Political Orientation (DPO), the Program and articles of the Popular Front and apply its decisions. 
Art. 5: 
The admission of a new organization is made upon application by the said organization. It is submitted to the evaluation of the Executive Committee of the Popular Front and the Coordination of the Popular Front. The decision of the Executive Committee and of the Coordination is ratified by the Congress. 
Art. 6: 
While awaiting ratification of its adhesion by the Congress, any organization admitted by the Executive Committee of the Popular Front enjoys all the rights and is subject to the duties of membership. 
Art. 7: 
The adhesion of any organization to the Popular Front involved that of all its militants. However, the cases on which the Executive Committee of the Popular Front issues a justified objection must be examined and decided by the Coordination of the Popular Front. 
Section II: Duties of Membership<title> 
Art. 8: 
Every member organization of the Popular Front has as its principal duties:
<list>
a) diffusing and defending the program of the Popular Front within its own organization and other elements of the people. 
b) applying the articles of the Popular Front and executing its guidelines.
c) consolidating the cohesion of the Popular Front that is conducive to unity. 
d) subordinating on all occasions the interests of its own organization to those of the people. 
e) cultivating a spirit of discipline and having a revolutionary morality.
</list>
Section III: Rights of Membership<title> 
Art. 9: 
The Popular Front recognizes to each member organization the right of: 
<list>
a) proposing representatives to proceedings of the Popular Front. 
b) keeping its organizational autonomy. 
c) merging with other member organizations of the Popular Front. 
d) resigning from the Popular Front. 
e) appealing to higher organs (Executive Committee, Coordination of the Popular Front, Congress) in case of sanction, while, however, seeing to its provisional application while awaiting the final decision. 
f) expressing itself freely at proceedings of the Popular Front in which it participates.
</list>CHAPTER II: FUNCTIONING OF THE POPULAR FRONT<title> 
Section I: Principles of Organization<title> 
Art. 10: 
At all echelons of the Popular Front, democratic centralism is the principle of organization. 
For the purpose of reinforcing cohesion of action of the Popular Front, the principle of criticism and self-criticism is applied at all echelons. 
CHAPTER III: ORGANS OF THE POPULAR FRONT<title> 
Section I: Central Organs<title> 
Art. 11: 
At the central level, the organs of the Popular Front are the following: 
<list>
a) The Congress 
b) The Coordination of the Popular Front (CPF) 
c) The Executive Committee of the Popular Front (EC) 
</list>
A) Composition and Attributes of the Congress<title> 
Art. 12: 
The Congress is the supreme organ of the Popular Front. It meets every two years in regular session. 
The choice of the date and place of the meeting is a matter for the Coordination of the Popular Front. The member organizations and structures are informed of the date and agenda at least two months in advance. 
Art. 13: 
Taking part in the Congress are: 
<list>
- The Executive Committee 
- The Coordination of the Popular Front 
- Delegates of member organizations of the Popular Front 
- Provincial delegates designated by the provincial conferences 
- Delegates of organs of the Popular Front abroad. 
</list>
Art. 14: 
The Congress may meet in special session. It is convened on the initiative of the Coordination of the Popular Front or upon request of 2/3 of the member organizations of the Popular Front. 
Art. 15: 
The Congress: 
<list>
a) approves or amends the program and articles of the Popular Front, 
b) defines the political line and the orientations of the revolutionary State, 
c) approves the composition of the Coordination of the Popular Front, 
d) evaluates the report of the incumbent Coordination of the Popular Front, 
e) ratifies or rejects the applications for adhesion. 
</list>
Art. 16: 
The decisions of the Congress are valid only when at least 2/3 of the delegates to the Congress are in fact present.Art. 17: 
The decisions of a Congress can be amended only by another Congress. 
B) Composition and Attributions of the Coordination of the Popular Front<title>
Art. 18: 
The Coordination of the Popular Front (CPF) is the supreme organ of the Popular Front in the interval between two Congresses. It meets regularly every three months. It may meet in special session upon convocation of the Executive Committee (EC) of the Popular Front or upon the request of 2/3 of its members.
Art. 19: 
The Coordination of the Popular Front is composed: 
<list>
- of the Executive Committee, 
- of representatives at the national level of the member structures of the Popular Front, 
- of the provincial coordinators of the Popular Front (high commissioners and general secretaries of the PRP), 
- of representatives of member political organizations of the Popular Front, 
- of representatives of member labor organizations of the Popular Front.
</list> 
Art. 20: 
The Coordination of the Popular Front: 
<list>
a) determines the agenda of the Congress and sees to its proper organization, 
b) proposes to the Congress amendments of the program and articles, 
c) sees to the application of the decisions of the Congress by the various organs, 
d) orients the activities of the central organs and supervises their activities, 
e) approves the internal regulations of the Popular Front, 
f) creates the specialized commissions which it deems necessary, 
g) approves the composition of the Executive Committee.
</list>
C) Composition and Attributions of the Executive Committee of the Popular Front<title> 
Art. 21: 
The Executive Committee is structured as follows: 
<list>
One president 
One 1 vice-president 
One 2 vice-president 
One secretary in charge of political affairs 
One adjunct secretary in charge of political affairs 
One secretary to the organization 
One adjunct secretary to the organization 
One secretary in charge of defense and security 
One adjunct secretary in charge of defense and security 
One secretary in charge of external relations 
One adjunct secretary in charge of external relations 
One secretary in charge of rural development 
One adjunct secretary in charge of rural development 
One secretary in charge of industrial development 
One adjunct secretary in charge of industrial development 
One secretary in charge of commerce and finance 
One adjunct secretary in charge of commerce and finance 
One secretary in charge of socio-cultural affairs 
One adjunct secretary in charge of socio-cultural affairs 
One secretary in charge of the question of women 
One adjunct secretary in charge of the question of womenOne secretary in charge of youth
One adjunct secretary in charge of youth
One secretary in charge of audit and inspection adjunct
One secretary in charge of audit and inspection.
</list>
Art. 22: 
The president of the Executive Committee is the president of the Popular Front. 
Art. 23: 
The Executive Committee: 
<list>
a) discharges the functions of direction and orientation during the interval between meetings of the Coordination of the Popular Front, 
b) designates the responsible persons of the specialized commissions, 
c) convenes and directs the meetings of the Coordination of the Popular Front. 
</list>
Section II: Local Bodies and Organs<title> 
A) Composition and Attributions of Bodies and Organs of Provinces<title>
Art. 24: 
There function at the level of the province: 
<list>
a) The Provincial Conference 
b) The Provincial Coordination of the Popular Front 
c) The Provincial executive Committee. 
</list>
Art. 25: 
The Provincial Conference is the supreme organ of the Popular Front in provinces. It meets in session every year. 
The choice of the date and place of its convening is a matter for the Provincial Coordination of the Front. 
The representatives of member organizations of the Popular Front in the province are informed of the date and agenda at least one month in advance. 
Art. 26: 
The Conference may meet in special session. It is convened on the initiative of the Provincial Coordination of the Popular Front or upon request of 2/3 of its members. 
The Conference may meet only if at least 2/3 of its regular members are present. 
Art. 27: 
The decisions of a Conference are valid only when at least 2/3 of the delegates to the Conference are in fact present. 
Art. 28: Taking part in the Provincial Conference are: 
<list>
The members of the provincial council of the popular structures. 
The representatives of other member organizations of the Popular Front in the province. 
</list>
Art. 29: 
The Provincial Conference: 
<list>
a) devises practical tasks applying decisions of the Congress and directives of the Popular Front, 
b) works toward the solution of specific problems of the province, 
c) evaluates the report of the Provincial Coordination of the Popular Front,d) approves the composition of the Provincial Coordination of the Popular Front,
e) of the designates the delegates of the province to the Congress of the Popular Front.
</list>
Art. 30: 
The Provincial Coordination is the supreme organ of the Popular Front in the province in the interval between two Conferences. It meets regularly every three months. It may meet in special session on request of 2/3 of its members. 
Art. 31: 
Members of the Provincial Coordination are: 
<list>
the Provincial Executive Committee 
the Provincial Revolutionary Power 
the representatives of the member popular structures of the Popular Front in the province.
</list>
Art. 32: 
The Provincial Coordination: 
<list>
a) determines the agenda of the Conference and sees to its actual organization, 
b) proposes to the Conference tasks applying decisions of the Congress and directives of controlling bodies of the Popular Front to specific conditions of the province, 
c) sees to the application of decisions of the Popular trout at all the echelons of the province, 
d) orients the activities of the organs within the province. 
</list>
Art. 33: 
The Provincial Executive Committee is structured as follows: 
<list>
- One president 
- One secretary to the organization 
- One secretary in charge of youth 
- One secretary in charge of the question of women 
- One secretary in charge of information and propaganda. 
</list>
Art. 34: 
The Provincial Executive Committee: 
<list>
- Convenes and presides at the meetings of the Provincial Coordination. 
- Sees to the proper functioning of the structures of the Popular Front at the provincial level. 
</list>
B) Composition and Attributions of Bodies and Organs of the Popular Front at the Departmental Level<title>
Art. 35: 
At the level of a department there functions: 
the Departmental Assembly of the Popular Front. 
Art. 36: 
Taking part in the Departmental Assembly are: 
the Representatives of popular structures and member organizations of the Popular Front in the department. 
Art. 37: 
The Departmental Assembly meets every three months in regular session under the presidency of the Prefect. It may meet in special session at the request of the Prefect or of 2/3 of its members. 
Art. 38: 
The Departmental Assembly: 
<list>
a) devises the tasks stemming from decisions of the Provincial Conference at the departmental level, 
b) works toward the solutions of specific problems in the department, 
c) proposes solutions to the Provincial Conference for specific problems in the department.
</list>Section III: Bodies and Organs of the Popular Front Abroad<title>
Art. 39: 
When Burkinese citizens abroad constitute an organization, it may adhere to the Popular Front within the terms provided in Article 3. 
Art. 40: 
The provisions made with regard to member organizations of the Popular Front on national soil apply to such organizations. However, the internal regulations of the Popular Front will take into account the particular circumstances under which such organizations evolved. 
CHAPTER IV: DISCIPLINARY MEASURES WITHIN THE POPULAR FRONT<title> 
Art. 41: 
Sanctions will be applied to any member of the Popular Front who violates its program or articles, who does not execute decisions of the Popular Front or acts to harm the unity and cohesion of the Popular Front. 
Art. 42: 
According to the gravity of the fault, the following sanctions will be applied: 
<list>
- warning 
- blame 
- suspension 
- exclusion 
- under the terms provided in the internal regulations of the Popular Front. 
</list>
TITLE III: RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EXECUTIVE AND THE POPULAR FRONT<title> 
Art. 43: 
Upon proposal of the Executive Committee the Coordination of the Popular Front approves the composition of the government. 
Art. 44: 
The Coordination of the Popular Front monitors the action of the government.
Art. 45: 
The Provincial Coordination approves the composition of the Provincial Revolutionary Power (PRP). 
Art. 46: 
The Provincial Coordination monitors the action of the Provincial Revolutionary Power (PRP). 
TITLE IV: FINANCES OF THE POPULAR FRONT<title> 
Art. 47: 
The financial resources of the Popular Front come from subsidies of the state, dues of member organizations and structures, gifts and legacies.TITLE V
SYMBOLS AND SEAT OF THE POPULAR FRONT
Art. 48: 
The symbols of the Popular Front are: 
<list_1>
a) The flag is that of Burkina Faso.
b) The coat of arms is that of the PDR, namely: 
<list_2>
- the wheel: symbol of the working class 
- the plow: symbol of the deep attachment of our people to the land 
- the weapon: symbol of popular defense, of the homeland and of the military forces engaged at the sides of the people 
- the book: alliance of intellectual revolutionaries 
- the grain: symbol of the happiness of the people 
- the star: the guide of the PDR in its radiant march 
- the pennant carrying the motto: symbol of the victory of the PDR through the determination of its people. 
</list_2>
c) The hymn is the "DYTANIE". 
d) The motto is the motto of Burkina Faso, "HOMELAND OR DEATH, WE SHALL CONQUER!". 
</list_1>
Art. 49: 
The Popular Front has an organ of propaganda and political agitation. 
Art. 50: 
The seat of the Popular Front is at Ouagadougou, capital of Burkina Faso. 
TITLE VI: GENERAL PROVISIONS<title>
Art. 51: 
Internal regulations of the Popular Front will specify the methods of functioning of the Popular Front. 
TITLE VII: TRANSITORY PROVISIONS<title> 
Art. 52: 
During the initial phase of organization of the Popular Front: 
<list>
The Coordination of the Popular Front created on October 15 discharges the tasks of organization, inspection and follow up of the executive.
Approves new admissions of organizations. 
The present Provincial Revolutionary Powers (PRP) discharges the functions of the Coordination of the Popular Front in the provinces. 
The functions of the Provincial Executive Committee are discharged by the permanent secretariat of the Provincial Revolutionary Power. 
Art. 53: 
The present Articles may be amended or revised only by the Congress of the Popular Front. 
HOMELAND OR DEATH, WE SHALL CONQUER!
OUAGADOUGOU MARCH 7, 1988 
THE COORDINATION OF THE POPULAR FRONTPROGRAM OF ACTION<title>
Presentation<title>
The Popular Front, as soon as it came into being on October 15, 1987, invited the people of Burkina Faso to make a complete accounting (acquisitions, deficiencies and prospects) and without complacency of the first four years of the democratic and popular Revolution. 
This accounting, drawn up beginning with broad democratic debates on January 8, 9 and 10, 1988, constitutes one of the basic ingredients for preparing the Program of Action of the Popular Front. 
The question of program is a question of principle for any revolution. Any revolution obeys, indeed, objective social laws which define its character and scope. Thus, each stage of the revolution has to realize a program which takes into account the aspirations and claims of the oppressed social classes and strata of the historical period under consideration, but which also lays the material bases which permit passing to a qualitatively higher stage. 
The program, for revolutionaries, is an instrument of conscious mobilization of the popular masses on the basis of their interests and for the pursuit of deepening the revolution. 
The preparation of the program is a major task because the experience of the first four years of the Revolution shows in an irrefutable fashion that the Discourse of Political Orientation, while a theoretical acquisition of importance, does not suffice to mobilize the masses in a sustained fashion and thus to assure the deepening of the Revolution. The Discourse of Political Orientation of October 2, 1983, gives the general orientation of the Revolution of August; in this sense, it is the theoretical basis of the present program, but it does not contain concrete measures of political practice. 
The absence of program, as instrument of mobilization and unification of the revolutionaries, favored the appearance of profound divergences when it was a question of taking certain concrete measures in connection with the general orientation of the Revolution. It is the lack of program which thus explains the opportunistic digressions denounced vehemently at the time of the National Assises of January, 1988. 
The present program of action has the objective of helping to realize the strategic goal of the Revolution of August, namely, building a peoples' democracy state. It is consequently an instrument for: 
<list>
- realizing the unity of the people around the Popular Front against imperialism and all the forces of domination,
- sapping the economic, political and economic bases of support for the relays of capitalism (consumer bourgeoisie, state bourgeoisie, retrograde forces), 
- working for the blooming of a national culture rich in the cultural contributions of all the nationalities of the country, 
- creating the conditions for a strategic alliance between the working class and the peasantry for installing the democratic dictatorship of workers and peasants,- creating the material, organizational and political bases for passing to a qualitatively higher stage.
</list>
The realization of this program is incumbent on all our people, who must count first of all on their own forces and afterwards on the spirit of international solidarity which animates peoples and states. 
The Popular Front is conscious that, without organization, the people would not know how to be effectively mobilized for the actions of revolutionary transformation contained in the present program. Hence, based on the experience of the first four years of the Revolution, it acts to reorganize popular structures, a priority task for endowing each social class and layer of the people with an adequate framework of organization and mobilization for revolutionary action. 
Introduction<title>
The strategic goal of the Revolution of August is to erect, in the political sphere, a peoples' democracy state, in the economic sphere, an independent and prosperous economy, in the social sphere, a society of justice where social inequalities will have been considerably reduced and in the cultural sphere, a national culture made out of the enriching mixture of the cultures of the different nationalities of the Burkina. 
The correctness of these objectives stems from the democratic and popular character of the Revolution of August. 
The principal contradiction which, indeed, marks our society since the coming of neo-colonialism, and consequently determines the stage of the struggle of our people, is the one which opposes the allied exploiting classes of imperialism (consumer bourgeoisie, state bourgeoisie and retrograde forces) and the exploited social classes and strata, components of the people (working class, peasantry, petit bourgeoisie). 
The resolution of this principal contradiction of our society resides in the struggle for the triumph and reinforcement of a democratic peoples' Revolution waged by the masses to make their own interests prevail. 
The Discourse of Political Orientation of October 2, 1963, the theoretical basis of the present program of action of the Popular Front, in defining the character of the Revolution of August, specifies indeed that it is democratic because "it has as primordial task the liquidation of imperialist domination and exploitation, the purging of the whole country of all the social, economic and cultural fetters which keep it in a state of backwardness.
"It is popular from the fact that the masses of the people are the receiving party wholeheartedly in this Revolution and consequently are mobilized around the democratic and revolutionary guidelines which translate into facts their own interests opposed to those of the reactionary classes allied with imperialism. The popular character of the Revolution of August resides in the fact that in the place and stead of the former state machine is erected a new machine able to guarantee the exercise of power by the people and for the people."The mobilization of our people around the objectives announced in the Discourse of Political Orientation permitted the gaining of great victories in political, economic, social and cultural fields. 
However, the appearance within ruling structures of an autocratic and fascist-leaning militarist line had the consequence of blocking the process of revolutionary transformations and producing a movement of restoration of neocolonialism. 
In the face of this dangerous threat of liquidation of the Revolution of August, conscientious revolutionaries and our people engaged in struggle against these deviations. 
This struggle triumphed on October 15, 1987, with the advent of the Popular Front which promised to rectify the grave deviations of the past in order to give back to the Revolution of August its proper political orientation. 
The movement of rectification is a movement of consolidation of the peoples' democratic revolution. It involves a coherent whole of revolutionary transformation actions in the political economic, social and cultural spheres, which must be carried out by the people under the direction of the Popular Front. 
POLITICAL PART<title> 
A: GENERAL OBJECTIVES<title> 
The Revolution of August is a peoples' democratic Revolution which made the power of the state pass from the hands of exploiting social levels and classes allied with imperialism (consumer bourgeoisie, state bourgeoisie, retrograde forces) to those of dominated and exploited social levels and classes (working class, peasantry, petit bourgeoisie) comprising the Burkinese people. 
The political objective of the peoples' democratic Revolution is to have power exercised by the people and to erect a state of popular democracy in destroying the neocolonial state apparatus. 
The execution of these tasks was begun from the advent of the peoples' democratic revolution of August 4 by: 
<list>
- the creation of Committees of Defense of the Revolution (CDR) as framework for the exercise of popular power; 
- the creation of peoples' courts in order to render justice truly popular; 
- the reform of the administration and the army in order to make them instruments in the service of the people. 
</list>
The execution of these tasks of revolutionary transformations in the political sphere was not, however, pursued consistently. 
The appearance within the political direction (the National Council of the Revolution) of a fascist-tending military line gave rise to autocratic deviations which voided popular power of its content and placed the Revolution of August in dangerous peril. 
The advent of the Popular Front on October 15, 1987, in favor of settling a crisis which was in reality the expression of a struggle of factions and hence of classes within the political direction, opened the way to rectifying past errors; it thus permits pursuing the work of destroying the neocolonial state apparatus and erecting a peoples' democratic state. 
B: SECTORIAL OBJECTIVES AND ACTIONS TO BE UNDERTAKEN<title> 
The Popular Front is convinced that without consistent practice of peoples' democracy, the revolution could not take root within the masses, and thus assure guaranteed stability through the consciousness which each component of the people has of the effective link between the defense of their interests and the strengthening of the revolution. 
That is why the Popular Front will set itself to: 
I: CREATING CONDITIONS FOR BROADENING AND STRENGTHENING DEMOCRACY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE<title>
Thus: 
<list_1>
1) it will organize the people according to a criterion of class and to socio-professional categories. In the place and stead of the Committees of Defense of the Revolution (CDR) which, since August 4, 1983, assumed important tasks but whose actions were marked with serious insufficiencies connected with lack of precision of their class nature, there will he created political organizations of revolutionary masses of peasants, workers, service employees, youths, women and the elderly. Organization like that will permit each social class and stratum of the people to present and defend its own interests; it will thus permit a better political education for a more conscious and unitary mobilization of the masses. 
2) it promises to strengthen further the exercise of popular power in recognizing for the various structures the right and the duty to participate in all processes of power on the national level and to exercise power directly on the local level in the processes that will be set up for this purpose. 
3) it will give popular structures a pertinent and reinforced political education in order for them to assume their mission in a more responsible, conscious and motivated fashion. 
4) the Popular Front considers youth as the future of the Revolution, called upon consequently to play a role of first importance in all the tasks of revolutionary transformations. The Popular Front will sharpen the sense of responsibilities, the spirit of solidarity and opening of the young and will recognize, through their organization, their right to participation in the exercise of popular power. It will work toward creating conditions for their full development. 
5) the Popular Front will accord women the attention that more than half of our people requires. It will consequently work for the emancipation of women through the liquidation of all the hindrances which are an obstacle today to the effective establishing of equality between them and men. It will dissociate itself from spectacular and folkloric operations of emancipation of women. It will work toward creating consciousness in women and will accord to claims made through their organization all necessary importance. 
6) as to the elderly. The popular Front considers that their experience in life can be put to profitable use to find appropriate solutions to numerous problems of our society; and that is why the organization of the elderly will fully find its place in the structures for the exercise of popular power. 
7) the Popular Front considers the working class and the peasantry as the two basic forces of the peoples' democratic Revolution. Despite the youth and numerical weakness of our working class and the technical and cultural backwardness of our peasantry, the Popular Front will create conditions for a concrete realization of alliance between these two forces.
8) the Popular Front promises to preserve and defend individual and collective liberties because it is aware that the practice of peoples' democracy cannot be consistent without the recognition and preservation of these liberties for the people. It will guarantee in consequence freedom of speech, freedom of belief and of non-belief, of meeting and association. It will combat, on the contrary, all actions seeking to put in question the Revolution and its basic options. It will maintain the measure prohibiting reactionary political parties which have often been denounced by the people. 
9) the Popular Front recognizes unions as the organizational form for workers, whose mission is to: 
<list_2>
- defend the material and moral interests of the workers, 
- participate in the organization of production in enterprises and services for the purpose of increasing production and the productivity of work. 
</list_2>
Endorsing this mission of the union under the peoples' democratic Revolution, the Popular Front will assure: 
<list_3>
- the right of workers to be organized in unions in order to defend their material and moral interests, 
- the right of unions to organize in complete freedom and independence activities leading to the accomplishment of their mission under the PDR. 
- the right of unions to participate in all processes where the future of workers is discussed. 
</list_3>
It will create frameworks for dialogue between unions and peoples structures and between unions and government. 
</list_1>
II: ERECTING A STATE OF PEOPLES' DEMOCRACY<title>
The Popular Front will pursue the double task undertaken on August 4, 1983, of destroying the neocolonial state apparatus and erecting in its place and stead a new state, a state of peoples' democracy. 
Thus:
<list_1>
1) it will pursue resolutely and consistently the revolutionarization of the administration by: 
<list_2>
. combating bureaucratic lethargy. ridding the administration of shady and counterrevolutionary agents 
. strengthening discipline at work and professional conscience 
. encouraging deserving agents 
. associating popular structures and unions in the management of services while clearly defining the functions of responsible administrators and those of popular structures and unions 
. assuring strict management of the assets of the state and its subdivisions 
. assuring a discerning and consistent use of higher technical staff. 
</list_2)
2) it will apply a policy of true decentralization not only to respond more quickly and easily to the needs of the masses but also to endow local units with their own powers of management of local life. 
3) the Popular Front will set up (and assure the proper operation of) all the institutions necessary for a truly democratic life at the level of the popular power. 
4) in the sphere of justice, it will pursue the efforts exerted since the advent of the peoples' democratic Revolution to destroy the old judicial apparatus and install a popular justice rendered by the people on the basis of law and procedure which magistrates and men of the law must put themselves to codifying in drawing lessons from the experience of our people and in taking account of the necessity of rendering justice to the masses as equitable and revolutionary. Revolutionary justice must pursue moralization of public life in repressing unflinchingly diversions and abuses of public and company property and corruption. 
5) the Popular Front will execute the tasks of constructing a peoples' army whose basic missions will be to: 
<list_3>
- defend territorial integrity 
- defend the revolutionary order against external and internal aggressions 
- participate in production 
- assure the military training of the rest of the people. 
</list_3>
The Popular Front will attach particular importance to the political education of soldiers through peoples' structures of the army which must play a more important role in army life and in implementing a defensive system based on popular self-defense. 
6) the Popular Front will work toward realizing the unity of the people around it by defining the class alliances to be effected in the field in order to permit each component of the people to participate in the national political life. It will create conditions for realizing a vast consensus of all the forces interested in the revolutionary transformations of political, social, economic and cultural natures underway in Burkina Faso. 
</list_1>
III: DEVELOPING AN EXTERNAL POLICY FOUNDED ON PRINCIPLES OF PACIFIC COEXISTENCE AND REVOLUTIONARY INTERNATIONALISM<title> 
<list_1>
1) The Popular Front will maintain and strengthen state-to-state relations of good neighborliness with all bordering countries and those of the sub-region. It will work toward the development of knowledge and mutual comprehension between the Burkinese people 'and other peoples. It will work most particularly toward strengthening the conditions indispensable to realizing the unity of African peoples. 
2) It will develop relations with all countries loving peace and justice, independently of their political and economic system and on the basis of: 
<list_2>
. reciprocal respect of territorial integrity, independence and national sovereignty 
. non-interference in internal affairs 
. equality and reciprocal advantages. 
</list_2>
It will consolidate in particular such relations with revolutionary countries, parties and organizations and will lend its support to all movements of national liberation and to struggles of social emancipation of peoples throughout the world. 
3) It will oppose the establishment of foreign military bases on national soil and will never accept territory of Burkina Faso being used by external forces to organize military aggression directed against other countries. 
</list_1>
ECONOMIC PART<title>
A: GENERAL OBJECTIVES<title> 
The fundamental economic objective of the Popular Front is to realize an economy of transition, meaning thereby an economy which ruptures with neocolonialism. Such an economy must be independent and planned. 
It is independent because it aims at liquidating the bases of support for imperialism; its factors of development are primarily internal and the objectives of development correspond essentially to internal needs, notably the satisfaction of the basic needs of the popular masses. 
It is planned because it must obey norms of scientific, coherent and proportional management and struggle against crises and anarchy in production. Thus economic activity will be conducted on the basis of economic programs of short and medium terms. 
An independent and planned economy must attack all pre-capitalist connections with production by taking advantage of technology, capitalism's rational organization of work, not in order to construct a great capitalism but to be given the material means of its destruction for the benefit of a more organized and humane society. 
In view of the backward state of the Burkinese society where several kinds co-exist of different socio-economic structures (patriarchal economy, feudal type economy, private capitalism and state capitalism) and having regard for the fact that the social revolution seeks above all the just division of riches still to be created, the democratic and popular Revolution will develop state capitalism. 
State capitalism is not an end in itself but a means of creating rapidly the material basis necessary for the sure passage of the DPR to a higher stage. It will seek: 
<list>
- the consolidation of existing state enterprises- the creation of new state enterprises in priority and strategic spheres 
- the creation and consolidation of enterprises of mixed economy and the institution of democratic management in such enterprises 
- control by the revolutionary state of the activity of the private sector. It is a matter of checking the conformity of such private activity with the fields of action which were expressly assigned to it and the fulfillment of engagements made by the private sector vis-a-vis the revolutionary state. 
</list>
Under the conditions of Burkina Faso, the revolutionary state has much greater need of the support of the private sector in the struggle against imperialism than everywhere else. The state must, then, through concrete measures, incite the private sector to invest for the development of economic activities for benefit of the people of Burkina Faso. 
The economic policy of the Popular Front must furthermore: 
<list>
- show a true understanding of the principle of relying on its own forces in order to avoid falling into autarky, 
- pursue vigorously the purifying of the state and combat in particular bureaucratism in the management of economic units. 
</list>
In the matter of international economic relations, Burkina Faso will develop its rapports on the basis of the principle of reciprocal advantage. 
Financial, economic and technical cooperation must be developed with the greatest number of countries. 
The strategy of development should include the transformation of structures serving neocolonialism into structures in the service of an independent and prosperous economy. Thus all structures of management, production and distribution should be thoroughly revised. 
In any case, the Popular Front's strategy of development will find support from the confidence in conscious action of the large organized popular masses. It will be a question of drawing definitively and totally these millions of healthy arms out of immobility, routine and torpor, in order to engage them with ardor and determination in the work of constructing the homeland. 
B: SECTORIAL OBJECTIVES AND ACTIONS TO BE UNDERTAKEN<title>
I: AGRICULTURE AND STOCK RAISING<title> 
The efforts deployed by the Popular Front will aim at: 
<list>
- realizing self-sufficiency in food, 
- reducing the differences between cities and the countryside through putting into effect programs of development able to improve the standard of living of the peasant masses, 
- assuring security both for direct consummation of the masses and agro-industrial needs. 
</list>
Thus the Popular Front will put into effect the following actions: 
<list>
1) The promotion of peasant cooperation as an indispensable tactic for organizing productivity and improving productivity. The Popular Front will favor the birth and development of a cooperative dynamic, democratic and revolutionary movement adapted to national realities and inspired by the experiences and traditions of historic solidarity of the people of Burkina Faso and enriched by the experiences of other peoples. 
2) Setting up cooperatives by priority in zones regulated by the State and according to the prescriptions of agrarian and land reform. 
3) Sensitizing peasants, in non-regulated village lands, to the rational management of space: to urge them progressively to bring closer and regroup parcels of land having identical uses. 
4) Urging the structures of the State and of enterprises of mixed or private economy to invest in the field of agricultural and agro-industrial production according to national priorities and observing the provisions of agrarian and land reform. 
5) Planning and organizing agro-pastoral production through a rigorous choice of speculations, species and varieties in accordance with the priorities and needs of the national economy, on the basis of regional specialization and an increased use of the innovations and techniques of modern production (harnessed and motorized cultivation).
6) Urging the practicing of intensive agriculture and stock raising and beneficial association and integration of agriculture and stock raising. 
7) Stimulating production through a practice of price incentives compatible with objective conditions of production and taking into account the purchasing power of the masses and the requirements of agro-industries and the market. 
8) Applying a strategy of training qualified staff responding to the requirements of the agricultural revolution and using them knowingly. 
</list>
II: ENVIRONMENT<title>
Conscious of the destruction of the environment in Burkina Faso, a country of the Sahel and of its serious repercussions on the economy, conditions of life of the masses and future of the country, the Popular Front will undertake the following actions: 
<list>
1) Strengthening the struggle against desertification and for the preservation of the environment through intensifying of sensitization, and properly repressing acts of systematic destruction of the environment. 
2) Intensification and better organization of acts of industrial and village re-timbering. 
3) Intensification of research in the field of environment. 
4) Making widespread the sources of energy for domestic use other than heating wood (gas, biogas, solar energy...). 
5) Developing activities of pisciculture and protection of the fauna.
</list>III: HYDRAULICS<title>
The Popular Front will undertake the following actions: 
<list_1>
A: Rural and pastoral hydraulics
<list_2>
1) Increasing the number of drillings and wells in the villages to satisfy the water needs of the population and cattle. 
2) Constructing dams and water reservoirs and managing them for agricultural production. 
</list_2>
B: Urban and industrial hydraulics
<list_3>
1) Developing a system of potable water in urban and semi-urban localities. 
2) Progressively installing a sewer system through the evacuation of rainwater and used water. 
</list_3>
</list_1>
IV: INDUSTRY<title> 
Industrialization remains an indispensable factor for the economic and social development of Burkina Faso. 
The principal objective in the matter of industrialization will be, for the Popular Front, the setting up of an industrial structure in which factories will be units integrated into the whole of the activities of a coherent economic system. 
Industrialization will have agriculture for its base (production of agricultural equipment and tools, supporting the value of agricultural produce) and will seek as priority to satisfy large consumer needs. 
A: Manufacturing industry<title> 
The following actions will be undertaken: 
<list>
1) Rehabilitating existing industrial units and those which are in cessation of activity or underused. 
2) Strengthening the industrial sector of the State through the pursuit of strict management and instigation of improvement in the productivity and quality of products and the taking of participations in private enterprises. 
3) Urging investors (national or foreign) to invest in previously defined sectors. 
4) Developing small and medium industrial or semi-industrial units financed essentially through national resources. 
5) Urging the consumption of Burkinese products.
</list>
Measures of protection compatible with regional and sub-regional economic organization will be taken in order to favor the growth of infant industries. 
B: Mining industry<title>
Burkina Faso contains mining riches whose exploitation can only be beneficial for the people.It is a matter, then, for the Popular Front to find solutions to the problems posed to the mining development of the country: 
<list>
- weakness of the communications network, difficulties in supplying water and energy, insufficiency of national personnel specialized in the field of mines, technical under-equipment… 
</list>
The Popular Front will work toward lifting these impediments but from now onwards will put emphasis on: 
<list>
1) The intensification of mining research. 
2) The organization and control of gold-seeking activities by reinforcing the capacities of the State and its subdivisions to intervene and by a more effective combating of fraud. 
3) The exploitation of mining resources which have already been the subject of advanced studies.
4) A more rigorous control of mining exploitation to permit the people to profit from the riches of their subsoil. An increase, a better organization and a more efficient control of industrial activities in general will permit the State to increase the returns in hard currencies and thus to improve the commercial balance of the country.
</list>
V: CRAFTS<title> 
The activities of crafts are varied and developed in Burkina Faso. The Popular Front will encourage the activities of crafts and will organize them further in order for them to contribute to the enrichment of the country and to the solution of technical problems which are posed in certain sectors of the economy (notably agriculture). 
The following actions will be conducted: 
<list>
1) Orienting a part of the activities of crafts toward the fabrication of agricultural tools and equipment and the maintenance of pumps installed in the country. 
2) Urging craftsmen to unite under forms of association or cooperative. 
3) Promoting crafts through: - a better environment and the perfecting of crafts - the development of changes and the search for outlets for production.
4) Progressive organizing of the crafts sector.
5) Facilitating access to credit.
</list>
VI: ENERGY<title> 
The importance of the energy sector in economic and social development and more particularly in the process of industrialization requires giving particular attention to seeking solutions to problems of energy in Burkina Faso, which are; a great dependence on the outside, the too high cost of energy and the highly deficient electrical network.The Popular Front in matters of energy will aim at: 
<list>
1) Reducing the bill for petroleum by the promotion of other energies: hydro-electricity, solar energy, biogas… 
2) Diversifying sources of supply of petroleum products intended for the production of energy. 
3) Developing research on energy and popularizing the results of such research. 
4) Accelerating the realization of projects for interconnecting with the electrical systems of neighboring countries. 
5) Seeking means for creating hydro-electric and hydro-agricultural dams. 
6) Pursuing the electrification of urban and semi-urban centers. 
</list>
VII: TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS<title> 
Burkina Faso is a country of deficient communications network. Such a situation limits economic changes and hence economic development. The Popular Front will pursue efforts at internal and external disenclavement through:
<list>
1) The management and thickening of the interior roadway system while taking into account the necessity of developing internal economic exchanges.
2) The rehabilitation of inter-state paved roads. 
3) The paving of other inter-states routes. 
4) The increase in air service to Burkina Faso. 
5) The development and modernization of means of transportation by road and rail. 
6) Strengthening the transit profession of Burkina Faso. 
7) Pursuing the rehabilitation and extension of the urban road system in the principal cities. 
8) Pursuing the widespread use of the telephone and the modernization of interior and exterior telephone connections. 
9) Reinforcing postal security and the density of the of the internal postal system. 
</list>
VIII: COMMERCE<title> 
With regard to the present structure of the national economy, the commercial sector appears as one of the sensitive links whose transforming should be conducted with discernment in order best to attain the objectives of development and regular provisioning of the national market, reduction of the deficit in trade balance and orientation of economic operators toward productive sectors. 
The Popular Front will undertake the following actions:
<list_1>1) Reorganizing distribution circuits in order better to assure the flow of products of large consumption and of national products. 
2) Coherent intervening by the State through State enterprises in the commercial sector in order to assure a better diversification of sources of supply and outlets for national products. 
3) Progressive organizing of the private commercial sector through urging voluntary uniting into economic interest groups or cooperatives. 
4) Applying a policy of selective limitations on imports and protection of the national market. 
5) Improving the auditing of the private commercial sector by: 
<list_2>
- instituting a single system of accounting for economic operators above a certain size, 
- observing the fiscal and customs system, 
- reinforcing auditing structures, 
- sensitizing consumers to consumer prices. 
</list_2>
6) Applying a pricing policy which stimulates national producers. 
7) Being flexible in commercial regulation. 
</list_1>
IX: TOURISM AND INNKEEPING<title> 
Tourism is a sector of activities capable of returning to the State and the national economy large resources particularly in hard currency. Burkina Faso has important tourist potentialities not being exploited. That is why the Popular Front will emphasize very particularly the exploiting of tourist sites and activities. 
It will be a matter of developing both internal tourism (for the benefit of nationals) and international (for the benefit of foreign tourists). 
The following actions will hence be undertaken: 
<list>
1) Inventorying and preparing tourist sites. 
2) Expanding infrastructures of accommodation (hotels, inns) throughout the country. 
3) Developing activities of tourist promotion inside and outside the country. 
</list>
X: FINANCES, MONEY AND CREDIT<title>
A: PUBLIC FINANCES<title> 
The following actions will be undertaken: 
<list>
1) Reform of the fiscal system in favor of taking better account of internal taxation. 
2) The revolutionary State will work in the tax field toward setting up a better assessment base and will see to an optimum recovery of duties and taxes by greater application of the means of the agencies responsible for recovering them.3) New techniques of recovery will be set up and will facilitate the identification of the taxpayer and the adaptation of the recovery to the demand of a very important informal sector. 
4) A civic tax spirit will be cultivated by repeated campaigns of awareness and information. 
5) Taxation will be used as an instrument of inciting production and the protection of local products. 
6) Strictness in the management of public finances will be pursued and consolidated. 
7) Inertia in the management of public finances will be corrected by the application of more flexible rules of procedure. 
8) Public enterprises in difficulty will be restructured so as to improve their treasury and lighten the budget of the State from the weight of permanent subsidies. 
</list>
B: MONEY AND CREDIT<title>
The inclusion of Burkina Faso in an international monetary and financial and in a sub-regional monetary system should lead to an optimal utilization of the possibilities which such institutions offer for financing projects of development and settling structural deficits. 
<list>
1) Credit will be regulated so as to respond to financing necessities of development plans.
2) Conditions will be created for mobilizing savings by limiting hoarding outside of the banking circuit. 
3) The State, its subdivisions and private nationals will be encouraged to increase their participations in banking and financial establishments. 
4) Funds guaranteeing loans to small and medium enterprises and national funds of discount from banking credit interest rates will be reactivated through a larger grant and extension of their fields of application. 
5) Procedures for granting credit will be made more flexible. 
</list>
SOCIO-CULTURAL PART<title>
A: GENERAL OBJECTIVES<title>
The Burkinese society is essentially a backward society which carries the stigmata of neocolonial imperialist domination. 
Thus persist still many scourges engendered or worsened by such a situation: obscurantism, illiteracy, misery, famine, begging, oppression of women and profound social inequalities. 
The Revolution of August having set for itself the principal task of freeing Burkina Faso from the domination of imperialism and retrograde forces, owes itself the creation of conditions necessary to the full social and cultural flowering of the popular masses in order to increase further the active participation of the people in the building of an independent and prosperous economy. 
The strategic objectives of the Revolution in the social and cultural fields are to assure free health and education to all, employment for all, comfortable housing for every element of the people, and placing at the disposal of the masses the elements and infrastructures necessary for sports, leisure and culture. 
The realization of these strategic objectives requires the Revolution to go by stages, to create and strengthen the material bases indispensable to economic impetus, and finally to conduct a serious struggle against the enemies of classes. 
The Popular Front owes to itself to assume with success all the tasks of revolutionary transformations in the social and cultural fields which accrue to it. Thus it fixes for itself the following specific objectives in the sectors of health, social action, education and scientific research, housing, work, culture, information and leisure. 
B: SECTORIAL OBJECTIVES AND ACTIONS TO BE UNDERTAKEN<title>
I: HEALTH<title> 
Being a factor which contributes to the creation, maintenance and development of the work force, health is a great national asset which must be protected and promoted for the benefit of the masses of the people. 
In order to do so, the objective of the Popular Front is to reduce within a short period mortality and morbidity due to transmissible disease in developing a system of health accessible to all and based on principles of the care of primary health. 
Priority actions in this regard will consist of: 
<list>
1) Expanding programs of mass immunization in order to cover all vulnerable groups against transmissible diseases. 
2) Putting particular stress on measures of basic sanitation and public hygiene in order to create a healthful environment for the people. 
3) Developing a strategy aimed at eliminating nutritional lacks especially with children. 
4) Strengthening measures of control of endemic diseases with a view to their eradication. 
5) Installing an efficient system of regular surveillance of vulnerable groups, permitting follow up of scholars, workers exposed to professional risks and aged persons. 
6) Setting up structures permitting following each mother and each child. 
7) Expanding the sanitation coverage of the country through adequate equipment of existing sanitary facilities in order to make essential care accessible and to reduce our dependence vis-a-vis foreigners, and creating new sanitary facilities. 
8) Revising certain texts relative to legislation with a view to improving the finances of hospital-health facilities (code of health, method of managing health facilities, rate schedules for medical services, terms for opening profit-making establishments, etc).
9) Training health personnel according to realities in the field and national priorities.
10) Placing essential medicines within the reach of all through a pharmaceutical policy which will include the traditional pharmacopeia.
11) Developing applied research in the matter of care, in the fields both of modern and traditional medicine, which we must further exploit and codify.
</list>
II: IN THE FIELD OF SOCIAL ACTION<title>
The Popular Front, in its concern for restoring to each individual his dignity and for facilitating his participation in the development of society, undertakes to put an end to the factors which marginalize certain individuals or social categories.
a) Thus at the level of the protection of women and children<title>
Outside of political measures aiming at promoting the real emancipation of women and sanitary measures designed to protect the health of the mother and the child, the Popular Front promises to: 
<list>
- assure the economic promotion of women, 
- construct close to places of work childcare centers which can look after children of women who work. 
</list>
Urgent measures will be taken for the adoption of a code of the family guaranteeing women the same rights as men in marriage and divorce and protecting children from scourges such as begging, prostitution and delinquency. 
In order to do so, the child, the future of society, will be protected against situations which marginalize him.
b) Measures concerning marginalized persons<title>
In order to take into account this fringe of the population with which the people should be in solidarity, there will be undertaken: 
<list>
1) The creation of centers of education and reinsertion with a view to recuperating and reintegrating into society marginalized persons (handicapped, orphans, young delinquents, former prisoners). 
2) The struggle against proxenitism with the adoption of more repressive laws in this field against procurers of prostitutes.
</list>
All such actions will be conducted on the basis of scientific studies which provide adequate solutions.III: IN THE FIELD OF EDUCATION AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH<title>
The efforts of the Popular Front will be directed in the field toward promoting knowledge and savoir faire of the people.
To this end: 
<list>
1) The liquidation of illiteracy will be pursued in both the city and the country. 
2) Access to a basic education capable of opening the way at least to a trade apprenticeship should be assured in time to any child residing in Burkina Faso. 
3) Schools of professional training leading to a practical trade will be multiplied. 
4) New disciplines, such as information, education on matters of population, civic instruction and politics will be instituted. 
5) The educational system will be reformed and adapted to our national realities in order to train executives that are politically conscious and technically competent at the level of execution, framing and conception of basic research. 
6) Particular stress will be laid on access of girls to education. 
7) A particular effort will be made to assist children coming from the most unfavored backgrounds in the matter of granting scholarships for study. 
8) The promotion of production on the premises of school equipment and pedagogical documentation will be undertaken. 
9) In face of the steady decline in the quality of teaching there will be undertaken intensified continued training of teachers and a regular follow up of school environment. 
10) Activities in scientific research leading to practical application will be encouraged. 
</list>
IV: IN THE FIELD OF HOUSING<title>
The principal objective is to succeed in offering to each Burkinese person decent housing and environment. With this in view, the following actions will be undertaken:
<list>
1) Subdividing into lots cities and large rural communities.
2) Pursuing the policy of cities in correcting serious deficiencies revealed in this regard, while aiding the construction on a large scale of lodging at moderate rent accessible to the workers.
3) Facilitating the acquisition at moderate prices of construction materials adapted to our realities. 
4) Developing housing credits so as to make them accessible to all.
</list>V: IN THE FIELD OF WORK AND SOCIAL SECURITY<title> 
The Popular Front, anxious to guarantee each Burkinese a source of revenue sufficient to permit him to live decently and to maintain his family satisfactorily, will be attached to: 
<list>
1) The struggle against unemployment in cities as well as villages through the creation of employment in the economic and social sectors of life, particularly in productive sectors. 
2) Setting up a fair system of profit-sharing for the workers. 
3) Guaranteeing each worker rights connected to his employment (annual paid vacations, retirement pensions, etc 
4) For increasing the protection of workers, a revision will be undertaken of the labor code, the code of social security and the general statute on public agents of the State; a better management of human resources will also be instituted. 
5) The State will urge enterprise partners to conclude sectorial collective labor contracts. 
</list>
VI: IN THE FIELD OF CULTURE<title>
The Popular Front will work toward the blooming of a national culture rich in the mixture of the reinvigorated cultures of the various nationalities. 
In this regard: 
<list>
1) National Culture weeks will be observed and their organization improved with a view to making them forums of meeting of the various nationalities and of contact with other peoples. 
2) National wholes will be created. 
3) Structures for the promotion of art craftsmanship will be created in the form of national and regional fairs. 
4) Literary promotion will be intensified by stimulating writing. 
5) Facilities will be created for publishing and distributing literary works. 
6) A national library will be created which will take in Burkinese productions as well as any other work likely to contribute to promoting culture. 
7) Production in the field of cinema will be assisted by material support for its creations. 
</list>
VII: IN THE FIELD OF INFORMATION<title> 
The various organs of information of the State must be capable of mobilizing and creating awareness by the people for their effective participation in the work of revolutionary transformations. 
In this sense efforts will point toward:
<list>
1) Expanding national broadcasting by a reliable coverage of the entire territory and equipping national and regional stations with proper means. A policy of creating regional and local stations will be pursued. 
2) Extending televisual coverage so as to cover in time all the national territory. 
3) Improving televisual and radio programs and developing national production. 
4) Developing the written press through the rehabilitation of its means of production, the creation of other organs and improvement of the distribution network of newspapers. 
5) Developing the information agency through expanding its capacities of production and distribution both at home and abroad. 
</list>
VIII: IN THE FIELD OF LEISURE<title>
The objective is to create for all Burkinese people a sound environment for regenerating their creative spirit. 
The Revolution is also leisure. For this to be, the Popular Front will be attentive to: 
<list_1>
1) Maintaining and developing mass sports whose organization will be improved in a way to attract adepts with the suppression of all aspects of compulsion. 
2) Developing competitive sports through: 
<list_2>
. the creation of a minimum of infrastructures in the various provinces, 
. the training of competent sports instructors. 
</list_2>
This will permit athletes to be better trained, better prepared and more motivated in order to be able to assert their presence in international competitions. 
3) Promoting games of clubs through national competitions. 
4. Developing sports medicine by expanding personnel and equipment for regular checkups and taking better care of our athletes in the matter of health. 
5) Creating infrastructures for leisure and relaxation for children and adults.
</list_1>
CONCLUSION<title>
The present program is a step and an obligatory passage for going to the new society which the Revolution has fixed for its strategic objective. 
For it is through tenacious work and through sacrifice that the people will achieve this program, thus transforming qualitatively its frame of life. 
The Burkinese people under the direction of the Popular Front will overcome all the difficulties and obstacles which will not fail to arise against the realization of this program of action. But in order to do so this program must become a material force within the basic masses and we must honor work, discipline, self-denial and the principle of counting above all on our own strength and determination. 
The realization of this program will also be a result of the unity which will be created around and under the direction of the Popular Front. Thus it falls upon the militants of the democratic peoples' Revolution to make known and to explain ceaselessly the content and scope of this program which, without any doubt, will give impetus to a sure development of productive forces of our country. 
HOMELAND OR DEATH, WE SHALL CONQUER 
THE POPULAR FRONT