THE BURUNDI PEOPLE, Confident in its cultural values and its own identity, in its unity and secular cohesion as well as in its traditions of struggle for its national dignity; 
Reaffirming its fundamental options expressed through a mass party founded upon the alliance of progressive forces seeking to create a society where social justice reigns and where the exploitation of man by man shall be banished; 
Convinced of the necessity of organizing the democratic structures of the State so that the sovereignty of the people shall be effective, of exercising sovereignty over the national wealth and resources and of promoting the rehabilitation and revitalization of the national culture; 
Proclaiming its attachment to the eminent dignity of the human being, to the recognition and to the protection of the rights of the individual and of peoples, as well as to international conventions and treaties relating to these rights; 
Recognizing that peace, friendship and cooperation among peoples requires respect for their self-determination and their independence, and the organization of equitable economic relationships among nations; 
Conscious of the historic, moral and material bonds and imperatives which unite the Countries of Africa and determined to support, by all means, African liberation, cooperation and unity; SOLEMNLY ADOPT THE PRESENT CONSTITUTION:TITLE I: OF THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI<title>
ARTICLE 1 
Burundi is a unitary, sovereign, secular and democratic Republic. Its principle is government of the people, by the people and for the people. 
ARTICLE 2 
National sovereignty belongs to the people, who exercise it either through their representatives or directly by means of referendum. 
ARTICLE 3 
The Republic of Burundi is divided into provinces and communes. The law determines their organization and operating, as well as other administrative considerations. 
It can alter their boundaries and the number of them. The national territory is inalienable and indivisible, subject to the terms of title VIII of the present Constitution. 
ARTICLE 4 
The capital of the country is located at Bujumbura. It can be transferred to any other place in the Republic by law. 
ARTICLE 5 
The flag of Burundi is tricolored: green, white and red. It is in the shape of a rectangle, divided by a saltier, having at its center a white discus stamped with three six-pointed stars in the shape of an equilateral triangle inscribed within a circle having the same center as the discus and whose base is parallel to the length of the flag. 
The Law specifies the dimensions and other details of the flag. 
The motto of Burundi is: Unity, Work, Progress. 
ARTICLE 6 
The emblem of the Republic is a shield stamped with a lion's head and three lances, all surrounded by the national motto. 
The national anthem and the seal of the Republic are decided by law. 
ARTICLE 7 
The official language is Kirundi. 
The official languages are Kirundi and other languages decided by law.ARTICLE 8 
The property of a Burundi is acquired, kept and lost according to conditions decided by law. 
ARTICLE 9 
The fundamental institutions of the Republic of Burundi are: 
<list>
- The Party, 
- The President of the Republic, 
- The Government, 
- The National Assembly, 
- The Judicial Authority.
</list>
TITLE II: PUBLIC LIBERTIES AND DUTIES OF THE CITIZEN<title>
CHAPTER I - PUBLIC LIBERTIES<title> 
ARTICLE 10 
The human being is sacred. The State has the obligation to respect and protect it. 
Each person has the right to the free development of his personality with consideration for the rights of others and for public order. 
ARTICLE 11 
All Barundi are equal in rights and duties without any distinction of sex, origin, color, religion or opinion.
ARTICLE 12 
The liberty of the human being is inviolable. No one shall be accused, arrested, or detained except in cases determined by a law promulgated prior to the infraction in question. 
The right of defense is guaranteed before all jurisdictions and at all levels of the proceeding. 
No one can be removed, against his will, from the judge which the law assigns to him. 
ARTICLE 13 
Every Burundi has the right to participate, be it directly through representatives, in the direction and management of the affairs of state, subject to legal qualifications, notably age and capacity.ARTICLE 14 
The domicile is inviolable. 
It can only be requisitioned under the manners and conditions prescribed by law. 
ARTICLE 15 
All Barundi have the right of movement and free settlement and dwelling throughout the Republic in accordance with restrictions provided by law. 
ARTICLE 16 
Freedom of religion, opinion, expression, secrecy of correspondence, the right of assembly and to form associations are guaranteed in accordance with forms determined by law. 
ARTICLE 17 
The family, the natural basis of society, is protected by law. 
Marriage is organized by law. 
Parents have the natural right and the duty to educate their children. They are supported in this task by the State and its public collectivities. The protection of youth against exploitation and destitution is a duty for the State and the public collectivities. 
ARTICLE 18 
Every citizen has the right to equal access to instruction, to education and to culture. It is provided particularly by public schools. Private schools may be opened with the authorization and under the control of the State. 
ARTICLE 19 
The right of private ownership is recognized for all, Barundi and foreigners, subject to legal limitations. 
It should be compatible with the general prosperity. It cannot be expropriated in the case of proven public necessity or in view of establishing social rapport and equitable economic standing among the members of the collectivity, subject to a fair indemnity and under conditions prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER II - DUTIES OF THE CITIZEN<title> 
ARTICLE 20 
The rights recognized by the terms of the preceding chapter are to be exercised within the conditions determined by the laws passed for their application. They are subject to the sole restrictions necessary to assure respect for the rights of others and to satisfy legitimate exigencies of morale, public order and the perpetuation of the State, such as the imperatives of economic development.No one may abuse rights recognized by the Constitution or by the law to compromise the national unity, the territorial integrity or the independence of Burundi, to attack the republican regime or to violate the present Constitution. 
ARTICLE 21 
Each Burundi has duties towards the family and the society, towards the State and the other collectivities recognized by the Constitution and the law. 
The Burundi has, in particular: 
<list>
1. The duty to serve the national community by placing his physical and intellectual capacities at its service with the aim of contributing to the development of an economic system based upon the eradication of exploitation of man by man, just distribution of national revenue, equal access to material well-being and to intellectual expansion. 
2. The duty to respect work and to perform the contributions stipulated by law to protect fundamental interests of society. 
3. The duty to safeguard and strengthen national unity and social solidarity. 
4. The duty to safeguard and strengthen the national independence and the territorial integrity of the Nation and, in a general way, to contribute to the defense of his country, within the conditions stipulated by law. 
5. The duty to be vigilant, in his dealings with society, for the preservation of cultural values and the promotion of the moral health of society.
</list>
TITLE III: OF THE PARTY<title> 
ARTICLE 22 
The Republic of Burundi adopts the principle of the one mass party, called "Union for National Progress" (UPRONA). 
ARTICLE 23 
Its fundamental choices in political, economic, social and cultural matters are contained in the Charter of the Party. 
The organization and operations of the Party are regulated by its statutes. 
ARTICLE 24 
The party channels and reflects the deep aspirations of the people. It orients the general politics of the country, inspires and controls the action of all the institutions of the State. 
ARTICLE 25 
The principal organs of the Party are: The National Congress, The President of the Party, The Central Committee and the Political Bureau.ARTICLE 26 
The National Congress is the supreme instance of the party. 
It lays out the basic line on matters of domestic and foreign policy, decides the broad orientations of economic and social development, and elects the President of the Party and the Central Committee of the Party. 
ARTICLE 27 
The President of the Party oversees the general progress of the Party. He directs and coordinates all the activities of the Central Committee and of the Political Bureau. 
ARTICLE 28 
The Central Committee is the superior organ of direction of the Party between National Congresses. 
It oversees the application of decisions and of resolutions of the National Congress, controls the execution by the government of the policies decided by the Congress and sees to the functioning of the organs of the Party in conformance with its Statutes. 
The Political Bureau is the organ of execution of the Central Committee.
TITLE IV: OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC AND OF THE GOVERNMENT<title>
CHAPTER I - OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title> 
ARTICLE 29 
The President of the Republic is elected by direct universal suffrage and by an absolute majority of the votes cast. The election takes place twenty days at the least and forty days at the most before the expiration of the term of the president in office. 
The President of the Uprona Party is the only candidate for the presidency of the Republic. If he does not obtain a majority of the votes cast, it is provided that there will be an election of a new President of the Uprona Party and election of a President of the Republic within sixty days. 
The term of the President of the Republic is five years. 
The methods of electing the President of the Republic will be decided by law. 
ARTICLE 30 
Before assuming his duties, the President of the Republic takes, before the Nation represented by the Central Committee of the Party and the National Assembly, the following oath: "Before the Burundi people, sole possessor of the national sovereignty, I swear fidelity to the Constitution and pledge to consecrate all my strength to defend the higher interests of the nation, to promote national development and social justice, and to safeguard the unity, the integrity and the independence of the Republic of Burundi."ARTICLE 31 
The President of the Republic, Chief of State and of Government, incarnates national unity, oversees respect for the Constitution, the continuity of the State and the proper functioning of powers, and represents the State in all acts of public life. 
He is the guarantor of national independence, of the integrity of the territory, of respect for international treaties and agreements. 
ARTICLE 32 
The President of the Republic has the plenitude of executive power which he exercises by decree. 
ARTICLE 33 
The President of the Republic guides the general policies of the State as determined by the Charter of the Party and the National Congress and defined by the Central Committee of the Party. 
He oversees the execution of laws and of judicial decisions. 
He declares war and signs the armistice. 
He accredits and recalls ambassadors and special envoys to foreign States and receives letters of appointment and of recall of ambassadors and special envoys from foreign States. 
He has the right of pardon. 
He confers national orders and decorations of the Republic. 
ARTICLE 34 
In case of grave and immediate danger threatening the institutions of the Republic, the independence or the higher interest of the Nation, the integrity of the territory or the execution of international obligations, the President of the Republic may proclaim by decree-law a state of emergency and take all measures which he deems necessary. He informs the Central Committee of the Party of this as soon as possible and informs the nation through an address. 
ARTICLE 35 
The functions of President of the Republic are incompatible with the exercise of any public function, other than that provided in Article 27, of any public employment and of any professional activity.ARTICLE 36 
In case of his absence or temporary indisposition, the President of the Republic may temporarily delegate the authority to perform his functions to a special delegation. 
In case of a vacancy because of resignation, death or any other cause of cessation of his functions, the President is replaced by a person elected, on the recommendation of the Political Bureau of the Party, by an absolute majority of the members present at a joint meeting of the Central Committee of the Party and the National Assembly. 
The resignation is addressed to the Central Committee of the Party. 
The vacancy is proclaimed by the Supreme Court at a joint meeting of all chambers. 
The Secretary General of the Party convenes the organs cited in paragraph two of the present article to announce the decision of the Supreme Court. 
The person thus elected receives a complete mandate and exercises the plenitude of powers conferred on the President of the Party and on the President of the Republic. 
Before the election of the President according to the methods stipulated in paragraph two of the present article, the Secretary General of the Party undertakes the continuation of the powers of the President of the Republic. He may not in any way modify the composition of the Government. 
In case of the absence or impairment of the Secretary General of the Party, the President of the National Assembly replaces him in the duties cited in paragraphs five and seven of the present article. 
ARTICLE 37 
In case of the resignation, the death of the President of the Republic or any other cause of the cessation of his functions, the Government is considered resigned and assures the expediting of current affairs until the formation of the new government. 
ARTICLE 38 
At the expiration of his term, the President of the Republic has the right, except in the case of proven treason, to a pension and to all other privileges and facilities determined by law. 
CHAPTER II - OF THE GOVERNMENT<title> 
ARTICLE 39 
The Government, the superior organ of the Administration of the State, executes the general policies of the State in accordance with the directives of the President of the Republic. 
It is responsible to him, to whom it gives an account of its actions.ARTICLE 40 
The President of the Republic names the Ministers, assigns their powers and terminates their duties. He may delegate certain powers to Ministers. The decrees that he issues, as well as the laws which he promulgates according to the conditions in Article 56, are countersigned by the Ministers responsible for their execution. 
ARTICLE 41 
The President of the Republic presides over the Council of Ministers. 
The latter must deliberate: 
<list>
- decisions concerning the general policies of the State; 
- legal projects; 
- decrees and regulatory ordinances.
</list>
TITLE V: OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY<title>
ARTICLE 42 
The Parliament consists of a single assembly called the "National Assembly" whose members bear the title of "Representative." 
ARTICLE 43 
The Representatives are elected by direct universal suffrage according to the methods stipulated by law. 
Nevertheless, in the desire to assure full representation of the social forces of progress, notably the youth, the workers, the intellectuals, the women, and in keeping with the democratic ideal inspired by the present Constitution, the President of the Republic designates one fifth of the members of the National Assembly. 
The law stipulates the number of representatives, the conditions of eligibility, the regulating of incompatibilities regarding indemnities and privileges, the conditions under which new elections are organized in case of the vacancy of a seat. 
The term of the legislature is five years.
ARTICLE 44
The mandate of the representatives is of a national character. Any private mandate is null. The vote of the representatives is personal, except for special delegation and limited within the conditions determined by law. 
The representatives cannot be prosecuted, searched or arrested, detained or brought to trial for opinions or votes given during the exercise of their duties.Except in the case of flagrant misdemeanor, representatives may not, during the duration of sessions, be prosecuted without the authorization of the Bureau of the National Assembly. 
Representatives may not, outside of session, be arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of the National Assembly, except in the case of flagrant misdemeanor, authorized prosecution or definite judgment. 
ARTICLE 45 
The National Assembly votes the law and levies imposts and taxes. 
ARTICLE 46 
It is the domain of the law: 
<list_1>
1. The fundamental guarantees and obligations of the citizen: 
<list_2>
- Protection of individual liberty; 
- System (regime) of public liberties; 
- Duties and obligations of the citizen in handling the imperatives of allegiance to the Country, the national defense and the development of the Country; 
- Labor and union legislation.
</list_2>
2. The statute of persons and goods: 
<list_3>
- Nationality and personal statute; 
- System (regime) of ownership; 
- Matrimonial, Inheritances and liberalities code; 
- Code of civil and commercial obligations.
</list_3>
3. The political, administrative and judicial organization:
<list_4>
- Organization of territorial and local collectivities; 
- Electoral code; 
- General rules of organization of the national defense; 
- Creation of lines of jurisdiction, determination of crimes and misdemeanors, rules and judicial procedure; 
- General principles of public duty.
</list_4>4. Financial and patrimonial questions concerning: 
<list_5>
- The code for issuing money; 
- The State budget; 
- The defining of the assessment and the levels of taxes and imposts; 
- The management of the domain of the State. 
</list_5>
5. The education code. 
6. The objectives of economic and social action defined in the program laws. 
</list_1>
Other matters other than those which are the domain of the law have a regulatory nature. 
ARTICLE 47 
Laws are passed by an absolute majority of the representatives present; organic laws are passed by a majority of two-thirds of the representatives present. The required quorum for meetings of the National Assembly is two-thirds of the representatives. 
ARTICLE 48 
The National Assembly elects, in its first meeting, the Bureau composed of: the President, a Vice-President and as many members as are deemed necessary. 
ARTICLE 49 
The National Assembly convenes each year in two ordinary sessions. The total duration of each session may not exceed two months. 
Extraordinary sessions, not lasting more than fifteen days, may be convened at the request of the President of the Republic or that of two-thirds of the representatives. 
ARTICLE 50 
The National Assembly adopts, in the form of law, its own code establishing the rules of conduct and the duties of its organization. 
ARTICLE 51
An Audit Office, responsible for the examination, liquidation and resolution of accounts of all public services, may be established and organized by law. 
The Audit Office submits a report on State expenditures to the National Assembly.TITLE VI: OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE LEGISLATIVE AND THE EXECUTIVE<title> 
ARTICLE 52 
The initiation of laws rests concurrently with the President of the Republic and the National Assembly. 
ARTICLE 53 
During the period between sessions, in case of emergency or when the National Assembly finds it impossible to meet, the President of the Republic may take measures relevant to the domain of law through decree-laws determined in the Council of Ministers. 
However, these decree-laws, which come into force upon publication, are subject, except for those concerning foreign loans, to the ratification of the National Assembly. 
ARTICLE 54 
The National Assembly and the President of the Republic have the right of amendment of Government legal projects and of legislative proposals of members of the National Assembly. 
The amendments of the President of the Republic are presented by a member of the Government. 
The proposals and amendments formulated by the National Assembly are not acceptable when their adoption would result either in an important diminution of public resources, or in the increase of a large public expense, at least when these proposals or amendments are for monetary compensation. 
ARTICLE 55 
The President of the Republic, after consultation with the Central Committee of the Party and the Bureau of the National Assembly, may submit for a referendum any proposed reform which, while relevant to the legal domain, might have profound repercussions on the future of the nation or the institutions of the Republic. 
The law determines the procedure for the referendum. 
ARTICLE 56 
The President of the Republic promulgates the laws adopted by the National Assembly within a period of thirty days after their transmission, if he does not request a second reading or consult the Supreme Court in accordance with Article 62. 
The request for a second reading may concern the entire law or part of it. 
After a second reading, the same text may only be promulgated if it has been passed by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present.ARTICLE 57 
The President communicates with the National Assembly through an address which he delivers or has read. These communications are not subject to debate. 
ARTICLE 58 
The National Assembly may inform itself about the activities of the Government through oral or written questions with the right of reply, or by constituting commissions of inquiry on specified subjects. 
The representatives have the right to debate the actions or policies of the Government. 
ARTICLE 59 
The President of the Republic shall be informed of the schedule of meetings of the National Assembly and its commissions.
Ministers may attend the meetings of the National Assembly and its commissions. They speak each time they express the desire to. 
ARTICLE 60 
The President of the Republic may, after consulting the Central Committee of the Party, dissolve the National Assembly. 
Elections take place within four months following the dissolution.
TITLE VII: OF THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY<title> 
ARTICLE 61 
Justice is rendered by the courts and tribunals throughout the territory of the Republic in the name of the Burundi people. 
The role and responsibilities of the Public Minister are filled by the magistrates of the office of the public prosecutor. 
ARTICLE 62 
The judicial structure and area of responsibility are stipulated by law. 
ARTICLE 63 
Judicial hearings are public, except in the case of closed-door sessions pronounced by judicial decision when publicity is dangerous for public order or good conduct. 
ARTICLE 64 
Every judicial decision is thought out; its terms are announced in public.ARTICLE 65 
The members of the Central Committee of the Party, the representatives and the members of the Government as well as other persons determined by law are, in serious matters, subject, in the first and last instance to the Supreme Court, subject to the legal provisions foreseen in Article 71. 
ARTICLE 66 
In exercising their functions, judges are subject only to the Constitution and the law. 
ARTICLE 67 
The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the independence of the judiciary. He is assisted, in this task, by the Superior Council of the Judiciary whose composition, organization and functions are defined by law.
ARTICLE 68 
The Supreme Court is the highest juridical entity in the Republic. It is the guarantor of the application of the law by the Courts and Tribunals. 
It includes: 
<list>
A Cassation chamber which takes appeals on decisions rendered by lower courts of last resort, other than administrative courts, except where a decision is contrary to the law; 
An Administrative Chamber which hears appeals from decisions rendered by administrative jurisdictions; 
A Judicial Chamber which deals with infractions committed by political or public figures subject in the first and last instance to the Supreme Court, except for crimes and misdemeanors against the Security of the State; 
A Constitutional Chamber which dealt with the constitutionality of laws and international agreements at the request of the President of the Republic or the National Assembly; a law declared unconstitutional cannot be promulgated. 
</list>
The law determines the composition, organization, operating rules and applicable procedures for each of the Chambers. 
ARTICLE 69 
With all Chambers meeting, the Supreme Court declares the vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic following the terms of Article 36. 
ARTICLE 70 
Judgment of the Supreme Court are not susceptible to any recourse, if a pardon is not involved.ARTICLE 71 
The law organizes a Court of State Security responsible for dealing with serious threats to State security under the penal code. 
TITLE VIII: OF TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS<title> 
ARTICLE 72 
The President of the Republic has the main responsibility for international negotiations. He signs and ratifies international treaties and agreements. 
ARTICLE 73 
The Republic of Burundi may create, with other States, intergovernmental organs with common administration, coordination and free cooperation. It may conclude agreements of association with or in community with other States. 
ARTICLE 74 
Treaties of peace and of commerce, treaties concerning international organization, treaties which concern the finances of the State, those which alter dispositions of a legal nature, those which concern the status of persons can only be ratified by virtue of a law. They only take effect after having been properly ratified and on condition that they are applied by the other party. No cession, no change, no adjustment of territory is valid without the consent of the Burundi people called to express themselves through a referendum. 
ARTICLE 75 
If the Supreme Court, notified by the President of the Republic, has declared that an international agreement contains a clause incompatible with the Constitution, authorization to ratify it may come only after revision of the Constitution according to the methods foreseen in-Articles 76 and 77. 
TITLE IX: OF THE REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION<title> 
ARTICLE 76 
The initiative for revising the present Constitution belongs concurrently with the President of the Republic and the National Assembly. 
ARTICLE 77 
Every proposition for amendment presented by the President of the Republic, after consultation with the Central Committee of the Party, is submitted to the National Assembly and is promulgated when it is approved by two-thirds of the members of the National Assembly.ARTICLE 78 
Under the reservation of the stipulations of titles VIII and IX of the present Constitution, no procedure for revision may be retained if it threatens the republican form, the national unity or the territorial integrity of the Republic.
TITLE X: TRANSITORY AND FINAL DISPOSITIONS<title> 
ARTICLE 79 
The President of the Republic in office exercises all the prerogatives of Chief of State and of Government until the expiration of his term and the official installation of the President of the Republic elected according to the stipulations of Article 29 of the present Constitution. 
ARTICLE 80 
The legislative texts and rules valid in Burundi at the promulgation of the present Constitution remain applicable to the extent that they are not contrary to its provisions, as long as they are not modified or abrogated. 
ARTICLE 81 
The present Constitution was adopted by popular referendum after having been approved by the Central Committee of the Party. It abrogates that of July 11, 1974.
