Throughout thousands of years, the Kampuchean people have struggled to build and defend their country of which the Angkor civilization is the proof and the pride. But they never enjoyed the fruits of their labor and could not develop their traditions, their pure national culture and their humanitarian and peaceful nature under the oppressive yoke of regimes of slavery, feudalism and imperialism. 
At the end of the 19th century, the French colonialists committed aggression against our country and against Vietnam and Laos, seizing them and transforming them into colonies. Finding themselves in the same situation and closely uniting their forces with those of the Vietnamese and Lao peoples, our people have since struggled against the common enemy. The struggle of our people and of the Vietnamese and the Lao peoples constituted an active contribution to the common struggles of the world's peoples against imperialism and colonialism. 
Meanwhile, U.S. imperialism--ringleader and policeman of world imperialism--employed all kinds of maneuvers, from interference to armed aggression, with the intention of placing the administrative yoke of American-style neocolonialism on the entire Indochinese peninsula. Once again our people rose and struggled against the American aggressors. At the beginning of 1975, with close cooperation from Vietnamese and Lao forces, our people waged repeated offensives and scored successive victories over the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys. These victories of the three Indochinese peoples in the struggle against U.S. imperialism marked the victory of the era of struggle against neocolonialism in the world. 
After 17 April 1975, our people should have been able to live in peace, independence and freedom to rebuild their country. But the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary-Khieu Samphan clique agreed to become the lackeys of the Beijing expansionist and hegemonist leaders. [The Phnom Penh Domestic Service version in Cambodian broadcast in installments at 1230 GMT on 28 June and at 2300 GMT on 28, 29 and 30 June renders the preceding sentence: "But the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary-Khieu Samphan clique plundered the revolutionary gains and sold themselves as lackeys to the Beijing expansionist and hegemonist leaders."] In the 4 years they were in power, this clique destroyed all the revolutionary gains, massacred millions of innocent people, trampled all fundamental human rights and abolished all the economic, social and cultural foundations of our splendid Kampuchea. It continued to bow down to and follow the orders of the reactionaries in the Chinese leading circle, to send armies to commit aggression against Vietnam's borders and to massacre the fraternal neighbors who has shared with us the same tranches and, together with us, won brilliant victories in the struggle against U.S. imperialism. 
Faced with the danger of genocide and the loss of territory to the Chinese reactionaries, our people had only one choice for survival--to abolish the barbarous Pol Pot-Ieng Sary-Khieu Samphan regime. Thanks to the clear-sighted political line of the party, the close unity within the KNUFNS, the sincere assistance of the people and army of Vietnam, and the support of the fraternal socialist countries and peace-loving countries in the world, our people definitively overthrew the genocidal regime on 7 January 1979. The people's state power was organized and the KPRC quickly administered the entire territory. This shining victory opened a new chapter in our history and gave our people independence, freedom, democracy and the right to be masters of their true destiny in order to rebuild our beloved Kampuchea according to our legitimate aspirations. The Chinese expansionists and hegemonists in Beijing, acting in collusion with U.S. imperialism and other powers, are undertaking to destroy the revolution of our country. But the situation in Kampuchea is irreversible. Our people will certainly triumph. The enemy is doomed to failure. 
The history of our people's struggle, crowned with victories, has clearly proven the truth that the entire people, enlightened by the party's correct political line, united as one, heroically struggling in unity and close cooperation with the Vietnamese and Lao peoples and other peoples of the fraternal socialist countries, and enjoying the approval and support of the peace- and justice-loving peoples in the world, are a powerful force for achieving victory.
The PRK Constitution is the result of the long struggles replete with difficulties and the sufferings of our people. It reflects the will and objective of our entire people to firmly defend national independence and to build the fatherland, which is gradually advancing toward socialism. Our people, united as one and holding high the banners of patriotism and proletarian internationalist solidarity, scrupulously implement the present Constitution and are determined to record victories in building an independent, peaceful, free and happy Kampuchea. 
All for the higher interests of the fatherland and the happiness of the people. Long live the PRK! 
Chapter I--Political System<title>
Article 1 
Kampuchea takes the official name of "People's Republic of Kampuchea." 
The People's Republic of Kampuchea is an independent, sovereign, peaceful, and democratic state, which has territorial integrity and is gradually advancing toward socialism. The sovereignty of the People's Republic of Kampuchea covers its mainland, islands, territorial waters, territorial sea, seabed, beneath the seabed and its airspace. 
Its slogan is: Independence, peace, freedom, happiness. 
The official language and script are Khmer. 
Article 2 
The Kampuchean people are masters of their country's fate. All power belongs to the people. The people exercise state power through the National Assembly and power organs which are elected by the people and responsible to the people. The people have the right to remove any representative who no longer enjoys their confidence. 
It is the duty of the state to defend the fatherland's independence, the people's freedom and revolutionary gains; to restore and develop production; to develop culture; to care for the people's material and intellectual life, and to raise their standard of living. 
The organization and functioning of state institutions must be in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the PRK. 
Article 3 
The Kampuchean Front for National Construction [Le Front d'Edification de la Patrie Kampuchea] and the revolutionary mass organizations constitute a solid support of the state, encouraging the people to fulfill revolutionary tasks. 
Article 4 
The KPRP is a force that takes direct leadership of the entire revolutionary task of the PRK. 
Article 5 
The state carries out a policy of unity and equality among the people of all nationalities living in the national community of Kampuchea. All nationalities must love and help each other. All acts of discrimination against, oppression of and division among the nationalities are prohibited. 
The languages and scripts as well as good customs and habits of the nationalities are respected. 
The state takes care of ethnic minorities so they can rise to the common level. The state pays special attention to the development of economy, education, culture, social affairs, health and communications in the mountainous regions and remote areas. 
Article 6 
The freedom of religious beliefs is respected. 
Religious activities in conformity with the Constitution and laws are guaranteed by the state. 
All acts taking advantage of religion to undermine security, public order and the people's interests are prohibited. 
Article 7 
Men and women have equal rights in marriage and in the family. Marriage must be concluded according to the conditions specified by law and following the voluntary and progressive principle of monogamy; coercion in marriage is prohibited. 
Article 8 
The rights and primary duties of parents are to educate and care for their children so they will become good citizens inspired by patriotism and the love of work, conscious of their responsibilities vis-a-vis society. 
Children have an obligation to care for their parents. 
Article 9 
The PRK adopts the principle that the people as a whole participate in national defense. 
The Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Armed Forces, composed of three categories, and the People's Police--the children of the people--must be loyal to the fatherland and people and are duty bound to defend the fatherland and the revolutionary power, safeguard the revolutionary gains and the peaceful life of the people and join with the latter in national construction. 
All the armed forces must be skilled in combat and production, know how to persuade the people and must respect and help the people. They must not do anything that violates the people's interests. They must be worthy of the love, esteem and confidence of the people. 
Article 10 
The PRK pursues a foreign policy of independence, peace and nonalignment. 
The PRK strengthens the bonds of solidarity, friendship and cooperation with Vietnam, Laos, the Soviet Union and other fraternal socialist countries. 
The PRK actively takes part in the struggle of the Nonaligned Movement to defend the independence, national sovereignty, peace and international security aimed at the establishment of a new economic order in the world.
The PRK firmly supports the struggle wages by the peoples the world over against imperialism, new and old colonialism, the Chinese Beijing expansionism, racism and the reactionary forces and their lackeys and for peace, national independence, democracy and social progress. 
Chapter II--Economic System and Political-Cultural-Social Line<title> 
Article 11 
The national economy is under the direction of the state. 
The state constantly raises the living standards of the people in all fields in order to build the country. 
Article 12 
The national economy comprises three sectors: the state-run economy, the collective economy and the family-run economy. 
The state closely manages the state-run economy in order to develop the leading role of the state economic sector and similarly, actively assists and guides the collective economy and the family-run economy to develop themselves to conform with the direction useful to the interests of the state and the life of the people. 
Article 13 
The state applies itself to developing agricultural production, industrial production in service of agriculture and the production of consumer goods, and to developing trade, communications and transportation. 
The state assists and protects handicrafts and small industries.
Article 14 
Land, forests, the sea, rivers, the lakes, natural resources, economic and cultural centers, national defense bases and other state constructions constitute state property. 
Article 15 
Citizens have the right to use and inherit land allotted by the state to each family according to the provisions of law, on which to build a house and grow crops or orchards. 
Article 16 
In addition to the land used to build a house and for a kitchen garden fixed by law and the land assigned by the production solidarity group for use in production by the group, each agricultural worker may secure from the state as a loan an extra plot of land on which to produce seasonal foodstuffs according to his ability to work and has the right to keep the product of that work. 
Article 17 
No one has the right to purchase, sell, lease or use land for sharecropping. No one may use, at will, land reserved for agriculture and forestry for other purposes without the authorization of competent services.Article 18 
The private ownership of citizens of work income, other incomes and legal goods is protected by law. Any arbitrary confiscation of the citizens' goods is prohibited. 
Article 19
The internal trade of the state shall be developed to bring about the circulation of goods, stimulate production and serve the life of the people. 
The citizens may make commercial deals on agricultural produce and family-run handicraft products. The purchase and sale practiced by the people in conformity with the political line of the state are guaranteed by law. 
Foreign trade is the monopoly of the state. 
Article 20 
The monetary and financial systems are defined by law. 
Taxes may be levied only when authorized by law. 
The obligation to sell to the state or the requisition of private goods may be carried out only if authorized by law. 
Article 21 
The state undertakes to build a national and progressive culture and to develop a national language and system of writing corresponding to the wishes of a new society. All influences and all remnants of the reactionary, perverted, and decadent culture are banned. 
Article 22 
The state implements a syllabus according to the pedagogic principle which links study with practice, education with production and schools with society. 
The state opens nurseries to teach preschool-age children. The state guarantees to offer a general education for all school-age children by building primary schools and progressively developing secondary schools, vocational schools and classes, various higher classes and the higher education to meet the needs of the country in achieving progress. 
As an encouragement, the state accords scholarships to youths deemed capable of pursuing their studies in higher classes and technical education at home and abroad. 
In order to eliminate illiteracy and to raise the cultural standards of citizens, the state launches an intensive campaign to eliminate illiteracy by opening study classes for illiterate adults and other complementary classes according to the needs of the country. 
Article 23 
The state contributes to the development of science and technology, literature and arts by expanding the educational system and by stimulating research activities combining instruction in theory with practice. The state encourages all creative activities useful to the country and the people by scientists, technicians, writers and artists by providing them material and moral support. 
The state enhances cooperation with fraternal socialist countries and exchanges experiences with them. The state develops relations with other countries.Article 24 
The state organizes the preservation of the historic monuments and artifacts, restores sites and develops the tourist sector in order to serve the people in the country and promote cultural relations with foreign countries. 
Article 25 
The state watches over the physical development of its citizens and encourages sports and gymnastic activities to enable them to acquire the necessary strength for stimulating production and actively contributing to national defense. 
Article 26 
To ensure the health of the people, the state watches over the prevention of disease and therapy, and persuades the people to strictly observe the rules of hygiene. The people enjoy free medical consultations. The state builds hospitals and conducts medical and pharmaceutical research through a combination of traditional remedies and modern medicine. 
Article 27 
The state cares for mothers and children. The state and society organize maternity hospitals, creches and kindergartens and take other adequate measures to alleviate the burden of housewives and ensure them the conditions necessary to participate like men in social activities. 
Working women or women employed by the state enjoy a 90-day maternity leave with pay. Nursing mothers enjoy a reduction of daily work hours while receiving the public welfare fixed by the state. 
The state shall take concrete measures concerning women working outside the state sector. 
Article 28 
The state takes special care of veteran revolutionaries who have made many contributions to the revolution, of disabled combatants, of families of combatants who have died for the revolution and of families who have rendered great services to the revolution. 
Article 29 
The state organizes a system of social insurance to benefit cadres, employees and workers who become disabled because of old age, sickness or work-related accidents. 
The state and society provide aid and assistance for old persons, invalids, widows and orphans without support. 
Chapter III--Rights and Duties of Citizens<title> 
Article 30 
The PRK recognizes and respects human rights. 
Citizens of the PRK are equal before the law and have the same rights and duties, irrespective of their sex, religious belief or race. 
The exercise of these rights is inseparable from the accomplishment of the duties of citizens.
Article 31 
Citizens of the PRK have the right to vote and run for election. 
Citizens serving in the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Armed Forces and the religious clergy have the right to vote and run for election. 
Citizens of both sexes who are at least 18 years of age have the right to vote. 
Citizens of both sexes who are at least 21 years of age have the right to run for election. 
Restrictive provisions on the right to vote are specified in the election law. 
Article 32 
Citizens of the PRK have the right to participate actively in the political, economic, social and cultural life of the country. 
All citizens may submit to state organs and mass organizations suggestions on questions concerning state policy and the people's life. These suggestions must be thoroughly examined by these bodies. 
Article 33 
Citizens are guided in choosing a profession which corresponds to their abilities and the requirements of society. 
Citizens have the right to be paid according to the amount and quality of their work. Men and women have the right to enjoy equal pay for equal work. 
Article 34 
The state and society undertake to organize rest and recreation for workers. The state prescribes daily and weekly work hours and the system of paid annual leave for cadres, workers and employees, and develops state and social organization-operated rest centers. 
Article 35 
The state guarantees the inviolability of its citizens. 
The law protects the honor, dignity and life of its citizens. Accusations against and the arrest or detention of an individual may be carried out only when authorized by law. In the case of an arrest with evidence, records must be immediately transmitted to the competent organ for decision. 
Article 36. 
The citizen's freedom of movement and establishment of domicile are prescribed by law. 
The preservation of the inviolability of homes and of the secrecy of mail is guaranteed by the state. 
The searching of a house must conform with legal prescriptions.
Article 37 
Citizens enjoy the freedom of speech, freedom of press and freedom of assembly. No one is allowed to abuse these freedoms to the detriment of the honor of other persons, the good mores and customs of society or public order and national security. 
Article 38 
Citizens have the right to set up associations. This right is defined by law. All citizens may join mass organizations to protect the revolutionary gains and social order, to build and defend the country and to develop national and international solidarity. 
Article 39 
All citizens must respect the principle of life in society, carry out the state's political line and defend collective property. Citizens have the right to claim reparation for damages caused by the illegal acts of state organs, social organizations and their personnel in performance of their duties. 
Article 40 
Citizens of the PRK must scrupulously respect the Constitution and the laws of the state and have the duty to serve state affairs and the life of the people. 
Article 41 
Building and defending the fatherland are the citizens' supreme duty and honor. 
Citizens must serve in the armed forces as prescribed by law. 
[The Phnom Pehn Domestic version says: "Citizens must defend the fatherland and serve in the armed forces as prescribed by law."] 
Traitors to the nation are punished by law. 
Article 42 
Genuinely patriotic citizens of the PRK living abroad are protected by the organs of the PRK. 
Article 43 
The PRK grants the right of asylum and protection to any foreign national persecuted for having struggled for peace and democracy, for national independence and socialism or for freedom in scientific and cultural activities in the interest of social progress. 
Article 44 
Foreign nationals residing in Kampuchea must respect the laws of the PRK. They enjoy the protection of the PRK. 
Chapter IV--The National Assembly<title> 
Article 45 
The National Assembly is the supreme organ of state power and the supreme people's representative organ of the PRK.
The National Assembly is the sole legislative organ. 
Article 46 
The National Assembly is composed of deputies elected according to the principle of universal, equal, direct and secret ballot. 
The number of deputies to the National Assembly and the electoral procedures are defined by the election law. 
Article 47 
The term of office of the National Assembly is 5 years. Three months before the term of office of the National Assembly expires, the Council of State decides on and directs the organization of the election of National Assembly deputies for the new legislature. 
In case of war or under other exceptional circumstances, the National Assembly may pronounce the prolongation of its term of office. 
Article 48 
The National Assembly has the following powers: 
<list>
1. To adopt or revise the Constitution and laws. 
2. To control the implementation of the Constitution and laws. 
3. To determine domestic and foreign policies. 
4. To adopt state economic and cultural programs and the state budget.
5. To elect or remove the chairman, vice chairman and secretary of the National Assembly. To elect or remove from office the chairman, vice chairman, secretary general and other members of the Council of State. To elect or remove from office the chairman, vice chairman and members of the Council of Ministers. 
6. To create or abolish ministries or institutions of ministerial level. 
7. To control the activities of the Council of State and the Council of Ministers. 
8. To create, revise or abolish taxes. 
9. To decide on amnesty. 
10. To ratify or reject international treaties when they are submitted by the Council of State to the National Assembly for decision. 
</list>
Article 49 
The National Assembly opens its first session 60 days after elections at the latest, when convened by the Council of State. 
The National Assembly meets twice a year in regular session and may hold extraordinary sessions if deemed necessary by the Council of State. 
Article 50 
At the beginning of each term of office, the National Assembly shall set up a commission to verify the credentials of deputies. The commission shall submit a report on the results of its verification to the National Assembly for decision. 
Article 51 
The chairman of the National Assembly directs its meetings, takes cognizance of the laws a,' resolutions adopted by the National Assembly, ensures the implementation of the National Assembly's internal regulations and conducts the National Assembly's external relations. The chairman of the National Assembly has the right to participate in all meetings of the Council of State. 
The vice chairman of the National Assembly assists the chairman in the above-mentioned functions, The secretary of the National Assembly takes the minutes of all National Assembly meetings and carries out the tasks entrusted by the chairman of the National Assembly. 
Article 52 
The National Assembly sets up various necessary commissions to assist the assembly and the Council of State in examining bills, draft decrees, draft economic programs, the draft budget of the state and other projects assigned by the National Assembly and the Council of State. 
Article 53 
The Council of State, the Council of Ministers, the chairman of the National Assembly, the National Assembly commissions, the president of the Kampuchean Front for National Construction Central Committee, the chairman of the trade unions, the chairman of the Kampuchean Revolutionary Youths and the chairman of the Women's Association of Kampuchea have the right to submit bills to the National Assembly. 
Article 54 
The National Assembly adopts laws and decisions by a majority of more than half of its members. 
Adoption and amendment of the Constitution are valid only if approved by a two-thirds majority of the National Assembly members. 
Article 55 
Laws adopted by the National Assembly must be promulgated within 30 days at the latest by the Council of State.
Article 56 
The members of the National Assembly enjoy parliamentary immunity. 
No member of the National Assembly may be sued, arrested and detained for stating an opinion or casting votes in the exercise of his functions. 
Any suit, arrest or incarceration of any member of the National Assembly may be carried out only with the authorization of the National Assembly or, between its sessions, with that of the Council of State with the exception of flagrant penal offenses. 
In this case, the competent service is required to report immediately to the National Assembly or the Council of State for decision. 
The decision of the Council of State must be submitted for approval to the National Assembly at the next session. 
Article 57 
Members of the National Assembly have the right to interpolate the Council of Ministers, ministers, the Council of State and the chairman of the National Assembly. The state institutions and persons interpolated must answer to a session of the National Assembly.
Article 58 
Members of the National Assembly have the obligation to respect the internal regulations of the National Assembly and to be exemplary in the implementation of the Constitution and laws. They are duty-bound to talk and act in conformity with the decisions of the National Assembly. 
Any National Assembly deputy who fails to fulfill his duties may be dismissed according to law. 
Chapter V--The Council of State<title> 
Article 59 
The Council of State is a representative organ of the PRK and a standing organ of the National Assembly. 
The Council of State has the duty to report its activities to the National Assembly. 
The Council of State is composed of a chairman, a vice chairman, a secretary general and a number of members fixed by the National Assembly. The Council of State is elected from among the National Assembly deputies. 
Article 60 
The Council of State has the following duties: 
<list>
1. To decide on and direct the organization of elections of deputies to the National Assembly and to convene National Assembly sessions. 
2. To promulgate laws, issue decree-laws and decrees and interpret laws.
3. To decide, when the National Assembly is not in session and on the recommendation of the Council of Ministers, on the appointment or removal of members of the Council of Ministers; to create or abolish ministries and ministerial-level institutions; and to decide on questions concerning taxes. Upon the recommendation of the Council of Ministers, to appoint, remove or recall ambassadors and envoys of the PRK accredited to foreign countries and to international organizations. 
4. To control the judgments and the exercise of the right of the State Court.
5. To accept letters of credentials from diplomatic representatives.
6. To ratify or denounce international treaties, except where it is deemed necessary to refer the matter to the National Assembly for decision. 
7. To institute and grant honorific titles and to institute military grades and ranks and diplomatic ranks upon the Council of Ministers' recommendation. 
8. To decide on pardons and the commutation of penalties. 
9. To accomplish other tasks entrusted to it by the National Assembly. 
</list>
Article 61 
The term of office of the Council of State is the same as that of the National Assembly After the expiration of the National Assembly's term of office, the Council of State shall continue its functions until the new National Assembly elects a new Council of State.
In a case where the chairman of the Council of State is unable to perform his duties because of illness or because he is on a mission abroad, the vice chairman of the Council of State shall act on his behalf. 
Article 62 
Decisions of the Council of State shall be approved by an absolute majority of its members. 
Article 63 
The establishment and the functioning of the Council of State are defined by law. 
Chapter VI--The Council of Ministers<title> 
Article 64 
The Council of Ministers is the Government of the PRK and is the organ of direct management of society and of direct guidance of the development of the national economy. The Council of Ministers is responsible to the National Assembly and reports its work to the assembly. Between sessions of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers is responsible to the State Council and reports its work to that body. 
Article 65 
The Council of Ministers comprises the chairman, vice chairmen and members. The number of vice chairmen and members of the Council of Ministers is fixed by the National Assembly. 
Article 66 
The Council of Ministers has the following rights [Phnom Penh Domestic substitutes term "duties"]: 
<list>
1. To prepare draft laws, draft decrees and other drafts to be submitted to the National Assembly and Council of State. 
2. To carry out the Constitution, laws and decrees and implement the domestic and foreign policies of the country. 
3. To prepare and execute the economic and cultural plans and the budget of the state; to liquidate the vestiges of the former regime; and to improve the life and take care of the health of the people. 
4. To establish and strengthen state organs from the central to the grass-roots levels and to train and manage state cadres, workers and employees. 
5. To unify the leadership of the work of ministries and various institutions under the Council of Ministers; to unify the leadership of the work of local people's committees. 
6. To suspect the execution of, revise or renounce inappropriate agreements and directives issued by ministers or the chairmen of various state institutions. To suspend the execution of, revise or annul inappropriate resolutions and directives of people's committees at all levels. 
7. "To delineate boundaries of municipalities, wards, provinces, districts and communes."
8. To protect the interests of the people, preserve security and public order and protect the legal rights and interests of the citizens. 
9. To consolidate and develop the national defense forces; to carry out the mobilization of the armed forces; to order curfews and take other necessary measures for national defense.
10. To implement treaties concluded with foreign countries.
11. To carry out other tasks entrusted to it by the National Assembly and Council of State. 
</list>
Article 67 
The chairman of the Council of Ministers directs the work of the council and presides over its sessions. 
The vice chairman assists the chairman and assumes the functions of the chairman when the latter is absent. 
Each member of the Council of Ministers is responsible for his activities; likewise, he is jointly responsible, with the other members, for the activities of the Council of Ministers. 
Article 68 
The resolutions of the Council of Ministers are adopted by a majority of its members. 
Article 69 
The term of the Council of Ministers is the same as that of the National Assembly. 
Upon the expiration of its term, the Council of Ministers continues its tasks until the National Assembly elects a new Council of Ministers. 
Article 70 
The organization and functioning of the Council of Ministers are defined by law. 
Chapter VII--The Local People's Revolutionary Committees<title> 
Article 71 
The territory of the PRK is divided into provinces and municipalities under the direct administration of the central authority. 
A province is divided into districts. 
A district is divided into communes. 
A municipality directly subordinated to the central authority is divided into wards. 
Article 72 
The people's revolutionary committees are established in all provinces, municipalities, districts, communes and wards. 
Members of the people's revolutionary committees at the commune and ward levels are elected by the local people in a universal, equal, direct and secret ballot. 
"Members of the people's revolutionary committees at the district level are elected by representatives of the people's revolutionary committees of the communes in the district, representatives of the front and representatives of mass organizations who are members of the district-level front.Members of the people's revolutionary committees at the provincial level are elected by representatives of the people's revolutionary committees of the districts in the province, representatives of the front and representatives of mass organizations who are members of the provincial-level front. 
"Members of the people's revolutionary committees of municipalities are elected by representatives of the people's revolutionary committees of the wards in the municipality, representatives of the front and representatives of mass organizations who are members of the municipal-level front." 
Article 73 
A people's committee comprises a chairman, a vice chairman and a number of members. 
The term of office of the people's revolutionary committees of the provinces and municipalities is 5 years. 
The term of office of the people's revolutionary committees of the districts, communes and wards is 3 years. 
Article 74 
The people's revolutionary committees at all levels are responsible to the local people and, simultaneously, are responsible to the organs of the state power at the next higher level. 
Article 75 
The local people's revolutionary committees decide on and execute the principles for building the locality in all domains. They implement the resolutions and circulars of the state organs of higher levels and manage local administrative work. They guide all branches and echelons under their authority in carrying out their tasks in ensuring public security and social order, building the economy, developing the culture, maintaining health and raising the standard of living of the local people. 
Article 76 
The people's revolutionary committees at all levels, based on the rights and powers fixed by law, make decisions, issue circulars and control their implementation. 
The people's revolutionary committees are entitled to suspend the implementation, amend or annul ill-founded resolutions taken by the organs directly under their authority and by the people's committees at lower levels. 
Article 77 
Any people's revolutionary committee or any member of a people's committee who has not fulfilled his task will be discharged or dismissed in accordance with the conditions prescribed by law. 
Article 78 
The organization and functioning of the local people's revolutionary committees are fixed by law.Chapter VIII--The Jurisdictions and Courts<title> 
Article 79 
The objectives of the judgment and the application of the rights of the courts are: 
<list>
1. To protect the power of the people and the democratic legality; 
2. To preserve public security and the social order; 
3. To protect public property; and 
4. To protect the rights, freedoms, life and legal interests of the citizens. 
</list>
Article 80 
The people's courts and the military tribunals are the jurisdictional organs of the PRK. Prosecutors initiate lawsuits and bring actions before the courts in conformity with the law. They affirm actions in the courts, judgments and the enforcement of sound and legal judgments. 
In case of need, the Council of State may establish special tribunals to deal with matters of a special nature. 
Article 81 
The jurisdictions, in judging, rely on the law and on the principle of equality of all citizens before the law regardless of nationality, religious belief, sex or social position. 
Article 82 
The people's assessors participate in judgment of the courts in accordance with legal prescriptions. During the judgment the people's assessors have the same rights as the judges. 
The jurisdictional council decides by a majority vote. 
Article 83 
In all jurisdictions, the sessions are open to the public. However, they may be held behind closed doors for cases prescribed by law. 
Article 84 
The jurisdictions ensure the ethnic minority citizens of the PRK the right to use their language and script in the courts. 
Article 85 
The right to defense is guaranteed to the accused. 
The accused has the right to stand in his own defense or to rely on attorneys or anyone else in his defense. 
Article 86 
The organization of functioning of jurisdictions and courts are fixed by law. 
Chapter IX--The National Emblem, National Flag, National Anthem and Capital<title> 
Article 87 
The national emblem of the PRK is round in shape and has a red background with gold-colored ears of rice forming an oval frame. 
A red ribbon wraps around the lower parts of the ears of rice in two tiers. In the middle of the ribbon are the words "The People's Republic of Kampuchea," written in gold letters. 
An open gold-colored constitution book is placed on the rice stalks which are bound together into pleats. A half-emerging seven-spoke cogwheel leans against the book. Above the cogwheel hangs the picture of a five-towered gold-colored Angkor Wat temple in the middle of the frame formed by the ears of rice. 
Article 88 
The national flag of the PRK is a red rectangle with the gold-colored profile of a five-towered Angkor Wat temple in the middle. 
Article 89 
The national anthem and national holidays of the PRK are to be fixed by the National Assembly. "The National Day of the PRK is 7 January." 
Article 90 
The capital of the PRK is Phnom Pehn. 
Chapter X--The Effects of and Amendments to the Constitution<title> 
Article 91 
The current Constitution is the fundamental law of the PRK and has supreme legal force. 
All other laws must necessarily be consistent with the Constitution. 
Article 92 
All decree laws and decisions of the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Council which have the force of law shall remain in effect until laws are enacted to supersede them. 
Article 93 
Amendments to the Constitution fall within the authority of the National Assembly and shall require a two-thirds majority vote of the deputies to the National Assembly.