CHAPTER I<title> 
Article 1 - 1
The official name of Cambodia is the State, of Cambodia. The State of Cambodia is an independent, sovereign with territorial integrity, peaceful, democratic, neutral, and nonaligned state. The sovereignty of the State of Cambodia covers its mainland, islands, territorial waters, territorial sea, seabed, and airspace. 
The slogan of the State Of Cambodia is "independence, peace, (progress), and happiness." 
The official language is the Cambodian language and alphabet. 
Article 1 - 2 
The State of Cambodia is one which cannot be divided. Various state institutions should be set up and in conformity with the State Constitution and laws of the State of Cambodia. 
The state has the duty to defend the motherland's independence, the people's rights and freedom, and the achievements of society and the nation; restore and expand the economy and culture; pay attention to solving and improving the people's daily life both materially and morally. 
Article 2 
The Cambodian people are the master of their country's destiny. All power belong to the people. The people use their power through the National Assembly and various organizations of the state authorities elected by the people and which are responsible to the people. The people have the right to withdraw the representatives they no longer trust. 
Article 3 
The National Council of the Kampuchean United Front for National Construction and Defense and various mass organizations, which are firm bastions of the state, have the duty to encourage the people to implement the state's policies and plans.Article 4 
The Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party is the leading force of the Cambodian society and state and the core force of the great national solidarity and unity of all political forces. 
Article 5 
The State (? of Cambodia) [passage indistinct] to catch up with the common idea. The state pay special attention to [words indistinct] culture, social, administrative, and communication in mountainous and remote areas. 
Article 6 
Buddhism is the religion of the state. Religious activities which conform to the Constitution [words indistinct]. Activities which use religion to infringe upon security, public order, and the people's interests are prohibited. 
Article 7 
Men and women enjoy equal rights in marriage and in the family. Marriage should be performed in accordance with legal conditions and the principle of one husband one wife. The state pays special attention to the protection of mothers and children.
Article 8 
Parents should educate and bring up children to become good citizens with patriotic conscience, love for labor, and with a sense of responsibility toward society. Children have the duty to look after patents. 
Article 9 
The State of Cambodia implements the principle of the entire people taking part in the defense and construction of the motherland. The three types of the Kampuchean People's Armed Forces and the people's police are the people's children and should be loyal to the country and the people. They have the obligation to defend the motherland and the people's state authorities, national and social achievements, and the people's peaceful life and cooperate with the people to build the country. The entire armed forces should be good in fighting and in production. They -should know how to promote the people's movements; respect and assist the people; and should not infringe upon the interests of people and their trust. 
Article 10 
The foreign policy of the State of Cambodia is that of independence, peace, neutrality, and nonalignment. The State of Cambodia adheres to the principles of peaceful coexistence; expands friendly and diplomatic relations with all countries regardless of their political regimes, based on equality and mutual respect for each other's independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and interests for the cause of defending peace in Southeast Asia and the world.
CHAPTER II Regime and Cultural and Social Policies Economic<title> 
Article 11 
The national economy is under the state's leadership. The state gradually improves the people's all-around living standards to build the country and nation. 
Article 12 
The national economy is composed of five components: state economy, joined state-private economy, collective economy, family economy, and private economy. The state closely manages state enterprises to expand the important role of the state economy and the joint state private economy in the national economy and at the same time assists and actively guides the building of the collective economy, family economy, and private economy in accordance with the direction beneficial to the state and to the people's life. 
Article 13 
The state strives to expand agricultural and industrial production which serve agriculture: expand the production of consumer goods; and expand trade, communications, and transport. The state assists and expands handicraft and industry.
Article 14 
The state property comprises land, forest, timber, sea, rivers, lakes, natural resources, economic and cultural centers, bases for national defense, and other state buildings. 
Article 15 
Cambodian citizens have full rights to own and use land and have the right to inherit land granted by the state for the purpose of living on it and exploiting it. 
Article 16 
The state prohibits the appropriation of fallow land by paying taxes for the purpose of selling and renting it to other people. No one can use agricultural land and forested areas at will for other purposes without permission from appropriate authorities. 
Article 17 
The rights to own and use land will be defined by a separate law. 
Article 18 - 1 
The private property of the people concerning gains from their labor, legitimate gains, and other legitimate property is protected by law. The forceful confiscation of the citizens' property is categorically prohibited. 
Article 18 - 2 
It is prohibited to infringe upon the people's private property, unless this is necessitated by public interests as defined by law in such a case, the owner of the property has the right to receive correct and appropriate compensation beforehand. 
Article 19 
Trade inside the country should be expanded to increase activities to exchange and vary goods and to promote production to serve the people's lives. Citizens or production units can sell their products. The people's buying and selling activities which are in conformity with the state policies are guaranteed by law. Foreign trade is under state administration and management. 
Article 20 
Control of foreign currencies and financial networks are determined by law. Taxes can be levied only when authorized by law. The obligation to sell to the state or the temporary use of private property can be done only when authorized by law.
Article 21 
The state pays attention to building a progressive national culture and expanding the national language appropriate to the needs of a new society. Bad influence and backward cultural legacies should be absolutely discarded. 
Article 22 
The state implements an educational policy in accordance with the pedagogical principle which links the study of general knowledge and education to practice and schools to society. The state administers and organizes kindergartens to educate pre-schoolchildren. The state administers and is in charge of providing general knowledge education to all school-age children; the building of primary schools; the gradual expansion of secondary schools, vocational schools and classes, various higher classes, and higher education to respond to the needs of the country which is advancing toward progress. The state encourages and provides scholarship to competent youths who can further their studies at higher levels and in technical fields in and outside the country. 
To eliminate illiteracy and to raise the people's cultural knowledge, the state promotes the literacy movement by opening classes for adults who are still illiterate and other supplementary education classes to respond to the needs of the country and nation. 
Article 23 
The state pays attention to promoting the development of science, technology, literature, and the arts; expanding educational networks; and promoting research by combining theory and facts. The state encourages scientists, technocrats, writers, and artists in their creative activities which are beneficial to the country, nation, and people by providing these people with both material and moral assistance. The state increases cooperation and exchange of experiences with foreign countries. 
Article 24 
The state organizes the preservation of ancient temples and antiquities, restores various scenic areas, expands tourism, and expands cultural relations with foreign countries. 
Article 25 
The state pays attention to promoting the physical development of the people and encourages sports activities and physical education in order to strengthen the people physically, enabling them to contribute to national construction and defense. 
Article 26 
To ensure the people's health, the state pays attention to the prevention and treatment of diseases and counsels the people to strictly observe hygiene. The people get free medical consultations. The state administers and is in charge of building various hospitals and conducts medical and pharmaceutical research combining traditional and modern medical medicine.Article 27 
The state pays attention to children and mothers. The state and society set up maternity centers, nurseries, and kindergartens, and take various appropriate measures to lighten women's burden of household chores and guarantee necessary conditions for women to take part in social activities like men. Women who are workers and employees have a 90-day paid leave when giving birth. Women who breastfeed children are entitled to a shortened daily work shift and to various benefits determined by law. The state will set concrete rules on women who are not state workers and employees. 
Article 28 
The state pays special attention to those who have been carrying out evolutionary activities for many years and who have made many contributions to the revolution, to disabled combatants, to families of combatants who died for the revolution, and to families with great merit in the revolution. 
Article 29 
The state provides social security for workers and employees who are no longer able to work due to sickness, old age, or disability during work. The state and society provide assistance to the unsupported aged, disabled, widows, and orphans. 
CHAPTER III Rights and Duties of Citizens<title> 
Article 30 
The State of Cambodia recognizes and respects human rights. Cambodian citizens are equal before the law and have the same rights, freedoms, and duties regardless of their sex, beliefs, religion, race, or social standing. The use of each individual's personal rights and freedom should not infringe upon those of others. The use of these rights and freedom should be in conformity with conditions defined by law. 
Article 31 
Cambodian citizens have the right to vote and stand for election. Citizens serving in the Kampuchean People's Armed Forces also have the right to vote and to stand for election. Citizens of both sexes who are at least 18 years old have the right to vote. Citizens of both sexes who are at least 21 years old can stand for election. Regulations reducing the right to vote should be stipulated by election law.Article 32 
Cambodian citizens have the right to actively take pail in the political, economic, social, and cultural life of the country and nation. All citizens can put forward proposals on state policies and on the people's life to state organizations and mass organizations. These proposals will be thoroughly examined by these bodies. 
Article 33 
Citizens have the right to choose a career appropriate to their abilities and the society's needs. Citizens have the right to receive remuneration appropriate to the amount and quality of work performed. Men and women have the right to equal pay for equal work. Every citizen has the right to receive social security and benefits set by law. 
Article 34 
The state and society pay attention to setting up rest and recreation periods for those engaged in labor. The state determines the length of time of daily and weekly work and paid annual leaves for workers and employees, and expands recreation centers of the state and social organizations.
Article 35 
The state guarantees protection against the physical violation of an individual. The law protects the honor, dignity, and life of the citizens. Accusation, arrest, detention, or imprisonment of an individual can be done only when authorized by the law. Coercion, physical abuse, or activities that go beyond the punishment meted out to detainees or prison inmates are prohibited. Perpetrators, collaborators, and conspirators in these acts will be punished in accordance with the law. Confessions resulting from brutal physical or mental coercion cannot be regarded as proof of guilt. If the offense is only an unsubstantiated suspicion, the accused should be acquitted. All suspects are considered innocent until decided otherwise by the court. The state guarantees all citizens the right to defend themselves in court. The death penalty is abolished. 
Article 36 
The people's freedom to travel and set up domicile is respected as stipulated by the law. Citizens can settle in foreign countries or return home. The state guarantees the inviolability of homes and the secrecy of correspondence through letters, telegrams, and telephone. Searches conducted in houses and on property and body searches should be carried out in accordance with the law.Article 37 - 1
Citizens have freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly. No one can abuse these rights to the detriment of other people's honor, good mores and the customs of society, public social order, and national security. The press shall be organized by law. 
Article 37 - 2 
Freedom of faith is respected. 
Article 38 
Citizens have the right to set up associations. This right is defined by law. Citizens can take part in mass organizations to defend the achievements of society and the country and social order in order to build and defend the country and increase national and international solidarity. 
Article 39 
Citizens should live in accordance with the social order and regime and contribute to protecting public property. Citizens have the right to denounce, complain, or lodge demands for compensation and damages resulting from illegal acts committed by state and social organizations and their personnel in the course of their duties. 
Article 40 
Citizens should abide by the state constitution and law and implement the state's policies. 
Article 41 
The task of building and defending the motherland is the duty and noble honor of citizens. Each citizen should actively contribute to building the country and defending the motherland. The duty to defend the motherland should be carried out in accordance with the law. 
Article 42 
Cambodian citizens cannot be deprived of their nationality, sent into exile, or extradited to any foreign countries. Cambodian citizens living abroad are supported by the state. 
[Articles 43 and 44 not carried in broadcast]CHAPTER IV The National Assembly<title> 
Article 45 
The National Assembly is the supreme body of the state authorities and the highest representative organ of the people of the State of Cambodia. The National Assembly is the sole legislative organ. 
Article 46 
The National Assembly is made up of people's representatives elected through universal, equal, direct, and secret ballot. The number of people's representatives in the National Assembly and the electoral procedures are set by the electoral law. 
Article 47 
The term of the National Assembly is five years and expires when the new National Assembly takes office. Three months before the term of the National Assembly expires, the Council of State organizes elections to choose peoples representatives for the National Assembly in the new term. In the event of war or other exceptional circumstances under which elections cannot be held, the National Assembly can extend its term of office by one year at a time at the proposal of the Council of State. The extension of the National Assembly's term of office should be decided by at least two-thirds of the total number of National Assembly members. 
Article 48
The National Assembly has the following powers: 
<list>
1. To enact or amend the constitution and various laws. 
2. To approve state budgets, state borrowing, and the borrowing of state capital. 
3. To approve state plans. 
4. To supervise enforcement of the Constitution and. laws. 
5. To set local and foreign policies. 
6. To elect, remove, or replace the chairman, vice chairman, and general secretary of the National Assembly; elect, remove, or replace the chairman, vice chairman, general secretary, and other members of the Council of State; elect, remove, or replace the chairman, vice chairman, and members of the Council of Ministers, and elect, remove, or replace the president of the People's Supreme Court and the Prosecutor General attached to the People's Supreme Court. 
7. To set up or abolish the People's Supreme Court and public prosecutors attached to the People's Supreme Court and ministries or institutions which equal ministries in rank in municipalities, precincts, wards, provinces, provincial seats, districts, and communes. 
8. To fix, amend, or abolish taxes. 
9. To supervise the activities of the Council of Stale, the Council of Ministers, the People's Supreme Court, and the Prosecutor General attached to the People's Supreme Court. 
10. To decide general amnesty. 
11. To ratify or abolish international treaties and conventions of the government. 
12. To decide on questions of war and peace. 
</list>
Article 49 
The Council of State convenes the first session of the National Assembly not later than 60 days following elections. The National Assembly meets at least twice a year. The National Assembly can convene an extraordinary session at the request of the Council of State, the Council of Ministers, or of at least one-third of the total number of National Assembly members. In such an event, the agenda of the extraordinary session should be publicized among the people along with the date set for the session. 
Article 49 - 1 
During the recess of the National Assembly, the Standing Committee of the National Assembly takes care of business. The Standing Committee of the National Assembly consists of the chairman of the National Assembly, the vice chairman, the general secretary, and the chairmen of various National Assembly commissions. 
Article 49 - 2 
The Standing Committee of the National Assembly has the following duties: 
<list>
1. Organize National Assembly sessions. 
2. Convene ordinary or extraordinary sessions. 
3. Interpret laws. 
4. Initiate draft laws. 
</list>
Article 50 
At the beginning of each term, the National Assembly elects a committee to examine the validity of National Assembly members and report the results of this examination to the National Assembly for decision.Article 51 
The chairman of the National Assembly chairs the National Assembly sessions; receives decree-laws and various resolutions adopted by the National Assembly; ensures the enforcement of internal regulations of the National Assembly; and organizes the National Assembly's foreign relations. 
In the event the chairman of the National Assembly is engaged and cannot fulfill his function due to illness or is carrying out missions abroad, the vice chairman of the National Assembly should stand in for the chairman. In the event the chairman of the National Assembly resigns or dies, the National Assembly should elect a new chairman. The vice chairman of the National Assembly assists the chairman in the tasks mentioned above. The General Secretary of the National Assembly keeps the minutes of all National Assembly sessions and carries out tasks assigned by the chairman of the National Assembly. 
Article 52 
The National Assembly sets up various necessary commissions to assist it in its task to supervise draft laws and drafts of state plans, state budgets, and other plans.
Article 53
The Council of State, the Council of Ministers, the chairman of the National Assembly, various commissions of the National Assembly, the chairman of the National Council of the Kampuchean United Front for National Construction and Defense, the chairman of the Kampuchean Federation of Trade Unions, the chairman of the Kampuchean Youth Association, the chairman of the Kampuchean Women's Association, the chairman of the Kampuchean Peasants' Association, the president of the People's Supreme Court, and the Prosecutor General attached to the People's Supreme Court have the right to draft a bill for the National Assembly.
Article 54
The National Assembly passes laws and other resolutions with the approval of more than half of the total number of all members. The National Assembly enacts and amends the Constitution with the approval of two-thirds of the total number of National Assembly members. 
Article 55 
The Council of State should promulgate in no more than 15 days a law passed by the National Assembly. After promulgation, this Jaw takes effect ten days later in Phnom Penh and a month later in the rest of the country. However, if this law says it is an emergency, it will take effect immediately throughout the country after being promulgated. This law should be recorded in the state gazetteer and disseminated throughout the country in accordance with the time frame mentioned above. 
Article 56 
Each National Assembly member should maintain close relations with the electorate, pay attention to suggestions or criticisms by the electorate, explain state policies to the electorate, and report his activities in the National Assembly to the electorate who are ballot owners. National Assembly members who fail to fulfill their duties could be removed in accordance with conditions stipulated by law. In the event that National Assembly members die, resign, or lose National Assembly membership within 12 months before the end of the term of office, by-elections should be organized to replace those members. 
Article 57 
National Assembly members have the right to question the chairman and members of the Council of Ministers: the chairman and members of the Council of State, the chairman, vice chairman, and general secretary of the National Assembly secretary, the president of the People's Supreme Court, and the prosecutor general attached to the People's Supreme Court. Those being questioned should answer during National Assembly sessions. Those questioned by the National Assembly should be relieved of their duties if a majority of more than half of the National Assembly members votes to withdraw their confidence. 
Article 58 - 1 
National Assembly members enjoy parliamentary immunity. No National Assembly member can be accused, arrested, detained, or imprisoned for expressing his opinions and views in the course of his duty. Accusation, arrest, detention, or imprisonment of any National Assembly member can be done only with the consent of the National Assembly or the Standing Committee of the National Assembly between National Assembly sessions, except in the case of a flagrant offense against the penal code. In that case, the competent authorities should submit an urgent report to the National Assembly or to the Standing Committee of the National Assembly for decision. The decision of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly should be submitted to the next session of the National Assembly for decision.Article 58 - 2 
National Assembly members receive a remuneration equal to the salary of a certain grade of civil servant belonging to an upper echelon. 
Chapter V The Council of State<title> 
Article 59 
The Council of State is the representative organ of the State of Cambodia. The Council of State is composed of a chairman, vice, chairmen, secretary general, and a number of members to be fixed by the National Assembly. The Council of State shall be elected by the National Assembly. The chairman of the Council of State is the head of state of the State of Cambodia. 
Article 60 
The Council of State performs the following duties: 
<list>
1 . To decide on and organize the elections of members to the National Assembly and to convene National Assembly sessions. 
2. To promulgate laws and issue decrees. 
3. To issue decrees on the appointment, removal, or replacement of the chairman, vice chairmen, and members of the Council of Ministers, the president of the People's Supreme Court, and the attorney general attached to the People's Supreme Court, following approval by the National Assembly. 
4. To issue decrees on the establishment or dissolution of the People's Supreme Court, the prosecutor general attached to the People's Supreme Court, the office of the Council of Ministers, and institutions of equal level to the office of the Council of Ministers, municipalities, wards, precincts, provinces, provincial capitals, districts, and villages, following approval by the National Assembly. 
5. To issue decrees proclaiming a state of crisis or a state of emergency throughout the country or in some regions, following approval by the National Assembly. 
6. On the recommendation of the Council of Ministers, to appoint or remove ambassadors or envoys of the State of Cambodia accredited to foreign countries and to international organizations. 
7. To accept credentials from foreign diplomatic envoys. 
8. To ratify international treaties and agreements of the government following approval by the National Assembly. 
9. To institute and decide on the award of orders, medals, ranks, and military, police, and civilian grades according to the recommendation of the Council of Ministers. 
10. To decide on requests for naturalization. 
11. To decide on granting pardons and amnesties. 
12. To perform other functions entrusted to it by the National Assembly. 
</list>
Article 60 - 1 
Decisions of the Council of State shall be approved by an absolute majority of the members of the Council of State. 
Article 60 - 2 
The Council of State has the duty of reporting its activities to the National Assembly. 
Article 61 
The term of office of the Council of State is equal to that of the National Assembly. After the term of office of the National Assembly expires, the Council of State shall continue to carry out its functions until a new Council of State is elected by the new National Assembly. 
In the event the head of state is engaged, cannot perform his duty because of illness, or is on a mission abroad, a vice chairman of the Council of State shall act on his behalf, with the exception of the duties defined in clauses 6, 8, 9, 10, and 11 of Article 60. 
In the event the chairman or members of the Council of State resign, are dismissed, or die, elections shall be held to replace them. 
Article 62 
The chairman of the Council of State is the supreme commander of the Cambodian People's Armed Forces and chairman of the National Defense Council. 
Article 63 
The establishment and functions of the Council of State and the National Defense Council shall be prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER VI The Council of Ministers<title> 
Article 64 
The Council of Ministers is the government of the State of Cambodia and the organ that directly governs society and leads the work to expand the national economy. 
The Council of Ministers is responsible to the National Assembly and the Council of State and reports on its activities to these organs. 
Article 65 
The Council of Ministers is composed of a chairman, vice chairmen, and members. The number of the vice chairmen and members of the Council of Ministers is fixed by the National Assembly. 
The election, removal, or replacement of the chairman, vice chairmen, and members of the Council of Ministers must be approved by the National Assembly. 
Article 66 
The Council of Ministers has the following functions: 
<list>
1. To draft laws and other bills for recommendation to the National Assembly and the Council of State. 
2. To execute the Constitution, laws, decrees, and domestic and foreign policies. 
3. To draft state plans and state budgets. 
4. To execute state plans and state budgets. 
5. To formulate and strengthen state institutions from central to grassroots levels and train and administer state workers and employees. 
6. To ensure the unanimity of the leadership of the office of the Council of Ministers and various institutions under the Council of Ministers, and ensure the unanimity of the leadership of the local people's committees at all levels. 
7. To suspend the implementation of, revise, or annul inappropriate conventions and directives of ministers and chairmen of various state institutions, and suspend the implementation of, revise, or annul inappropriate decisions and directives of people's committees at all levels. 
8. To take measures to delineate boundaries of municipalities, precincts, wards, provinces, provincial cities, districts, and communes as prescribed by law. 
9. To safeguard the people's interests, maintain public order, and protect the rights and legitimate interests of the citizens. 
10. To strengthen and develop national defense forces, mobilize the armed forces, institute curfews in the event of a state of emergency, and take other measures necessary to defend the country. 
11. To implement all international treaties and conventions. 
12. To perform other functions entrusted by the National Assembly and the Council of State.
</list>Article 67 
The chairman of the Council of Ministers leads the work of the Council of Ministers and presides over its sessions. 
A vice chairman shall assist the chairman and assume the functions of the chairman in his absence. 
Each member of the Council of Ministers is responsible for his activities and jointly responsible, with other members, for the activities of the Council of Ministers. 
Article 68 
Decisions of the Council of Ministers shall be approved by a simple majority of the members of the Council of Ministers. 
The chairman of the Kampuchean National United Front for National Construction and Defense, the chairman of the Kampuchean Federation of Trade Unions, the chairman of the Cambodian Youth Association, the chairman of the Cambodian Women's Association, and the chairman of the Cambodian Peasants' Association have the right to attend the meetings of the Council of Ministers. 
Article 69 
The term of office of the Council of Ministers is equal to that of the National Assembly. 
On expiration of the term of office of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers shall continue to carry out its functions until the National Assembly elects a new Council of Ministers. 
Article 70 
The establishment and functions of the Council of Ministers shall be prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER VII The Local People's Committees<title> 
Article 71 
The territory of the State of Cambodia is divided into provinces and municipalities directly under the central state authority. Provinces are divided into provincial cities and districts. Provincial cities are divided into wards. Districts are divided into communes. Municipalities directly under the central state authority are divided into precincts and suburban districts. Suburban districts are divided as districts under provinces. 
Article 72 
People's committees shall be established in all municipalities, precincts, suburban districts, wards, provinces, provincial cities, and communes. 
Members of people's committees in communes and wards are elected by commune and ward people through a universal, equal, direct, and secret ballot. 
Members of the provincial city and district people's committees are elected by representatives of commune and ward people's committees, representatives of the front committees, and representatives of mass organizations who are members of the front committees at provincial city and district levels. 
Members of the precinct and suburban district people's committees are elected by representatives of commune and ward people's committees, representatives of the front committees, and representatives of mass organizations who are members of the front committees at precinct and suburban district levels. 
Members of the provincial people's committees are elected by representatives of provincial city and district people's committees, representatives of the front committees, and representatives of mass organizations who are members of the front committees at provincial levels: Members of municipal people's committees are elected by representatives of precinct and suburban -district people's committees, representatives of the front committees, and representatives of mass organizations who are members of the front committees at municipal levels. 
[Articles 73 and 74 not carried in broadcast] 
Article 75 
Local people's committees shall decide on and execute principles for building localities in all fields, implement resolutions, and circulars of the superior state institutions, control administrative work in localities, and advise all sectors at all levels under their authority in order to implement the tasks to preserve public security and social order, build the economy, expand culture, take care of people's health, and improve local people's livelihood. 
Article 76 
By virtue of their functions and duties defined by law, the people's committees at all levels shall issue resolutions and instructions and monitor the implementation of these resolutions and instructions. The people's committees have the right to suspend the implementation of, revise, or annul inappropriate resolutions and directives of their subordinate organs and of the people's committees at lower levels. 
Article 77 
Any people's committee or members of any people's committees who fail to fulfill their duties may be removed or dismissed according to conditions prescribed by law. 
Article 78 
The appointment, organizations, and functions of the local people's committees shall be prescribed by law. 
Chapter VIII The Courts and the Prosecution<title> 
Article 79 
The activities of the courts and the prosecution are aimed at: 
<list>
1. Protecting the people's state authority and the democratic legitimacy. 
2. Preserving public security and social order. 
3. Protecting public property: 
4. Protecting the rights, freedom, life, and legitimate interests of citizens. 
</list>
Article 80 
The people's and military courts are the judiciary organs of the State of Cambodia. State prosecutors attached to the courts shall file indictments in the courts according to the law and ensure that the filing of lawsuits in the courts and court proceedings are conducted correctly and according to the law. 
In case of necessity, the Council of State may set up a special court to try special cases. 
Article 81 
In court proceedings, the courts shall be based on the law and on the principle of every citizen having equal status before the law, regardless of nationality, religious belief, sex, or social status.Article 82 
The People's Council shall take part in court proceedings as prescribed by law. 
In court proceedings, the authority of the People's Council is equal to that of the judge. 
The courts shall make decisions according to the majority. 
Article 83 
All stages of court proceedings shall be heard in public. Nevertheless, cases may be held in secret if provided for by law. 
Article 84 
Courts of the State of Cambodia shall ensure that citizens who are ethnic minorities have the right to use their own language and writings in court proceedings. 
Article 85 
The accused has the right to stand in his own defense or to rely on a lawyer or anyone else who can help in his defense. 
Article 86 
The establishment and functions of the courts and the prosecution shall be prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER IX National Emblem, National Flag, National Anthem, and Capital City<title> 
Article 87 
The national emblem of the State of Cambodia is round in shape and has a red background with gold-colored ears of rice forming an oval frame. A red ribbon wraps around the lower part of the ears of rice in two tiers. In the middle of the ribbon are written in gold letters the words "State of Cambodia." 
An open gold-colored constitution book is placed on the rice stalks which arc bound together into pleats. A half emerging seven-spoke cogwheel leans onto the book. Above the cogwheel in the middle of the frame formed by the ears of rice is the picture of a five-tower gold-colored Angkor Wat temple.Article 88 
The national flag is blue in the lower half and red in the upper half. The width is two-thirds of the length. The picture of the temple is that of a decorated five-tower temple in yellow. The distance between the base of the temple and the top of the central tower is half of that of the base of the temple, and the height of the temple is two-fifths of the flag's width. The angle formed by the central tower and the lateral towers is 130 degrees. 
The red color represents the valiant, courageous will of the Cambodian people in defending and building the country and nation into prosperity. The blue color symbolizes the entire people who acclaim and support the nation's blood and represents natural resources on land, underground, in the water, and underwater to be preserved for eternity. 
The yellow symbolizes the Cambodian people's longstanding culture and religion. 
Article 89 
The national anthem of the State of Cambodia shall be determined by the National Assembly. The national day is on 7 January. 
Article 90 
The capital city of the State of Cambodia is Phnom Penh. 
CHAPTER X The influence of the Constitution and the Amendment of the Constitution<title>
Article 91 
This constitution is the principal law of the State of Cambodia and has the highest legal influence. All laws should be in absolute conformity with the Constitution.
Article 92
Laws, decree-laws, decrees, sub-decrees, communiques, and decisions of various institutions of the People's Republic of Kampuchea which are in conformity with the Constitution of the State of Cambodia, shall remain in effect until replaced by new texts. Decree-laws and decisions of the Cambodian People's Revolutionary Council which are laws in their character and are in conformity with the Constitution of the State of Cambodia shall remain in effect until replaced by laws.Article 93 
Amending the Constitution is the duty of the National Assembly and can be done only with the approval of two-thirds of National Assembly members. This amended constitution of the State of Cambodia has been unanimously endorsed by the First National Assembly of the People's Republic of Kampuchea on 30 April 1989 at an extraordinary session.