The form of the Central African State is the Republic. 
The Central African People, 
- Proud of its linguistic unity and its cultural diversity which contribute to the enrichment of its national personality; 
- Profoundly convinced of the overriding necessity of consolidating its unity, which is the surest measure of its social and economic progress; 
- Motivated by concern to assure the Central African his dignity within the principle of "Zo Kwe Zo"; 
- Conscious that by persistent work he will liberate himself from the yoke of misery and humiliation; 
- Convinced that the development and prosperity of the Central African Republic depend upon the liberation, unity, and development of all of Africa; 
- Firmly wishing to form ties of friendship with all peoples based upon principles of equality, reciprocal interests, and mutual respect for national sovereignty and territorial integrity; 
- Reaffirms its adherence to the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man, the principle of self-determination of peoples, and the fundamental rights and liberties of democracy. 
- Affirms its desire to cooperate in peace and friendship with all States and to work for African unity, in conformity with the Charter of the Organization for African Unity. 
TITLE I THE FUNDAMENTAL BASES OF SOCIETY<title> 
Article 1. 
The human person is sacred. All agents of public power have the absolute obligation to respect and protect it. 
- Everyone has a right to life, to bodily integrity, and to the free development of his personality. No one may violate the rights of others nor infringe upon the constitutional order. These rights may not be put in jeopardy except by application of a law. 
Article 2. 
The Republic recognizes the inviolability and inalienability of the rights of Man, the basis of the whole human community, the bearer of Peace, justice and progress in the world. 
- Liberty of the person shall be inviolable. Consequently, no one may be convicted except by law in effect before the crime.- The right to defense is absolute in all stages, levels and forms of the procedure. 
- Freedom of movement, residence and establishment in the whole territory shall be guaranteed to all under conditions established by law. 
Article 3. 
All human beings shall be equal before the law without distinction as to race, ethnic origin, region, sex or religion. 
- There shall be in the Central African Republic neither subjection nor privilege based upon place, birth, person or family. 
- Everyone shall have access to the sources of knowledge. The Republic shall guarantee to the child and the adult access to education, professional training, and culture. Public education must be organized upon the principle that it is free of charge and neutral. 
- Education shall be public. However, under conditions provided for by law, the creation of private establishments may be authorized. 
Article 4. 
All citizens may form associations, groups, societies and establishments in the public interest provided they conform to laws and regulations. 
- Associations, establishments or societies whose goals are contrary to public order or to the unity and cohesion of the Central African people shall be prohibited. 
Article 5. 
Freedom of conscience, assembly and worship shall be guaranteed to all under conditions established by law. 
Article 6. 
Freedom of expression and publication of opinions by word, pen and image, while respecting the rights of others, privacy of correspondence, as well as postal, telegraph, and telephone communications shall be inviolable. No restrictions may be ordered except in application of a law.
Article 7. 
All physical or legal persons shall have the right to property. No one may be deprived of his property except in a legally declared public interest and with fair, prior compensation. 
- The domicile shall be inviolable. It may not be put in jeopardy except by a court, or if the residence is in danger, by other authorities designated by law, acting within the forms prescribed by law. 
- Measures which jeopardize the inviolability of the domicile or which restrict it may be taken to ward off a public danger or to protect persons from danger. These measures may be taken applying a law protecting public order from imminent threat, particularly to combat risks of epidemic or fire or to protect children from danger. 
Article 8. 
Marriage and the family constitute the natural moral base of the human community and they shall be placed under the special protection of the State. - The State and public bodies together have a duty to ensure the physical and moral health of the family and to encourage it by appropriate institutions. 
- The protection of young people against exploitation and against physical, intellectual or moral neglect shall be an obligation of the State and public bodies. 
- Parents have the natural right and the primary duty to raise and to train their children in order to give them good physical, intellectual and moral aptitudes. They shall be supported in this task by the State and public bodies. 
- Children born outside of marriage shall have the same rights to assistance as legitimate children. 
- Natural children who are legally recognized by their parents shall have the same rights as legitimate children. 
Article 9. 
All citizens shall be equal regarding public debts and taxes which may be created and assigned only through law within the forms provided for by this constitution. They shall support them in proportion to their ability to contribute. They shall mutually support the costs of natural calamities. 
Article 10. 
The Republic shall guarantee to each citizen the right to work, to rest, and to leisure, while meeting the demands of national development. 
- It shall assure conditions favorable to prosperity through an effective policy on employment. 
- All citizens shall be equal in work. No one may be jeopardized in his work or employment by reason of origin, sex, opinions or beliefs. 
- Labor unions and the right to strike shall be recognized and freely exercised within the bounds of the laws which regulate them. 
TITLE II THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY<title> 
Article 11. 
The Central African Republic shall be a sovereign State, indivisible, secular and democratic. 
Its national language shall be Sango. 
Its official language shall be French. 
Its emblem shall be a flag with four horizontal stripes of equal width, blue, white, green and yellow, crossed by a red stripe of equal width, with a yellow five-pointed star in the upper left corner. 
Its motto shall be "Unity, Dignity, Work."Its anthem shall be "Rebirth." 
Its national holiday shall be December 1. 
Its capital shall be Bangui. It may be transferred by law if the higher interest of the nation so requires or if territorial integrity is threatened. 
Its currency shall be defined by law. 
The State seals and the coats-of-arms shall be defined by law. 
Article 12. 
The principle of the Republic is government of the people, by the people, and for the people. 
National sovereignty shall be vested in the people, who shall exercise it directly by election or referendum, or indirectly by their representatives.
No individual or fraction of the people may usurp its exercise. 
Article 13. 
Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret. It may be direct or indirect under conditions provided for by law. It shall be regulated by the electoral code. 
Article 14. 
Political parties and groups shall compete in the expression of suffrage and in political, economic and social activity. 
They shall have freedom to form and to exercise their activities. They must respect the principles of democracy, national unity, the rights of Man, and the Republican character of the State, obeying laws and regulations. 
An organic law shall determine the conditions of their formation and dissolution. 
TITLE III THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title> 
Chapter 1 The President of the Republic<title> 
Article 15. 
The President of the Republic, the Chief of State, shall embody and symbolize national unity; he shall assure respect for the Constitution, the regular operation of public powers, as well as the durability and continuity of the Republic. 
He shall be responsible for national independence, territorial integrity, and respect for agreements and treaties.He shall determine the policy of the nation. 
He shall appoint the Prime Minister and the other members of the government on the Prime Minister's recommendation, and he may terminate their duties. 
He shall be the chief executive; under that title he shall assemble and preside over the Council of Ministers, he shall assure the execution of the laws and guarantee that judicial decisions are carried out. 
He shall sign ordinances and decrees. 
He shall be the supreme chief of the armed forces. 
He shall have an administrative staff and shall appoint employees to civil and military posts. 
He shall negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements. 
He shall accredit ambassadors and extraordinary envoys to foreign powers. Foreign ambassadors and envoys shall be accredited to him. 
He shall have the right of pardon. 
He shall confer the Republic's honorary distinctions. 
Article 16. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected for 6 years by universal, direct, secret suffrage. He shall be eligible for one reelection. 
An organic law shall establish conditions of eligibility, ineligibility and incompatibilities. 
Article 17. 
When assuming office, the President of the Republic shall swear on the Constitution the following oath before the full assembly of the Supreme Court in solemn audience: 
"I swear to observe scrupulously the Constitution, to guarantee the independence and durability of the Republic, to safeguard the integrity of the territory, to assure the well-being of the Central African people, to fulfill conscientiously the duties of my office with no ethnic or regional consideration, never to exercise the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution for personal ends, and in everything to be guided only by national interest and the dignity of the Central African man." 
Article 18. 
The President of the Republic shall publish laws within two weeks of their transmittal to the government by the National Assembly. This period shall be reduced to five days in an emergency declared by the National Assembly. 
He may, however, before the expiration of this period, ask the Assembly for reconsideration of the law or certain of its provisions. The reasons for this request must be given, and it may not be refused. It must take place during the same session. Adoption of the law submitted for reconsideration must be by two-thirds majority of the members of the National Assembly.The President of the Republic shall publish this law within the month which follows the closing of the parliamentary session. 
Article 19. 
The President of the Republic may communicate with the National Assembly either directly or by written message. These communications shall not give rise to debate. 
Between sessions the National Assembly may be assembled especially for that purpose. 
Article 20. 
The President of the Republic may dissolve the National Assembly with the consent of the Council of Ministers, the Bureau of the National Assembly and the Constitutional Council. 
In that event, the election of a new National Assembly shall take place not less than twenty days nor more than forty days after the dissolution. The new Assembly shall then meet. It may not be dissolved within the twelve months which follow its election. 
Article 21. 
The President of the Republic, with the consent of the Constitutional Council and the Bureau of the National Assembly, may submit to a referendum bills within the legislative area. 
Article 22. 
If the institutions of the Republic, the independence or higher interests of the nation, the integrity of the territory, or the execution of its international commitments are threatened in a grave and immediate manner, or if the regular operation of public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic shall take the measures required by circumstances after consultation with the Bureau of the National Assembly, he shall so inform the nation by a message. 
Article 23. 
The President of the Republic, after consultation of the government and notification of the National Assembly, when circumstances so require, may proclaim by decree martial law or an alert for a period of thirty days. This period may only be extended through a law. 
Article 24. 
The President of the Republic shall not be responsible, according to common law, for acts committed in the exercise of his duties, except in the case of high treason duly declared by the Constitutional Council, upon appeal from two-thirds of the members of the National Assembly. 
Article 25. 
In the event of temporary disability, from whatever cause, duly declared by the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Council assembled by the President of the Supreme Court, upon appeal from the government and the National Assembly, the duties of the President of the Republic, except for those provided for in Article 15, paragraph 4, Article 15, paragraph 9, and Articles 20, 21 and 70, shall be assumed temporarily by the Prime Minister. The government may not be altered from its current composition. 
In the event of a vacancy from resignation or death, or if the disability described above is declared permanent, balloting for the election of a new President shall take place within not less than twenty nor more than forty days after the vacancy or declaration of permanent disability.Chapter 2 The Government<title> 
Article 26. 
The government shall consist of the Prime Minister, as the head of the government, and the ministers. 
Article 27. 
The Prime Minister shall be responsible to the President of the Republic, who shall appoint him, and the National Assembly. 
After appointing the members of the government, the Prime Minister shall appear before the National Assembly and set forth the program which he expects to apply. The program must draw up guidelines for action which the government expects to take in the various areas of national activity, particularly in foreign relations and in cultural, social and economic policy. 
On that occasion the Prime Minister must ask for a vote of confidence from the National Assembly. 
Confidence is granted by a simple majority. It may be denied only by two-thirds majority of the members of the National Assembly. 
Article 28. 
The Prime Minister, as the head of the government, shall lead and direct government activity according to the policy defined by the President of the Republic. 
He shall preside over cabinet councils and inter-ministerial committees. 
Article 29. 
The Prime Minister shall exercise regulatory power; regulatory actions of the Prime Minister shall be countersigned by the ministers responsible for their execution. 
Article 30. 
The Prime Minister may delegate certain of his powers to the ministers. 
Article 31. 
The Prime Minister may be dismissed at any time by the President of the Republic or following the adoption of a motion of censure by the National Assembly. 
Article 32. 
The duties of the government members shall be incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, any duty of professional representation of a national character, any public position or professional activity. 
An organic law shall establish the conditions under which provision shall be made to replace all office-holders. 
Article 33. 
The government must be the first to deliberate on: 
<list>
- questions concerning the general policy of the Republic; 
- public and private bills before their presentation to the National Assembly; 
- regulatory decrees;- planning bills; 
- bills to revise the Constitution; 
- appointments to certain civil and military posts. 
</list>
Article 34. 
The National Assembly may authorize the President of the Republic to pass ordinances executing the government program or for definite objectives falling within the area of law. 
These ordinances shall take effect as soon as they are published. They shall be presented to the Bureau of the National Assembly for ratification within the period established by the enabling law. They shall remain in effect unless the National Assembly refuses ratification. 
TITLE IV THE LEGISLATIVE POWER<title> 
Chapter 1 The Deputies <title> 
Article 35. 
The Parliament of the Central African Republic shall consist of one Assembly called the National Assembly. 
Members of the National Assembly shall have the title of deputy. 
Article 36. 
Deputies and their substitutes shall be elected by universal suffrage for five years under conditions established by an organic law which shall also determine their number, compensation, and conditions of eligibility, as well as regulation of ineligibility and incompatibility. 
Article 37.
No deputy may be prosecuted, arrested, detained or judged for opinions or votes given by him in the exercise of his duties. 
During sessions or between sessions no deputy may be prosecuted or arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of the National Assembly, except in the case of flagrant delicto, authorized prosecution, or final conviction. 
Article 38. 
The deputies' right to vote is personal. All committed votes shall be invalid. Internal regulation of the National Assembly may authorize delegation of a vote as an exception. No one may receive the delegation of more than one vote. 
Chapter 2 Sessions and Meetings<title> 
Article 39. 
The National Assembly shall hold two ordinary sessions a year. 
The first session shall open the third Tuesday in April; its duration may not exceed fifty days. The second shall open the first Tuesday in October and shall end not later than the third Friday in December. They shall take place by Presidential decree.The opening of a session shall be postponed until the following day if the day provided for this purpose is a holiday. 
Article 40. 
The National Assembly may be assembled in an extraordinary session at the request of an absolute majority of its members or by Presidential decree. 
Article 41. 
Ordinary and extraordinary sessions shall be held on the basis of a determined agenda. Whenever this agenda is exhausted the session shall be terminated by Presidential decree. 
Article 42. 
Ministers shall have access to the National Assembly and to its commissions; they may address the Assembly when they so request; they may be assisted by commissioners designated by them. 
Article 43. 
Meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. A complete report of the debates must be published in the Journal officiel des debats. 
However, the National Assembly may meet in closed session at the request of the President of the Republic or of a third of its members. 
Article 44. 
The National Assembly shall meet on the first working day following the fifteenth day after its election. Aside from emergencies submitted by the government, its agenda shall consist exclusively of the designation of its President and Bureau. 
The President and Bureau of the National Assembly shall be elected for the duration of the legislature. 
Chapter 3 The Powers of the National Assembly<title> 
Article 45. 
The National Assembly shall vote laws, raise tax revenue, and supervise government activity under the conditions established by the Constitution. 
Article 46. 
The following are in the area of law, in addition to matters expressly conferred by other articles of this Constitution: 
<list_1>
1. Rules regarding the following matters: 
<list_2>
- civil rights and fundamental guarantees granted to citizens for the exercise of public liberties; 
- determination of crimes and misdemeanors and penalties applicable to them, penal procedure, civil procedure, social and commercial procedure, and amnesty; 
- obligations imposed upon Central Africans, their person and their property, in the public interest, particularly national defense; 
- nationality, the status and capacity of persons, matrimonial regulations; inheritance and gifts;- the organization of the registry of vital statistics; 
- electoral regulation for the National Assembly and the Assemblies of the territorial units; 
- regulation of the judiciary; 
- the organization of ministerial offices, ministerial officers, and lawyers; 
- the authorization of declarations of war, states of emergency and alert; 
- regulation of political parties and associations; 
- the budgetary law; 
- the bases, rates and methods of collection of taxes of all sorts, regulation of the currency and coinage; 
- the general administrative and financial organization; 
- regulation of land, real estate, forests and mines; 
- the Plan for social and economic development in the Republic; 
- the general regulation of the civil service; 
- the creation of public services; 
- the nationalization of enterprises and the transfer of the property of enterprises from the public sector to the private sector; 
- the creation or elimination of autonomous establishments or services where the government has the initiative.
</list_2>
2. The fundamental principles of:
<list_3>
- education; 
- the right to work; 
- Social Security; 
- labor law; 
- cooperative and savings associations; 
- the general organization of defense; 
- regulation of prisons.
</list_3>
</list_1>Article 47. 
Matters other than those in the area of law shall belong to the regulatory area. 
Article 48. 
Bills adopted as laws may be modified by decree, with the consent of the Constitutional Council, if they infringe on an area conferred on the regulatory power. 
Article 49. 
All revenue and expenditures of the Republic must be evaluated and written in the budget for each fiscal year. 
Presented by the government at the opening of the second ordinary session, not later than October 15, the budget shall be decreed by a law, to be called the budgetary law, before the beginning of the new fiscal year. This law shall include only provisions which are strictly financial. 
If the budgetary law establishing the revenue and obligations of the fiscal year has not been presented on time by the government, the government shall ask the National Assembly for emergency authorization to levy taxes and shall create, by decree, credits related to the services voted upon during the preceding year. 
If, at the end of the second session, the budget has not been voted upon, and if this delay is attributable to the National Assembly, the President of the Republic shall establish it automatically and definitively by ordinance which is not subject to confirmation. 
Article 50. 
Provisions and amendments formulated by deputies may not be adopted if they would entail a reduction in revenue or the creation or increase of a public obligation unless corresponding revenue is released. 
Article 51. 
The National Assembly shall vote upon its internal regulation. This may take effect only after having been held by the Constitutional Council to be in conformity with the Constitution. 
Chapter 4 The Exercise of Legislative Power<title> 
Article 52. 
The initiative in laws shall be vested concurrently with the President of the Republic, the government and the deputies. 
Drafts which deputies originate shall be presented to the Bureau of the National Assembly for the government's consent. 
The government must give its consent not later than the session following the date of presentation. 
Article 53. 
The agenda of the National Assembly shall be established by the Bureau. It must include, by priority and in the order which the government has established, discussion of government bills and of private bills accepted by the government. 
One session per week shall be reserved by priority for questions from the deputies and answers by the government. Ministers must answer not later than the next session.Article 54. 
During the legislative procedure, if it appears that a provision or amendment is not within the area of law or is contrary to a delegation conferred in Article 34, the President of the Republic may declare it null and void. 
In the event of disagreement, the President of the Republic or the President of the Assembly shall appeal to the Constitutional Council, which must decide within one week. 
Article 55. 
The government's means of control over the National Assembly are: 
<list>
- written questioning; 
- oral questioning without debate; 
- a commission hearing; 
- an investigative commission; 
- a motion of censure. 
</list>
Conditions for the organization and operation of investigative commissions shall be determined by law. 
A motion of censure shall permit the National Assembly to challenge the government's responsibility. 
Article 56. 
The motion of censure provided for in the preceding article shall be signed and presented to the President of the National Assembly, who shall inform the government without delay. It must be entitled "Motion of Censure" and must be signed by one-third of the members of the National Assembly. 
Voting on the motion of censure shall take place within forty-eight hours following its presentation, with the same conditions and forms as balloting on a question of confidence. 
If the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure or if it fails to approve the program or a declaration of general policy of the government, the Prime Minister, not later than a week following the vote, must submit his resignation to the President of the Republic, which automatically entails the resignation of the government. 
TITLE V THE JUDICIARY POWER<title> 
Chapter 1 Justice<title> 
Article 57. 
Justice shall constitute a power the independence of which shall be guaranteed with regard to the legislative and executive powers.Justice shall be rendered in the name of the Central African people by the Supreme Court, the Courts of Appeal, and the tribunals. 
Judges shall hold their appointments for life, under conditions established by law. 
Article 58. 
The President of the Republic shall assure the independence of the judiciary.
He shall be assisted in that purpose by the Superior Council of Judges over which he shall preside. 
The organization and duties of the Superior Council of Judges shall be established by an organic law. 
Article 59. 
No one may be arbitrarily detained. Every accused person shall be presumed innocent until his guilt has been established following a procedure which offers him the guarantees indispensable to his defense, without discrimination. 
The judiciary power, the guardian of individual liberty, shall assure respect for these principles under conditions provided for by law. 
Chapter 2 The Supreme Court<title> 
Article 60. 
A Supreme Court shall be instituted which shall include three chambers: 
<list>
- the judicial chamber; 
- the administrative chamber; 
- the auditing chamber. 
</list>
An organic law shall determine the authority of the Supreme Court and of each of its chambers, as well as their composition, organization, rules of operation, and the procedure to be followed within them. 
Article 61. 
Jurisdictional decisions by the Supreme Court are not subject to appeal. 
Article 62. 
Government bills and private bills, ordinances and regulatory decrees may be examined by the Supreme Court before being submitted to the President of the Republic and the government. 
Article 63. 
The Supreme Court shall give its opinion on any judicial or administrative question which the President of the Republic or the National Assembly submits to it. 
The Court may also, on its own initiative, call the attention of the President of the Republic to reforms of a legislative or regulatory nature which seem to be in the public interest.TITLE VI THE CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL<title> 
Article 64. 
A Constitutional Council shall be instituted to be responsible for assuring the regularity of presidential, legislative, and municipal elections, and examining and proclaiming the results of the balloting. 
The Constitutional Council shall consist of six members, of which three shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, and the three others by the Bureau of the National Assembly. In the event of a tie vote, the vote of the President of the Constitutional Council shall prevail. 
The Constitutional Council shall rule in the event of a dispute over the regularity of these elections. It shall assure the regularity of referenda and shall proclaim the results. 
In addition to these duties and those conferred in Articles 20, 21, 24, 25, 50 and 54, the Council shall examine the constitutionality of ordinary and organic laws submitted before publication. Its consideration shall suspend the time period for publication. It shall settle conflicts of authority between the National Assembly and the government touching upon the respective areas of law and regulation. 
The organization and operation of the Constitutional Council shall be established by an organic law which shall guarantee its independence and permanence. 
Article 65. 
Decisions of the Constitutional Council are not subject to appeal. 
A decision declared unconstitutional shall be null and void. 
TITLE VII THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL<title> 
Article 66. 
An economic and social council shall be instituted responsible for advising on all government and private bills, ordinances and decrees, as well as on all measures necessary for the economic and social development of the Republic which are submitted to it. 
It may be entrusted with any study of an economic or social nature. On its own initiative it may publish resolutions within the area of its competence. 
Article 67. 
The composition of the economic and social council and its rules of operation shall be established by an organic law. 
TITLE VIII TERRITORIAL UNITS<title> 
Article 68. 
Territorial units in the Republic shall be created by law. They may not be modified or eliminated except with the consent of the councils concerned and under conditions established by law. The territorial units shall be administered by elected bodies. 
TITLE IX INTERNATIONAL TREATIES AND AGREEMENTS<title> 
Article 69.
Treaties of peace, treaties of commerce, treaties regarding international organizations or committing the finances of the Republic, treaties modifying legislative provisions, treaties regarding the status of persons or entailing the ceding, exchange or annexation of territory, may not be ratified except by virtue of a law. 
They shall take effect only after they are ratified. 
If the Constitutional Council, upon appeal from the President of the Republic or the President of the Assembly, has declared that an international commitment includes a clause contrary to the Constitution, authorization to ratify or approve it may be given only after revision of the Constitution.
No cession, exchange or annexation of territory shall be valid without the consent of the populations concerned through a referendum. 
The Central African Republic may conclude agreements of association or merger with any African state, including partial or total abandon of sovereignty, in order to achieve African unity. 
It may create with all States intergovernmental organisms for common management, coordination and free cooperation. 
Treaties and agreements which are duly ratified and published shall prevail over laws, provided they are applied by the other party. 
TITLE X CONSTITUTIONAL REVISION<title> 
Article 70. 
Initiative for revising the Constitution shall be vested concurrently in the President of the Republic, with the consent of the Council of Ministers, and the National Assembly, ruling by a two-thirds majority. 
Article 71. 
Government and private bills for revision shall be submitted to a referendum. 
Article 72. 
No procedure may be undertaken or pursued if it jeopardizes territorial integrity. 
Article 73. 
The republican form of the Central African State, as well as the provisions of Article 16 of this Constitution, may not be the subject of revision.TITLE XI TEMPORARY PROVISIONS<title>
Article 74. 
This Constitution shall take effect as soon as it is published by Presidential decree and after approval of the people by way of a referendum. 
Article 75. 
Before the National Assembly is installed, legislative power shall be exercised by Presidential ordinances. 
Article 76. 
The National Assembly provided for in this Constitution shall be installed not later than three months after the election of the President of the Republic. 
Article 77. 
Before the installation of the Supreme Court provided for in this Constitution, the Court instituted by Law 61-249 of November 15, 1961, will continue to function in conformity with the laws in force. 
Article 78. 
Before its installation the powers of the Constitutional Council shall be exercised temporarily by the Plenary Assembly of the Supreme Court. 
Article 79. 
All laws which are not expressly abrogated shall remain in force.