+(,121/,1(
Citation: 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1048 1828-1829 Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline (http://heinonline.org) Tue Jun 8 14:53:35 2010 -- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license agreement available at http://heinonline.org/HOL/License -- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

1048

CHILI.

indulge a personal gratification, permit me the humble expression of the joy which fills my soul, on seeing myself destined by Providence to present to you the Constitution which is about to rule your destinies. Be happy under its auspices-this is the most ardent of my wishes ! FRANCISCO ANTONIO PINTO. Santiago, 9th August, 1828. The Vice-President of the Republic. the General Constituent Congress has decreed and sanctioned the Political Constitution of Chili, contained in the following Code.WHEREAS POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILI. TITLE
ART.

I.-Of

the Nation.

I. The Chilian Nation is the Political Union of all natural and legal Chilians. It is free and Independent of every Foreign Power. In it essentially rests the Sovereignty, the exercise of which belongs to the Supreme Power, according to the Laws. It cannot be the patrimony of any Person or Family. 1I. Its Territory, from the north to the south, extends from the Desert of Atacama to Cape Horn ; and, from east to west, from the Chain of the Andes to the Pacific, with the Islands of Juan Fernandez, and those adjacent. It is divided into 8 Provinces, viz.: Coquimbo, Aconcagua, Santiago, Colchagua, Manle, Concepcion, Valdivia and Chilo6. III. Its religion is the Catholic Apostolic Roman, to the exclusion of the public exercise of any other. IV. No one can be persecuted or molested for his private opinions.
TITLE II.-Of Chilians. V. Natural Chilians are those who are born in the Territory of the Republic. VI. Legal Chilians are: 1. The Sons of a Chilian Father or Mother born out of the Territory of the Republic, but domiciliated in it. 2. Foreigners who have married Chilian Women, and who, professing any science, art, or trade, or possessing a capital in money or landed property, have resided 2 years in the Territory of the Republic. 3. Foreigners who have married Foreigners, and possess any of the qualifications mentioned in the preceding Article, and have resided 6 years. 4. Unmarried Foreigners who have any of the above-mentioned qualifications, after 8 years residence. 5. Those who obtain the right by the special favour of Congress. A particular Law will prescribe the Authority before which the qualifications required in the preceding cases shall be verified.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1048 1828-1829

CHILI.

1049

VII. Active Citizens are: 1. Native Chilians who, being 21 years of age, orof less age, if married, are serving in the Militia, or profess any science, art, or trade, or hold any employment, or possess any capital in money, or landed property, by which they can subsist. 2. Legal Chilians, or those who have served 4 years as Officers in the Armies of the Republic. VIII. Citizenship is suspended, in consequence: 1. Of physical or moral incapacity, which prevents free and deliberate action. 2. Of being a domestic servant. 3. Of being a Public Debtor and declared Defaulter. IX. Citizenship is lost: 1. By being condemned to a punishment of infamy. 2. By fraudulent bankruptcy. 3. By naturalization in a Foreign Country. 4. By accepting employments, distinctions, or titles, from another Government, without the special permission of Congress. Those, however, who, in consequence of either of the 4 preceding causes, may lose their Citizenship, can, nevertheless, obtain the restoration of it.
TITLE II.-PersonalRights. X. The Nation secures to every Man, as imprescriptible and inviolable rights, his liberty, security, property, the right of petitioning, and that of publishing his opinions. XI. There are no Slaves in Chili ; if any Slave place his foot on the Territory of the Republic, he recovers his liberty by that act. XII. Every action which does not injure society, directly or indirectly, or prejudice a third Person, is beyond the jurisdiction of the Magistracy, and appertains to God alone. XIII. No Inhabitant of the Territory can be arrested or detained, except in virtue of a Warrant issued by a competent Judge, after the requisite process, unless he be taken in the act of crime, or shall conceal a Criminal. XIV. Every Individual arrested or detained, agreeably to the preceding Article, and for a crime to which corporal [Uunishment does not attach, shall be set at liberty, immediately after he has given security, in the manner prescribed by Law. XV. No one can be tried by a Special Commission, nor by a Tribunal not established by the Law. The Law can, however, in no case, have a retrospective effect. XVI. No house can be forcibly entered, except in case of resistance to, or by virtue of a Warrant issued by, a legitimate Authority. XVII. No Citizen can be deprived of his property, nor of that to 3 Y [1828-29.]

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1049 1828-1829

1050

CHILI.

which he has a legal right, not even of the smallest part thereof, except in virtue of a judicial sentence. When the public service requires the property of aiiy one, he shall be paid its exact value, and be indemnified for his loss in case of the retention of it. XVIII. Every Man may publish his thoughts and opinions, by means of the press. The abuses committed by such means, shall be tried under a particular Law, and decided by a Jury. XIX. The Law declares all epistolary correspondence to be inviolable: no one can intercept, or violate the same, without being guilty of an offence against personal security. XX. The Law declares culpable, every Individual or Body that shall violate any of the rights mentioned in this Title. The Laws will determine the punishment which shall attach to such offences.
TITLE IV.-Form of Government. XXI. The Chilian Nation adopts for its Government the Popular Representative Republican form, in the manner which this Constitution points out.

TITLE V.-Division of Power.

XXII. The exercise of the Sovereignty, vested by the Nation in the Authorities which it constitutes, is divided into three Powers, viz., the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial, which are exercised separately, and must not, in any case, be united.
TITLE VI.-Legislative Power. XXIII. The Legislative Power is vested in the National Congress, which will consist of 2 Chambers, one of Deputies and another of Senators. Chamber of Deputies. XXIV. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of Members elected directly by the People, in the manner which the Law of Elections will determine. XXV. One Deputy shall be elected for every 16,000 souls, and for a fraction of not less than 7,000. XXVI. Throughout the whole of the Republic, the Election of Deputies shall take place on the 1st Sunday in March. XXVII. The functions of the Deputies shall continue for 2 years. XXVIII. To be qualified for the Office of Deputy, it is necessary: 1. To be in the exercise of Citizenship. 2. To be 25 years of age, if a bachelor, or of less age, if married. 3. To possess a property, profession, or office, affording a decent livelihood. XXIX. Cannot be Deputies: The Individuals of the regular Clergy, and Seculars who obtain accuracy annexed to a benefice.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1050 1828-1829

CHILI.

1051

Chamber of Senators. XXX. The Chamber of Senators shall be composed of Members elected by the Provincial Assemblies, by an absolute plurality of votes, at the rate of 2 Senators for each Province. XXXI. The Election of Senators shall take place in all the Provinces, on the 2nd Sunday in March. XXXII. The functions of the Senators shall continue 4 years, one half of them being renewed every 2 years. The half of the Senators shall leave the Chamber, in the first instance, by lot; afterwards, those of longest standing. XXXIII. The vacancies which occur in the Senate, shall be filled Up by the Provincial Assembly which it concerns, immediately, during the Session, or on the re-opening of it, if the vacancy occur during the recess. XXXIV. To be qualified for the office of Senator, it is necessary: 1. To be in the exe'cise of Citizenship. 2. To be 30 years of age. 3. To possess a property, or be of a scientific profession, producing at least 500 dollars a year. XXXV. The disqualification with respect to Deputies, described in Article XXIX, extends also to Senators. XXXVI. If the same Individual be elected both a Senator and Deputy, he shall become that which he prefers. Internal Regulation of the Chambers. XXXVII. Each Chamber shall be governed by the regulations prescribed by itself. XXXVIII. Each Chamber shall elect its President, Vice-President, and Secretaries. XXXIX. Each Chamber shall fix its own expenses, and submit them to the Government, in order that they may be included in the Estimates of the general Expenditure of the Nation. XL. Neither Chamber shall open the Session until one half of the whole number of its Members be assembled; if that do not happen on the day appointed by the Constitution, the Members present must unite, and compel the attendance of Absentees, by means of fines or other penalties. XLI. The Chambers shall communicate with each other in writing, and with the President of the Republic, by means of their respective Presidents, with the authority of a Secretary. XLlI. The Deputies and Senators are not responsible for the opinions which, they express, and the votes which they give in the discharge of their duty; no authority can prosecute them, nor can they at any time be indicted for them. XLIII. No Deputy or Senator can be arrested during the exercise 3 Y2

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1051 1828-1829

1052

CHILI.

of his functions in the Legislature, nor in his way to or from the Place of its Sitting, unless taken in the commission of crime. XLIV. No Deputy or Senator can be criminally accused, from the day of his election, except before his respective Chamber, or before the Permanent Commission, during the recess of the Chamber. If the votes of two-thirds of the Members decide that there are good grounds for the accusation, the Accused shall be suspended from his legislative functions, and brought before the competent Tribunal. XLV. In case of any Deputy or Senator being arrested in the commission of Crime, he shall be placed immediately at the disposal of his respective Chamber, with the act of accusation. The Chamber shall then proceed conformably to what is laid down in the second part of the preceding Article. Attributes of Congress, and Special Duties of each Chamber. XLVI. The following are the exclusive attributes of Congress: 1. To frame, and cause to be promulgated, Codes of Law, and to regulate the proceedings of Tribunals, and the administration of Justice. 2. To make general Laws, for whatever concerns the independence, security, tranquillity, and honour of the Republic; the protection of all the individual rights enumerated in the 3d Title of this Constitution; and the encouragement of education, agriculture, industry, and external and internal commerce. 3. To approve or reject, augment or diminish, the Estimates of Expenditure, presented by the Government ; to appoint the taxes necessary to cover such Expenditure, regulate their distribution in the Provinces, and the manner of their collection and payment, and to repeal or alter the existing taxes. 4. To approve, or reject, either wholly or in part, the Accounts presented annually by the Government to the Chambers.. 5. To contract Debts on the part of the Nation, consolidate them, and provide for their liquidation, and to regulate Public Credit. 6. To approve or reject any Declaration of War, which the Executive Power may issue, and the Treaties which it may conclude with Foreign Powers. 7. To appoint annually the Armed Force necessary in time of Peace and War. 8. To form new Provinces, regulate their limits, establish Ports and Custom-houses, and the Import and Export Duties. 9. To fix the weight, alloy, value, type, and denomination of the coin, and regulate the system of weights and measures. 10. To permit or prohibit the admission of Foreign Troops into the Territory of the Republic, and fix the period of their stay within it. 11. To permit or prohibit the departure of the National Troops out of the Territory of the Republic, and fix the time of their return within it.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1052 1828-1829

CHILI.

1053

12. To create or suppress public employments, prescribe or modify their duties; appoint, augment, or diminish, their salaries or retired allowances; grant pensions or rewards, pecuniary or otherwise; and decree public honours for important services. 13. To grant pardons in extraordinary cases. 14. To regulate the Militia, and to determine their number and the period of assembling. 15. To select the place in which the Supreme National Powers are to assemble. 16. To approve or disapprove of the formation and regulation of Discount, Mortgage, or any other description of Banks. 17. To name, when the Chambers are sitting, the Members of the Supreme Court. 18. To name, on the day after the meeting of Congress, 24 Individuals, possessing the qualifications required for Members of the Supreme Court, and to elect from them, by lot, 5 Members and I Fiscal, who shall decide, in the first Instance, the accusations against the said Members. on those subjects which are not comprehended in the second part of Article XLVI I. A similar number, elected in the same manner, shall decide them in the second Instance. A Special Law shall determine the form and mode of procedure. XLVII1. The exclusive attributes of the Chamber of Deputies are: 1. To propose Laws relative to Imposts and Taxes, taking into consideration the amendments which may have been made to them, on. their being returned from the Senate. 2. To consider the petition or proposition of any of its Members, concerning accusations against the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Ministers, and the Members of both Chambers, and of the Supreme Court of Justice, for treason, mis-application of the Public Revenues, infractions of the Constitution, and violations of individual rights ; to declare whether there be grounds for instituting an accusation, and, if there be, to present the accusation in form to the Senate. XLVIII. The exclusive attribute of the Senate is: To give public judgment on those accused by the Chamber of Deputies, and to pronounce Sentence, with the concurrence of, at least, two-thirds of its Members. Formation (?f the Laws. XLIX. Every Project of Law, except those relative to Taxes and Imposts, may originate in either of the Chambers, on the proposition of one of its Members, or by means of Projects presented by the Executive Power. L. On the approval of a Project of Law in the Chamber of its origin, it must pass immediately to the other Chamber, for discussion and approbation.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1053 1828-1829

1054

CHILI.

. LI. A Project of Law rejected by one of the Chambers, cannot be again presented, until the Session following. LII. A Project of Law enlarged, or amended, by the Chamber to which it has been sent, shall be returned to that in which it had its origin, and shall be subject to the rules prescribed in the 2 preceding Articles. 1,111. On the approval of a Project of Law by the 2 Chambers, it shall be remitted to the Executive Power, which shall order its promulgation, or shall return it to that of its origin, with its objections or observations. LIV. If the return mentioned in the preceding Article do not take place within the 10 days following that on which it was sent to the Executive Power, it shall have the force of a Law, and shall be promulgated as such. LV. If the return take place within the prescribed term, the Project shall be re-considered in both Chambers; it shall have the force of a Law, and be promulgated immediately by the Executive, if it be approved in either of the Chambers LVI. If the Project returned by the Executive be not approved, it shall be laid aside, and shall not be again presented until the Session following. LVII. If the return be not made within the prescribed term, in consequence of the Session of Congress being suspended or terminated, it shall take place on the first day of its next assembling. Sessions of Congress. LVIII. The Congress shall open its Ordinary Session on the 1st of June of each Year, and shall close it on the 18th of September. Should any particular circumstance require the extension of this term, it shall never exceed one moiith. LIX. When Congress shall be convoked extraordinarily, it shall occupy itself exclusively with the affairs which gave rise to its convocation. TITLE V I.-Exeutive Power. LX. The Supreme Executive Power shall be exercised by a Citizen, a Chilian by birth, above 30 years of age, with the title of President of the Republic of Chili. LXI. There shall be a Vice-President, who, in case of the death, or the physical or mental incapacity of the President, shall discharge his duty. Iis qualifications must be the same as are required for the President. LXII. The Functions of the President and Vice-President shall continue for 5 years. They cannot be re-elected, until after the expiration of a similar period of 5 years. LXIII. The President and Vice-President shall be elected on the

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1054 1828-1829

CHILI.

1055

5th (lay of April, of the year in which the time appointed by Law for the duration of their functions, respectively, shall expire. LXIV. The President and Vice-President shall be chosen by Electors named by the Provinces, in a popular and direct election, tile number of whom shall be triple that of the total number of Deputies and Senators belonging to each Province. LXV. The nomination of the Electors shall take place on the 15th of March. Their qualifications must be the same as thoserequired for Deputies, in Article XXVIII. LXVI. The Electors being assembled, on the day appointed in Article LXIII, and with the formalities prescribed by the Law of Elections, shall vote, indistinctly, for 2 Persons, one of whom, at least, shall not be a Native or Denizen of the Province in which the election takes place. LXVII.. Tile Electoral Junta shall form double Lists of the Persons elected, which Lists, signed by all the Electors, and sealed, shall be remitted, one to the Provincial Assembly, in whose archives it shall be deposited and kept, and the other to the Permanent Commission, which shall keep it, in the same state, until the meeting of the Chambers. LXV I 1I. O the day following that of the meeting of Congress, thesaid Lists shall be opened and read, in a public Sitting of the two Chambers, assembled in the Hall of Sittings of the Senate, the President of that Body officiating as President, with the President of the Chamber of Deputies at his right hand. The Secretaries of both Chambers shall exercise their functions, jointly, at this meeting. LXIX. The Lists having been read, the President of the Senate shall name a Commission, composed of an equal number of Senators and Deputies, to revise them, and to report the result during the same Sitting. LXX. The Chambers shall then confirm the Elections, according to the rules prescribed in the following Articles, and one of the Secretaries shall read aloud the result. LXX 1. He who has an absolute majority of votes compared with the number of Electors, shall be declared President of the Republic, but if there chance to be *2with the said majority, he shall be President who has the greatest number, and he who has the next greatest number shall be declared Vice-President. If 2 have the same number, the Chambers shall name one of them as President, anld the other as VicePresident. LXXII. If it happen that no one obtain an absolute majority of votes, the Chambers shall elect the President of the Republic from amongst those who obtain the respective majority, and afterwards the Vice-President from amongst those of the next highest majority. LXXIII. If one alone have the respective majority, and 2 or more of those next in point of number of votes be equal, the Chambers

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1055 1828-1829

1056

CHILI.

shall elect from among them, him who can compete with the first, whether for the election of President, or Vice-President, as the case may be. LXXIV. If all the Candidates happen to have an equal number of votes, the Chambers shall elect from among them all, first the President and then the Vice-President, by a separate vote. LXXV. The latter Elections cannot take place, unless three-fourths of the Members of both Chambers be present. If, upon the division, there be an equal number of votes, there shall be a second division, and if an absolute majority do not result, it shall be decided by lot. LXXVI. On the day of the expiration of the 5 years of their Office, the President and Vice-President who have filled those Offices, shall give them up entirely, and shall be replaced by those newly elected. But if from any extraordinary circumstance, the Elections be not finished and published, the President and Vice-President shall nevertheless resign their trust, and the Executive Power shall be confided to the President of the Senate, or of the Permanent Commission, if it should happen during the recess of the Chambers. LXXVII. If the President and Vice-President should find themselves incapable of fulfilling their duties, the President of the Senate, or of the Permanent Commission, during the recess of the Chambers, shall immediately announce the same to the People, by means of the Intendants, in order that the election of Electors may take place on the 15th March, and the same periods shall be observed in respect of the Election of President and Vice-President, as are prescribed in Articles LXIII, LXVIII, and LXXVIII, and, in the mean time, the Executive Power shall be exercised as provided by the preceding Article. LXXVIII. On the 18th September, the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take possession of their Offices, and, on the day on which their functions terminate, they shall call before them those newly elected, to take the customary oath ; but if any accident prevent the presence of the former, the Vice-President shall provisionally take charge of the Government. LXXIX. The said Oath shall be taken in the presenceof the united Chambers ; and shall also be taken before them in case of the inability of the President, when the Vice-President takes his place ; or before the Permanent Commission, if it happen during the recess of the Chambers. LXXX. The year preceding each Election of President and VicePresident, the Congress shall appoint the Salary of both, which can neither be augmented nor diminished, during the time appointed by the Law for the duration of their Offices. Privilegesand Attributes of the Executive Power. LXXXI. The President and Vice-President cannot be accused during the period of their government, except before the Chamber of Deputies, and for the crimes specified in the second part of Article

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1056 1828-1829

CHILI.

1057

XLVII, Title VI. of this Constitution. The accusation may be made during their government, or within a year afterwards. LXXXII. After the expiration of that year, when their responsibilit y ceases, no one can accuse them for any crime committed during the period of their government. LXXXIII. The attributes of the Executive Power are: 1. To make observations on, or objections to, the Projects of Law submitted by the Chambers, and to suspend their promulgation, within the 10 days following that on which they are presented to it. 2. To propose Laws to the Chambers, or modifications and amendments of those before mentioned, within the term specified in this Constitution. 3. To demand of Congress the prorogation of its Ordinary Sessions for 30 days, and to convoke Extraordinary Sessions. 4. To appoint, or remove, without assigning a reason, the Ministers Secretaries of State, and the Clerks of their Departments. 5.To confer civil, military, and ecclesiastical Appointments, conformably to the Constitution and Laws; the consent of the Senate, or, during its recess, of that of the Permanent Commission, being necessary, for those of Diplomatic Envoys, Colonels, and other Superior Officers of the Standing Army. 6. To dismiss Persons from Office, on account of incapacity, neglect of duty, or any other fault. In the two first cases, with the consent of the Senate, or, during its recess, of the Permanent Commission, and, in the latter case, referring the matter to the Tribunals of Justice, that they may be legally tried. 7. To negotiate and conclude Treaties of Peace, Friendship, Alliance, Commerce, and any others; the approbation of Congress being necessary to the ratification of them. To conclude, according to the same form, Concordates with the Apostolic See, and to withhold or give effect to its Bulls or Diplomas. 8. To exercise, according to Law, the attributes of Church patronage; but not to present to Bishopricks, except with the approbation of the Chamber of Deputies. 9. To declare War, the resolution of Congress being previously taken ; and afterwards to employ means to avert the same, without compromising the national honour and independence. 10. To dispose of the Sea and Land Forces, and of the Active Militia, for the internal security and external defence of the Country, and to employ the Local Militia for the same objects : the approbation of Congress, or during its recess, of the Permanent Commission, being previously obtained. 11. To give retired allowances, grant furloughs, and regulate Military Pensions, according to Law. 12. In serious and unforeseen cases of external attack, or internal

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1057 1828-1829

1058

CHILI.

commotion, to take prompt measures for the public security, rendering an immediate account to Congress, or, during its recess, to the Permanent Commission, of its proceedings, motives, and intentions. Duties of the Executive Power. LXXXIV. The duties of the Executive Power are: 1. To publish and circulate all Laws sanctioned by the Congress; to execute them, and to take the measures necessary for causing them to be executed. 2. To watch over the collection of the general contributions, and to decree the application of them, according to Law. 3. To presen t , annually, to Congress, an Estimate of the necessary Expenditures, and to give a detailed account of the application of the Estimate of the preceding year. 4. To present, annually, to Congress, on the opening of the Session, a Report on the state of the Nation in all the branches of the Government. 5. To watch over the official conduct of the Functionaries employed in the Judicial Department, and!the execution of the Sentences. * 6. To adopt the necessary measures, in order that the Elections take place at the time appointed by this Constitution, and that they are conducted agreeably to what is prescribed by the Electoral Law. Restrictionsof the Executive Power. LXXXV. The Executive Power is prohibited: 1. From commanding, personally, the armed Force, either by sea or land, withon)t the previous permission of Congress, or, during its recess, of two-thirds of the Permanent Commission; that being obtained, the Vice-President shall govern the Republic. 2. From quitting the Territory of the Republic during the period of its Government, and for one year after it has ceased. 3. From taking cognizance of judicial matters, under any pretext. 4. From depriving any one of his personal liberty ; in case, however, of doing so, if required by the general interest, it shall be limited to simple arrest, and, before the expiration of 24 hours, the arrested person shall be placed at the disposal of the competent Judge. 5. From suspending, on any account, the National Elections, and from altering the time at which they are to take place, agreeably to this Constitution. 6. From obstructing the assembly of the Chambers, or offering any impediment to their Sittings. 7. From permitting the receipt of any Pay, or Allowance, on other ,"rounds than those of actual service, reward for public services, or retired allowance, according to the Laws. 8. From issuing Orders without signing them, and without the signature of the respective Minister; in the absence of which no one shall be bound to obey them.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1058 1828-1829

CHILI.

1059

Ministers Secretariesof State. shall be 3 Ministers Secretaries of State, for There LXXXVI. the dispatch of business. Each of them shall be responsible for the Decrees which he shall sign, and all of them for those which they sign in common. LXXXVII. To be a Minister, it is requisite to be a Citizen by birth, and to be 30 years of age. LXXXVIII. So soon as the Chambers open their annual Session, the Ministers shall render an account to each of them, of the state of their respective Departments. LXXX[X. No Minister can leave the Territory of the Republic, until 6 months after his administration shall be concluded, during whi'ch period his conduct whilst in office is liable to be judged. VIII.-Permanent Commission. XC. During the recess of Congress, there shall be a Permanent Commission, composed of I Senator for each Province. XCI. For the 2 first years, the Senators named, in the first instance, by the respective Provincial Assemblies, shall be the Members of the Permanent Commission, and afterwards those of the longest standing. The Members of the Commission shall name fiom amongst themselves a President, by a majority of votes. XC II. The Duties of this Commission are: 1. To watch over the observance of the Constitution and the Laws. 2. To communicate to the Executive Power such observations as it may have to make upon that subject, for the omission of which the Congress shall be responsible; and if the fiist communication be not sufficient, it shall be repeated a second time. 3. To order, of itself alone, in case of the insufficiency ofthe course before pointed out, the convocation of Congress in an extraordinary Session. 4. To give or refuse its consent, in all the cases in which the Executive Power requires it, agreeably to this Constitution.
TITLE TITLE

IX.-Judicial Power.

XCIII. The Judicial Power is vested in the Supreme Court, the Courts of Appeal, and the Tiibunals of First Instance. XCIV. The Supreme Court is composed of 5 Members and a Fiscal. The Congress can augment this number as circumstances require it. XCV. In order to be a Member of the Supreme Court, it is necessary to be either a natural or legal Citizen, to be 30 years of age, and to have exercised for 6 years the profession of an Advocate. Attributes of the Supreme Court. XCVI. The Attributes of the Supreme Court are:

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1059 1828-1829

1060

CHILI.

I. To hear and decide: upon questions of competency between the Tribunals; 2. Upon questions of contentious jurisdiction between the Provinces; 3. Upon differences which arise respecting Contracts entered into by the Government, or by its Agents in its name; 4. Upon Civil Causes between the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Ministers of State, and Members of both Chambers; 5. Upon Civil and Criminal Causes between Diplomatic Agents, Consuls, and Intendants of Provinces ; 6. Upon Admiralty Causes, captures by sea and land, and acts committed on the High Seas; 7. Upon Causes arising out of infractions of the Constitution; 8. Upon Causes concerning the suspension or loss of the right of Citizenship, agreeably to what is prescribed by this Constitution ; and 9. Upon the other Appeals which are now submitted to it, until the system of the Administration of Justice shall have been amended. 10. To exercise a direct, correctional, consultative, and administrative Superintendence, overall the Courts and Tribunals of the Nation. 1I. To propose to the Executive Power 3 Persons, from amongst whom the Members, respectively, of the Courts of Appeal are to be selected. XCVII. An appeal by Petition shall be permitted in all the cases mentioned in ยง ยง 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of the preceding Article. The Supreme Court, in order to take cognizance of them, shall be composed of the Members, or their Substitutes, of the respective Province. Courts of Appeal XCVIII. The Courts of Appeal shall be composed of the number of Judges, which shall be prescribed by a Special Law; which Law shall also designate the Provinces to be assigned to each of them, and the manner, form, gradation, and order, in which they shall exercise their attributes. XCIX. To be a Member of the Courts of Appeal, it is necessary to be a legal or natural Citizen, and to have exercised the profession of Advocate 4 years. Courts of the Peace and of First Instance. C. There shall be Courts of the Peace to settle disputes, in the manner prescribed by a Special Law. CI. There shall be, in each Province, one or more Judges of the Courts of First Instance, to take cognizance of the Civil and Criminal Causes which arise within it; which office shall be exercised by Lawyers in the manner to be appointed by a Special Law. CII. To be a Judge of a Court of First Instance, it is necessary to be a natural or legal Citizen, and to have exercised the profession of an Advocate for 2 years. CIII. The office of Members of the Supreme. Court, Courts of

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1060 1828-1829

CHILI.

1061

Appeal, and Judges of the Courts of First Instance, shall be held during the time of their good conduct and services. Those who acquit themselves well cannot be deprived of them, unless by a sentence of a competent Tribunal. Restrictions of the Judicial Power. CIV. Every Judge, Authority, or Tribunal that, conformably to Title III., Article XIII., does not inform any Individual who shall be arrested and detained, of the cause of his arrest and detention within 24 hours, or denies to him, or prevents his obtaining, the means of legal defence, of which he desires to make use, is guilty of an attempt against personal security ; it justifies an action at Law ; the fact may be tried summarily by the competent Authority, and the offending Party, having been heard in the same manner, shall undergo the penalty of the Law. CV. All Judges, Authorities, and Tribunals, are prohibited from imposing the punishment of confiscation of property, and from applying any sort of torture. The punishment of infamy shall never extend to any other than the person condemned. CVI. They are equally prohibited from ordering or attending the search of houses, documents, books, or effects of any Inhabitant of the Republic, except in the cases expressly appointed, and in the form prescribed, by the Law. CVII. No Criminal shall be required to take an oath, relative to his own act, in a criminal cause. X.-Internal Government and Administration of the Provinces. CVIII. The Internal Government and Administration of the Provinces, respectively, shall be exercised by the Provincial Assembly, and by the Intendant. ProvincialAssemblies.
TITLE

CIX. The Provincial Assembly shall be composed of Members elected directly by tile People, and in the manner prescribed by the general Law of Elections. CX. One Deputy shall be elected for every 7,500 souls. CXI. The Provinces which cannot, on this basis, elect an Assembly of 12 Members, shall, nevertheless, elect that number whatever may be its population. CXII. Its duration shall be for 2 years; and its meeting, which cannot take place unless two-thirds of its Members are present, shall be held in the Capital of the Province. CXIII. To be a Deputy of the Assembly, it is required that he be a Citizen, in the exercise of his rights, and a Native, or a Denizen, of the Province. CXIV. The Attributes of the Provincial Assemblies are: I. To confirm the Elections of their respective Members.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1061 1828-1829

1062

CHILI.

Q. To fix tile period of their Sessions, which shall never exceed that appointed by this Constitution for those of the National Legislature. 3. To name the Senators, and propose, in a triple list of names, the Intendants, Vice-Intendants, and Law Judges of the Courts of First Instance. 4. To establish Municipalities, in places where they may consider them necessary. 5. To take cognizance of, and decide upon, the legality of the Election of those Bodies. 6. To approve or disapprove of the measures and plans proposed by them, as conducive to the welfare of their respective Districts. 7. To authorize the annual Estimates of the Municipalities, approve of, or reject, the extraordinary expenses which they propose, and the regulations intended to controul them. 8. To have under their immediate inspection the pious Establishments of correction, education, security, police, health, and improvement, and to create any others of acknowledged public utility. 9. To examine their Accounts, and correct their abuses, improve their regulations, and see that the Laws of the respective Institutions are observed. 10. To propose to Government, such measures and plans as may be conducive, in any respect, to the welfare of the Province. 11. To report annually on the state of the Agriculture, Industry, and Commerce, of the Province, and the obstacles opposed to their progress, and of any abuses which they may discover in the administration of the Public Revenue. 12. To apportion the contributions to be levied on the Towns of the Province. 13. To form the statistical Census of the Province. 14. To watch over the observance of the Constitution and of the Electoral Law. CXV. The Provincial Assemblies shall suggest to Congress the means, which they think most expedient, of providing for the expenses of the Administration of the Provinces. In tendants. CXVI. The Intendants and Vice-Intendants shall be named by the Executive Power, in virtue of what is proposed iu Article CXIV, ยง 3. They shall continue in office for 3 years. They cannot be reelected until after a similar interval of 3 years has elapsed. CXVII. The attributes of the Intendants are: 1. To execute, and cause to be executed, the Constitution; the Laws and Orders of the Executive Power; and the Resolutions of the Provincial Assembly, which are not opposed to the Constitution, and the general Laws.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1062 1828-1829

CHILI.

1063

2. To exercise the Sub-Inspection General of the Militia of their respective Provinces ; to propose the Chief Officers, with the consent of the Assembly, and the Subalterns, without that consent; in both cases in confbrmity with the Laws. Governors and Municipalities of Towns. CXVIII. Every City or Town which has a Municipality, shall have a Local Governor ; who shall be nominated, by an absolute majority of the votes of the Municipality. The duration of his Office shall be for 2 Years. CXIX. The attributes of the Local Governors are: 1. To cite the Inhabitants of their Districts to the Elections appointed, and at the time fixed, by the Law. 2. To maintain order in their Territory. 3. To name and remove their Subaltern Officers, with the consent of the Municipalities. 4. To execute the orders, relative to the police, and local interests, of their Territory, or to any other matter, which the Municipalities, in virtue of their attributes, may transmit to them. 5. To execute, in like manner, all those which they receive from the Intendant of the Province. 6. To observe, and cause to be observed, the Constitution, the existing Laws, and those which may be hereafter passed. 7. To preside at the Meetings of the Municipalities. If he be unable to attend, the Presidency shall devolve upon the Member who had the greatest number of votes. CXX. In the absence of the Local Governor, his place shall be supplied by the Member referred to in the latter part of the preceding -Article. Municipalitics. CXXI. The nomination of the Municipalities shall proceed directly from the People, conformably to the Law of Elections. Their number cannot exceed 12, nor be less than 7. The duration of their Office shall be for 2 Years. CXXII. The attributes of the Municipalities are: 1. To instruct the Local Governor in matters which requires it. 2. To promote and execute measures for the improvement of the health and convenience of the Inhabitants. 3. To promote and execute measures for the administration and appropriation of the Revenues derived from Public Lands, and Taxes, conformably to the regulation approved of by the Provincial Assembly. 4. To regulate the assessment of the contributions to be levied in their District. 5. To establish, superintend, and protect, the Schools of primary Instruction, and of public Education, in all its branches.

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1063 1828-1829

1064

CHILI.

6. To do the same, in respect of Hospitals, Charitable Institutions, Pantheons, and Foundling and other Establishments of beneficence, under such regulations as they may prescribe. 7. To order the construction and reparation of roads, causeways, bridges, prisons, and all other public works of security, utility and ornament. 8. To prepare municipal regulations for those works, and to submit them to the Provincial Assembly for its approbation. 9. To promote agriculture, industry, and commerce, so far as the circumstances of their Towns may permit. 10. To regulate internal order, and to appoint the Persons required to carry on their correspondence, and for other services. 11. To arrange the celebration of the Civic Festivals in their District. XI.-rmed Force. CXXIII. The Armed Force shall be composed of the Army by Sea and Land, and of the active and local Militia. Congress, invirtue of its attributes, shall regulate the number, organization and discipline, and the providing of substitutes, both for the Army and the Militia, which shall be governed by the same system. CXXIV. Every Chilian capable of bearing arms, must be enrolled in the Registers of the active or local Militia, conformably to the Regulations. TITLE XI.- General Regulations.
TITLE

CXXV. Every Man is equal before the Law. CXXVI. Every Chilian may hold Office. All must contribute to the expenses of the State, in proportion to their means. There is no privileged class. The right of primogeniture, and every obstacle to the free transfer of property, is for ever abolished. The actual possessors of property may dispose of the same freely, one-third part of its value being reserved for the immediate successors, who may dispose thereof with the same freedom. CXXVII. The actual possessors of property, who have no legal heirs, may dispose of two-thirds of the portion of it which would, otherwise, have accrued to their immediate relations. CXXVIII. Every Public Functionary is liable to be called to account for his conduct during the period of his holding Office. A Special Law shall regulate the mode of proceeding against him. CXXIX. The Republic recognizes no Tribunal out of its own Territory. A Special Law shall prescribe the mode and form of proceeding, for the termination of those causes which were formerly decided out of it. XIII.-Observance, Interpretation,and Reform of the Constitution. CXXX. Every Public Functionary, without exception of class,
TITLE

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1064 1828-1829

iPAIN AND GREAT BRITAIN.

1065

t.ore taking possession of his destined Office, shall make oath to observe this Constitution. CXXXI. Congress, in virtue of its attributes, shall dictate all the Laws and Decrees that it believes to be expedient, in order that it may render effectual the responsibility of those who transgress them. CXXXII. The General Congress alone can resolve the doubts which arise iespecting the meaning of these Articles. CXXXIII. In the Year 1836, a Grand Convention shall be convoked by the Congress, for the sole and exclusive purpose of reforming, or adding to, this Constitution; which Assembly shall be dissolved immediately after it has accomplished that task. A Special Law shall prescribe the mode of proceeding, the number of which it is to be composed, and otler details. CXXXIV. Immediately after the confirmation of this Constitution, the present Constituent Congress shall divide itself into 2 Chambers, the Senators being named by a majority of votes. In the mean time, it shall occupy itself, exclusively, in forming the Law of Elections, and other Laws necessary for carrying this Constitution into effect, and it shall separate before the 1st of February, 1829. Hall of Sessions, Valparaiso, 6th August, 1828. MANUEL NOVOA, President, FRANCISCO CALDERON, Vice-President. [Signatures of Deputies.] Wherefore, I command all the Inhabitants and Subjects of the Republic, to receive and observe the said Constitution as a fundamental Law; and I also command the Authorities, whether Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastic, to keep, and cause the same to be kept, fulfilled and executed, in all its parts; the same being printed, published, and circulated. Given in the Principal Chamber of my Office, in Santiago de Chili, 8th August, 1828. FRANCISCO ANTONIO PINTO.
CARLOS RODRIGUEZ,

linister of Statefor the Home and Foreign Departments. Ministerof Stalefor the FinanceDepartment. Josg M. BORGONO, M1inister of State for the War Marine Departments.
FRANCISCO RUIZ TAGLE,

DECREE of the King of Spain, appointing Commissioners, to carry into effect the Convention of Claims with Great Britain, of 28th October, 1828.-El Pardo, 20th January, 1829. (Translation.)
EXPERIENCE having proved that the Treaty concluded with Great Britain, on the 12th March, 1823,* for the reciprocal indemnification of

0
[1828-29.]

See Vol. 1823, 1824. Page-44.

3Z

HeinOnline -- 16 British & Foreign State Papers 1065 1828-1829

