In the Name of the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.
WE, the Representatives of the undermentioned Provinces of New Granada, being assembled in virtue of the Full Powers with which we are invested by our respective Provinces, (the said Powers having been previously and reciprocally examined and duly recognised,) considering the long series of Events which have occurred in the Peninsula of Spain, our Mother Country, since its occupation by the Armies of the French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte; the new and various forms of Government which during that time have rapidly succeeded each other, without any one of them having been able to effect the salvation of the Country ; the destruction of the daily decreasing resources of the Nation, so that human foresight forbids the hope of a successful issue; and lastly, the indisputable right inherent in the large Population of these Provinces, as in every other People of the Universe, to secure their political existence, and to establish for themselves the form of Government best adapted to that end ;-in accordance with the spirit, instructions, and the express and definite will of all our said Provinces, which have collectively, formally and solemnly declared their wish to become united in one Federative Union, which, entrusting to the entirety of the General Government the Powers proper and peculiar to the Nation, considered as one and indivisible, reserves for each of the Provinces its liberty, sovereignty, and independence, in all matters which do not concern the common weal, securing and guaranteeing to each of them these valuable prerogatives, as well as the integrity and inviolability of its Territories; we, concluding with this religious duty, and reserving for a more favourable opportunity, or for more tranquil times, the Constitution which shall definitively ascertain and secure the interests of this great People, have agreed upon, and do hereby agree upon, the following Federative Compacts: ART. 1. This Confederation shall be styled, The United Provinces of New Granada.
II. Into this Confederation are, from this time, admitted and considered as forming part thereof, all the Provinces which at the date of the Revolution of the Capital of Santa Fý, namely, on the 20th July, 1810, were regarded and reputed as such, and which, in the continuance and exercise of this right, assumed to themselves, from that epocha, their government and internal administration. This their admission shall, notwithstanding, in no way affect any Treaties or Conventions which the said Provinces have already made or entered into, or may hereafter be desirous of making or entering into; provided that such Treaties or Conventions are in no way prejudicial to the interests of the Union. III. Equally admissible into the Confederation are those Provinces or Populations which, although they belonged not, at the above period, to New Granada, yet being connected with it in a certain degree by their geographical position, by commercial relations or other similar causes, are now desirous of becoming associated with this Confederation, or with one of its adjoining Provinces. Such Union must, however, be preceded by the necessary Compacts and Negotiations with the States or Bodies Politic to which the Provinces so desiring association belonged, without whose consent and approbation no step of this kind can be taken. IV. The Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion shall be preserved in all its purity and integrity, in all and every one of the United Provinces of New Granada. V. All and each one of the Provinces now united, or which shall in future become united, of New Granada, or of other neighbouring States, shall expressly disavow and repudiate the authority of the Executive Power or Regency of Spain, the Cortes of Cadiz, Courts of Justice, and whatsoever other Authority, deputed or substituted by the present Authorities or by the People of the Peninsula, in Spain, in its adjacent Isles, or in any other part, without the free and spontaneous concurrence and consent of this Union. In none of the said Provinces, therefore, shall any obedience be paid, or effect given, to the Orders, Mandates, Decrees or Warrants, emanating from the above mentioned Authorities, or from any other appointed in the Peninsula, of whatever nature it may be, whether civil, ecclesiastical or military; since the said Provinces recognise as lawful, and undertake to obey, each in its District, those only whom their respective Inhabitants have invested with the Powers peculiar to each ; and beyond the said District, the Confederation of the United Provinces, in all matters delegated to them by this Act, and which properly belong to the preservation and furtherance of the objects of the Union. This Resolution, however, must in no way be considered as loosening in any degree the bonds of fraternity and friendship, or the commercial relations which unite us with those parts of Spain which are unoccupied by the Foreigner, provided that the Spanish Nation eschew all superiority over us, and entertain the same sentiments towards us that we entertain towards it. VI. The United Provinces of New Granada reciprocally recognise each other as equal, independent and sovereign; guaranteeing to each other the integrity of their Territories, their internal Administration, and a Republican form of Government. They also reciprocally promise to each other the firmest friendship and alliance, swear to preserve an inviolable fidelity, and bind themselves by a Compact as durable as the imperfect condition of humanity will allow. VII. The Provinces therefore reserve to themselves, by virtue of their indefeasible rights:-l. The power of forming a Government most suitable to their circumstances, although it must in every case be popular, representative, and similar to the General Government of the Union, in order that there may hence result among all a more perfect harmony, and an increased facility of administration, by a just distribution of their Powers, and by laying down the Rules by which their measures are to be regulated. 2. The Police, the interior or home administration of its Inhabitants, and appointment of every class of public Officers. 3. The formation of its Civil and Criminal Codes. 4. The establishment of Upper and Lower Courts of Justice, in which may be determined all questions of Law, of whatsoever degree or instance. 5. The creation and regulating of the Provincial Militias, the arming and disciplining them for its (the Province's) own defence, as well as for that of the whole Confederation, in case of need. 6. The formation of a private Treasury for their respective necessities, by means of such Taxes and Duties as may be considered most convenient, without prejudice to the Union or to the rights hereafter mentioned. 7. The protection and encouragement of agriculture, the arts, sciences, commerce, and whatsoever else can conduce to their happiness and prosperity. 8. Lastly. Whatsoever is not considered as connected with the common interest, or is not delegated to the General Government by the following Federative Compacts, is understood as being reserved and peculiar to the respective Provinces. But all those powers, resources and important relations of a State which cannot be exercised, employed or maintained without a general Representative System, without a concentration of the wealth belonging to each Province, and without the co-operation and efforts of them all, must be ceded in favour of the Union or General Government. VIII. For the better securing the enjoyment of such inestimable rights, consolidating this Union, and providing for the common defence, the United Provinces engage to afford each other mutually all the assistance necessary to repel every attack, whether from external or internal foes, which may be made in order to deprive them of the said privileges; contributing for this purpose arms, money and Men, and every other means in their power; without laying down their arms, or desisting from their efforts, until the danger has ceased and liberty be secured, whether it be that of the particular Province so threatened or invaded, or that of the entire Union. IX. They likewise reciprocally engage, that they will all concur in the general welfare, sacrificing their individual interests whenever the preservation of them would clash with those of the Union, preferring the latter, under every circumstance, to their own, and regarding the great People of New Granada, throughout all its Provinces, as Friends, Allies, Brothers and Fellow Citizens. X. As, however, it would be impossible to effect all these desirable objects without a Body who should be entrusted with these great and important Powers, and be at the same time the Conservator of the rights of the Nation, and the Director of its means and resources; the Deputies representing the Provinces, in virtue of their Full Powers already mentioned, will constitute themselves into a Body or Congress, in whom shall reside all the aforesaid Powers, as well as those which shall be hereafter enumerated; the said Body or Congress being composed for the present of 1 or 2 Individuals for each one of the Provinces, the most perfect equality being preserved; and at a subsequent period, of such a number of Representatives as shall bear a certain proportion to the Population of each Province, according to the basis or principle which shall then be laid down : provided, however, that in no case shall any Province, however small, be left without having one voice in the Congress. XI. The Congress of the United Provinces shall be installed or formed wherever it shall be judged most convenient transferring its seat successively, should it become necessary, wheresoever the interests of the Union, and more especially the common defence, shall require; and in whatsoever part or place it has its Session, there it shall exercise freely and securely, and in full sovereignty and independence, all the high Powers with which it is invested. XII. The common defence is one of the first and principal objects of this Union; and since this cannot be maintained without the help of arms, the Congress shall have the power of raising and forming the Armies it may judge necessary, as well as such Naval Forces as circumstances shall permit; all the Ships of War and Sea and Land Forces possessed by each of the Provinces being placed at its disposal, to be directed to whatever point, or employed upon whatever service, the Congress may deem fit: provided always, that whenever they are so employed under the orders of Congress, the Troops shall be paid, and all other expenses defrayed, out of the Common Treasury. XIII. The placing the Frontiers and Fortresses in a fit state of defence will depend solely upon the General Government, to whose direction such matters are properly entrusted ; but under present circumstances, in which dangers are pressing, and in which it would be difficult to meet them successfully without some immediate Authority to regulate and direct the necessary movements and operations, such Authority shall be for the present delegated to the respective Governments; with the express understanding, however, that the said Governments shall, in eases where the necessity is not urgent, render an account to, and await the orders of, Congress, and in all other cases make their Reports within a reasonable time. XIV. The above provisions respecting the Land Forces must be understood as applying to those of the Sea, as well as to all warlike Establishments, whose direction, organization, and appointment of Officers of every rank, as well as the construction of Arsenals and fortified Harbours, and the building and arming of Ships of War, belong exclusively to the authority of Congress : they shall, however, remain for the present under the immediate inspection of the respective Governments, subject to the restrictions and limitations already mentioned. XV. The Congress shall have the power of assigning to each of the Provinces the number of Militia which it ought to contribute towards the common defence; and this quota shall be regulated by the circumstances in which the said Province is placed, with respect to the Enemy, its resources of this description, and the number of its Population. The Province shall cause them to march, fully clothed, armed and equipped, within the time prescribed, and to the place appointed ; but the expenses incurred from the time of their entering the service of the Union shall be paid out of the Common Treasury, precisely as is directed with respect to the Regular Troops. The Officers of both these descriptions of Troops, up to tie rank of Colonel inclusive, shall be appointed by the Provinces; but from that rank upwards their appointment shall rest with the Congress, more especially that of the Commanders or Generals in Chief of any Expedition. XVI. The Provinces shall provide themselves as quickly as possible with the necessary arms,-muskets, sabres, &c., to the use of which their Population is accustomed, or in which they are in future to be duly trained and exercised, and more especially with cannon, battering trains, and field guns, and the requisite ammunition, all of which shall be kept ready for service in magazines and store-ionses. XVII. For the same purpose, no time shall be lost in disciplining the said Troops, in forming them into Corps and Companies according. to the extent of the Population, and in exercising them once or twice in every week, (principally on holidays, after attending Mass at their respective Parishes,) an occupation which, independently of its utility for the Country, and for the Men themselves, in withdrawing them from other pursuits not equally healthy, may in the present day be considered as most acceptable in the eyes of the Divinity, inasmuch as they will be employed for the defence of their native land, of their dearest rights, and of the menaced religion of their Forefathers: a truth which should be particularly impressed upon their Parishioners by the Priests appointed by the Civil Law, except when, as is hardly to be expected, this sacred duty shall have been spontaneously performed. XVI. The Congress shall have the power of making and issuing the orders and regulations, whether general or particular, which are requisite for the direction and government of the Land and Sea Forces during the time they are on foot; the same power shall also extend to the Militias of all the Provinces, the latter being entrusted with the care of instructing and disciplining them in conformity with those orders, to the end that under any circumstances, one uniform system throughout the Armies of the Union may be depended upon. But upon the cessation of the state of War in which the Country is now actually engaged, no Province shall maintain any Regular Troops, or Ships of War, except such as may be absolutely necessary for the protection of the Frontiers, the garrisoning of Fortresses and the protection of commerce; and these Troops must be at the disposal of, and subject to, the authority of Congress. XIX. Such Ports and Provinces of New Granada as still groan under the oppression of their ancient Tyrants, shall be the first objects of the tender and protective solicitude of the Congress ; the former being secured from all external invasion, and the latter freed from the chains with which they are now ignominiously bound, in order that, the yoke being shaken off, and the open expression of their will secured to then, they may form themselves into so many free and independent Governments, similar to those of which this Union is now so happily composed. XX. But as nothing of this kind can be effected, without a National Fund or Common Treasury, sufficient to meet the great expenses which are required for the salvation of the Country and for the common security, at a period when we have to contend with Enemies both at home and abroad, or with such at least as prudence bids us to fear, and when the more effectually to avoid or vanquish them, it is necessary that we should be fore-armed; the Congress shall have the power to impose Taxes, levy Contributions, or fix Duties, upon all such objects and materials as are in general request, and are not peculiar or exclusive to any Province in particular, and also to allot quotas, or extraordinary contingents to each of the said Provinces, in the ratio of its Population, and other circumstances, and invariably in a just and equitable proportion. These quotas or contingents shall be levied and received by the respective Boards, Juntas, or Governments, without excuse or denial; the said Boards, Juntas, or Governments being held responsible to the other Provinces for whatever evils the said Commission may cause, and subject to such measures as the Congress shall, in its wisdom, think fit to adopt, in order to enforce the payment of the said quota or contingent, or to secure it in any other way, at the expense of the Province so failing in, or being neglectful of, its duty. XXI. In virtue, therefore, of these principles, and considering as homogeneous the Custom-house Duties of the Ports, Citadels, or Frontier Towns, in which places only the said Duties could have any relation with Foreign commerce; considering also that the said Duties are either directly or indirectly exacted from all the Provinces of the Union, into which the articles of merchandise which enter the Country by the said Ports or Frontier Towns are introduced, circulated, and consumed ; the Custom-house Duties and whatever is derived therefrom shall belong to the common weal, and shall constitute one of the Funds of the Confederation ; and the said Ports, Citadels, or Frontier Towns shall not therefore hinder or obstruct Foreign commerce, (under which term is to be understood even that of Spain, or of the Ports of the Spanish Peninsula, the Isles adjacent, and other States, Kingdoms, Provinces, Islands or Continents of America which form no part of New Granada,) by fresh Duties, or any kind of obstacles which may be prejudicial to the public good, and which shall not have been already established, approved, and decreed by the General Congress. XXII. To the common Fund of the Congress also belong the proceeds of the Mints now in the Kingdom itself as well as those of all others which may be hereafter established in any of the Provinces of the Union; and to it alone belongs the right of coining money, fixing the standard, and assigning the value. In consequence of this principle, the 2 existing Mints of Santafo and Popayan shall be forthwith placed under the direct and exclusive authority of the Congress; and all their proceeds shall be at its disposal. XXIII. To the liberality of the Provinces is left the disposal of those Common Lands which lie within the known and inhabited limits of their Territories, and which at some future day, by the settlement and naturalization of Foreigners, or the increase of the Population, may be productive of a considerable income to the Congress; but the Congress will consider as indisputably belonging to it, all such as may at present be considered as waste, or having no Owner or Owners, on account of their being uninhabited, and beyond the known limits of the said Provinces, although comprehended under the general demarkation of the Kingdom and the Boundary Lines which divide them from other Powers and States, or ancient Viceroyalties ; such as those which are watered by the Amazon, Napo, Putumayo, Caqueta, Guaviari, and other Rivers which discharge themselves either into tie first-mentioned stream, or into the vast Orinoco, and on the banks of which, in process of time, will be established new Nations which may form part of this Union, and on which it behoves us at least to maintain Frontier Towns, that shall separate and divide us from the neighbouring Nations which now occupy the Eastern Coast of South America. XXIV. The wandering Tribes, or.Nations of Wild Indians, which are located or established within the said Territories, shall not on this account be molested or suffer the least annoyance or persecution ; on the contrary they shall be respected as legitimate and ancient Proprietors, and shall have extended to them the benefits of civilization and religion, through the medium of commerce, and all other conciliatory means suggested by reason and dictated by Christian charity, and which alone become a civilized and cultivated People : such are the measures to be adopted towards those Tribes, unless indeed their hostilities should compel us to pursue another course. XXV. For the same reason, we may enter into Treaties and Negotiations with such Tribes upon these subjects, protecting their rights with that spirit of humanity and philosophy which is required by their present state of imbecility, and by a consideration of the evils, which, without our participation or connivance, may have been caused to them by their Conquerors. XXV 1. But if within the known limits of the Provinces, or between those of one Province and another, there should be Tribes of this description already established, who might conveniently form part of this Union, or of the Provinces themselves, more especially if they be not weighed down by an ignominious Tribute, nor by a cruel and despotic Government, like that which has oppressed their Brethren for 300 years ; such Tribes or Nations shall be invited and attracted by mild and friendly overtures, such, for instance, as those afforded by Treaty and by commerce, to associate themselves with us; their religion being considered no obstacle thereto, since that must inevitably sooner or later yield to truth, convinced as these Heathens must then be, by the light of reason and by the doctrines of that Gospel to which they are at present strangers. XXVII. The Congress may also consider, as forming one of its Funds, any Mine of the precious metals which is not, as yet, the property of any Province in particular, or which any such Province may voluntarily cede to the Union, or which the latter shall acquire and purchase with its own funds, in order to work it for the advantage and profit of the State, as is now the practice in all those Governments which are able by this means to lighten the burdens, whether direct or indirect, of their People; an advantage which is still further increased by the honest means afforded by these establishments for the employment and occupation of great numbers of the Population. XXVIII. In like manner shall be considered as belonging to Congress the establishment of any large Manufactory or invention, more particularly any for the support or working of which the resources of the Province are inadequate. But in this, as in the former case (that of Mines), the Union shall take especial care not to engage in projects which too often have in them more of show and ostentation than of real utility, or which are calculated for other times than the present. The contents, therefore, of these 2 Articles (the XXVIIth and XXVIIIth) will be chiefly to convince the Provinces that the Taxes now raised are only temporary, that their condition will one day be ameliorated, and that when we can calmly devote ourselves to the furtherance of the common good, without exacting from the Provinces burdensome impositions, all the resources of the State, and all the cares of a paternal Government, will flow in one large stream for their general benefit and prosperity. XXIX. Il, notwithstanding these measures, the Union shall not succeed in covering the expenses of the State, which is certainly under existing circumstances impossible, the Congress shall devise and carry into effect whatever plans it may judge expedient, such as borrowing money upon its funds and revenues, the issue of paper money, or any other expedients which necessity, the urgency of the moment, and the decided resolution of the Provinces to establish and preserve their freedom may suggest, allow, and require to be accomplished, in order to obtain so inestimable a good. XXX. When the difficulties in which we are involved shall have been removed or surmounted, and when safe and triumphant, the state of the Nation shall enable the Congress to direct its attention to its internal welfare, its first care shall he to employ its funds in introducing into the Country the arts and sciences with which we are unacquainted, in promoting agriculture, facilitating commerce, opening canals of communication, rendering rivers navigable, and widening, shortening, and improving the public roads; in short, in procuring for this happy land all the benefits, and all the good which it may be within our power to secure, benefits which will be hailed by future Generations as the fruit of those anxious cares to which we have devoted ourselves for the sake of our beloved Country. XXXI. But besides the matters already considered, namely, such as relate to the defencresourcese of the Union and the resources upon which we may reckon, there are others which equally belong to Congress, as well from their common nature, the general interest of the Provinces, and the Sovereign authority possessed by Congress alone, for regulating or administering them, as the great representative Body of the Nation : these matters shall be explained, defined, and made known in the following Articles. XXXII. The proceeds from the Post Office, and its subordinate branches, such as the Posting Houses (Postas) and Money Offices (Ewomiendas), equally belong to the Congress, and is, less on account of the proceeds or profits accruing therefrom, as on account of the nature of that Establishment, which requires to be regulated upon one uniform system. Under the direction, therefore, of the Congress, the Post Office shall be administered and managed throughout the whole extent of the United Provinces, both by sea and land ; nor shall there henceforth at any of the Ports be paid charges or fees for the repairs or freightage (carenas, soldadas), of any Packet-Boats, excepting such as are sent by, or are under the authority and orders of the Congress. XXXIII. The Weights and Measures, in the same manner as the current Coin, together with the respective regulations for each, belong exclusively to the Congress, and no Province can, separately and of itself, alter or change them. Until the Congress shall determine otherwise, the same weights and measures which have been hitherto in general use, and which are known by all the People of Spanish America, as well as by Foreigners, shall be still continued. XXXIV. The Public Roads of the Kingdom, and those from Province to Province, the Rivers which are navigable or may be made so, the Harbours, Wharfs, Canals, Docks, and Bridges, and the Ferries of the said Rivers, Places of egress and ingress, and everything of this description which may be considered as of one common character and belonging to the Provinces in general, are under the authority of the Congress, and shall continue in the same state as to freedom of communication as heretofore: no one of the Provinces being allowed to interpose obstacles or impediments to the free transit of the Citizens and their effects, nor to place restrictions and limitations, nor to levy tolls, whether of bridges or ferries, greater than those to which their respective Inhabitants have been accustomed, and which do not press more particularly and immediately upon those of other Provinces. XXXV. To Congress also belongs the regulation of the Duty upon Internal Commerce between Province and Province; nevertheless there shall for the present be no alteration in the established practice, nor in the application of its produce, unless a change be required by the necessities of the State, the general welfare, or the representations of the Provinces themselves; provided always, that by such change no injury be done to Foreign trade, as was provided above with regard to the Duties of Ports and Frontier Towns. Any Province is empowered, for the benefit of its own trade, to prohibit the importation of certain specified articles of commerce for internal consumption, or to impose a new Duty upon them, but in this case, notice of such intention must be given to Congress, and its approbation obtained ; this, however, must not be done with respect to other Provinces, which have the right of free passage through such Province, even so far as regards prohibited goods or articles of commerce, unless it be ordered to the contrary by Congress. XXXVI. A like exception from the general rule for the liberty of Internal Commerce is made in favour of useful discoveries, the printing or re-printing of original works of genius or of new translations, and the large establishments of machinery and manufactures unknown in this Country ; in favour of which the Congress shall give when it thinks fit, with the necessary limitations and restrictions, and for a limited time, exclusive privileges for the encouragement and advantage of their Authors or Introducers: with which privileges the Provinces cannot interfere. XXXVII. No change is at present made in the Commerce established and allowed with Friendly and Neutral Nations, who shall continue to keep up the relations of this description which they now maintain with us, nor shall they experience the least annoyance or molestation, whilst they continue in the same amicable and friendly disposition. But the moment that they break out into hostilities, or cause them to be declared against us in any way whatsoever, by assisting our Enemies, invading our Coasts, seizing our Vessels and cargoes, or molesting our Merchants and Travellers, Members of this Union, in their persons and property, on account of the Cause which is now embraced by almost all the ancient Kingdoms of New Granada, or under any other pretext, the Congress shall resent with all the power and by every means which it possesses, the wrongs and injustice which have been committed; it shall allow just reprisals, give Letters of marque, and obtain ample reparation for such acts of violence. No Province, however, shall separately and of itself have the right of acting in this manner, either in arming Privateers, giving Letters of marque, making reprisals, or entering into hostilities, even in the case of real grievance, until after a formal Declaration of War has been made by the Congress; unless, in the event of sudden invasion or other imminent danger, when it might not be practicable or prudent to consult the Congress, in order to await its determination. . XXXVIII. The Legal Decisions upon the Prizes which in consequence of the above and similar circumstances may be made, either at sea or on land by our Vessels of War, the regulations concerning them or their execution, the punishment of crimes and piracies committed on the high Seas, and the Courts of Justice which are to take cognizance thereof, as well as of whatever appertains to the Maritime Jurisdiction, belong also to the Congress. XXXIX. In pursuance of the system of peace and amity which we intend to observe with all Nations who respect our rights and do not meditate hostilities, we shall give an asylum in our Ports and inland Provinces to all Foreigners who may be desirous of residing peaceably amongst us, and of subjecting themselves to the Laws of this Union, as well as to those peculiar to the Province in which they may reside; the more especially if, in addition to the praiseworthy intentions with which they come amongst us, they bring with them and carry on in our Country any kind of trade useful to the land of their adoption, and by which they can gain their livelihood. For which purpose they shall have a deed of naturalization, or permission from the Congress, before which Body they must, more particularly in times when it would be dangerous to permit an unrestricted immigration, establish the truth of the circumstances which have induced them to seek our shores. XL. The Congress has the exclusive management and direction of the Foreign relations, whether it be with Foreign Nations, or with the other Governments and States of America which are not incorporated in this Union; and no Province can separately and of itself enter into, with any one of them, Treaties of Amity, Union, Alliance, Commerce, Boundaries, &c., nor declare War, or make Peace, not consequently receive or sen.d Agents as Bearers of Negotiations, Consuls, Commissioners or Public Negotiators of any kind; and in case of Negotiations or Missions being proposed to them, it is their duty to forward intelligence thereof immediately to the General Congress, dispatching at the same time to that Body all the official communications which they have received touching the matter. XLI. Among the external relations to be maintained hy Congress is one, the importance of which cannot be too strongly impressed upon the Provinces,-that with the Apostolic See, by means of which the spiritual necessities of the Faithful in these remote parts may be supplied : this sacred object ivill be best accomplished by promoting the creation of Bishoprics and other religious establishments, of which there is so great a need, and which have been so much neglected under the old Government, and by the obtaining of Rescripts and Concordats, a duty which, conformably to the practice and general rule of all Catholic Nations, is imperative upon the Supreme Power of a State, in order to secure the spiritual welfare of its Subjects. XLII. It also belongs to Congress to decide upon the subject of Church'Patronage, which the Kings ofSpain have hitherto exercised in America, both with respect to the Provinces of New Granada collectively, and to each of them separately, its permanency, its regulation, the application of its proceeds, and other circumstances connected with it ; for the better considering and determining of which, the Congress shall, if it judge fit, receive the opinions of the different Prelates, Universities, Chapters, and other Ecclesiastical Bodies, or shall call together a National Council, which may duly deliberate upon these and other points of Church Discipline, that are rendered so absolutely necessary by the interruption of our communications with the Holy See, an interruption which, it is apprehended, may yet continue for some time: in the meanwhile the necessities of the Church are daily increasing, and the Faithful are in want of those spiritual resources which should be provided for them by the Supreme Power of a State, as the natural Protector of the Church, and as the Conservator of one of the most important rights of the People,-its religion and conscience.
XLIII. The Provinces cannot conclude, among themselves reciprocally, any Treaties of Friendship, Union, Alliance, Commerce, &c., without the express knowledge and approval of the Congress: such Treaties will however be permitted, when not prejudicial to the general interests, or to those of a third Province; and such as have been made up to the 20th July, 1810, the epocha as already mentioned of tie political change of the Government, shall be likewise submitted for the sanction of the Congress ; but they can and do possess no effect in anything whatsoever contained in them, which is contrary to the compacts of this Union. XLIV. The Congress shall take cognizance of all disputes now pending, or which nay hereafter arise between one Province and another, concerning the limits of its Territory, Jurisdiction, Commerce, or any other object whatsoever, in which both Parties being at the same time interested they cannot also be Judges ; and more especially when such disputes or pretensions are of so much importance as to be prejudicial to the general welfare, and liable to disturb the peace of the other Provinces. For the same reason, no Government of any one of the Provinces can admit into or incorporate with its Territory any other People, even though it be declared that this is done with the voluntary consent of such People themselves, or of their respective Province, unless the arrangement shall have been communicated to Congress, and its consent obtained. XLV. But this shall in no respect prevent the voluntary union or association of any Provinces or People with others, whenever it is required by the general welfare or by the particular interests of the said Provinces or People, for the better regulation of their internal Government, the administration of justice, and other benefits resulting from union or incorporation. On the contrary, Congress will be inclined to promote such unions, if by these means the limits of Territories can be better regulated, and the Provinces, when they are disproportioned or dissimilar in point of extent,.can he more equalized so as to bear a more adequate ratio to the whole Confederation : in this case, indeed, it becomes the duty of the Congress to decree such incorporation, accession, or union, at least for a time, then the Province in its then actual state, being deficient in resources or finding it impossible to contribute like the rest to the general good, necessarily requires such a measure, not only for its own well being but also for that of the others ; until, by the increase of its population and its resources, it obtains its independence, which from that moment is guaranteed by the Congress itself. XLVI. The People belonging to a Province who may dissent from any proposed measure, must accede to the wish of the majority of that body politic of which they form a part ; but if any differences should arise between 2 Parties alike powerful, which differences, from the impossibility of their being amicably adjusted between the said Parties themselves, and from there being no fundamental Laws or principles mutually agreed upon by which the question might be decided, require the formal decision of an impartial Arbitrator, the said Parties shall submit themselves, before having recourse to the dangerous and always fatal expedient of Arms, to the decision of Congress ; which Authority, without interfering in what does not immediately concern it, shall adjust the dispute with as much impartiality as good feeling, suggesting every means and topic of conciliation, and ultimately laying down the rules which ought to regulate the 2 Parties. XLVII. The Congress shall take cognizance of and decide upon the Law-suits and disputes between Citizens of different Provinces, those between one of the latter and the Inhabitants of another, and in general all those in which, the common interests of the Union being concerned, or the respective Powers of the Provinces not being sufficient to decide the matters in question, or to make their judgment when pronounced duly respected by either one or both of the Disputants, an Appeal to a superior and an impartial Tribunal becomes necessary. XLVIII. The free Inhabitants of all and each of the Provinces shall have the right of entering the Territory of the others, of trafficking and trading in them, and of enjoying all the privileges and immunities of free Citizens, without any of the charges or restrictions to which the Inhabitants themselves are subject, and without any obstacle or hindrance being opposed either to their passage into other Provinces, or to their return, with the goods and effects belonging to then, to the Place from whence they may have come. They shall, however, in the mean time remain subject to the Laws of the particular Province in which they reside, trade, traffic, or perambulate. XLIX. From this rule must be excepted Beggars, Vagrants, and such Persons as have fled from justice, or for crimes committed in the Province whence they have escaped; who at the demand of the respective Governments shall be given up, without denial or excuse, together with all their property and effects. L. For these and all other judicial proceedings which may occur between one Province and another, due credit and authority shall be given to their respective Protests, Registers, Legal Instruments, Warrants, Requisitions,&c., the same being authenticated and legalized in the accustomed forms; and every means shall be taken to preserve a perfect harmony and good understanding, the better to insure the due administration of justice between the different Provinces. LI. But as up to the present time the due number of Deputies of which the Congress should consist, according to the first convocation of it by the former Junta of Santa Fý cannot be assembled ; partly on account of the oppression under which, as has been said, several of the Provinces that were to return them have laboured, and partly on account of the difficulties which have surrounded others who are disposed to exert their right ; the latter at least must be urged to complete, as they have formerly done, the said nominations, and to cause their Deputies to proceed upon their journey with the utmost expedition ; each Province nominating not one only, but two, distinguished as first and second, as other Provinces have done, and as is already the practice with those who at the commencement had only chosen one, in virtue of the said convoking: by which means not only the inconveniences arising from sickness, absence, or any other cause which may deprive the Province of its Representative, are obviated, but by a division of their powers, there will be a greater facility in the exercise of them, in the formation of Committees, and in going through the important business which must now engage the attention of the Congress. LII. The Deputies, whether they be one or two for each Province, shall always have equal votes: and as they are to consider themselves, as to the objects of their appointment, rather as tie Representatives of the Union in general than of any Province in particular, since without the safety and well-being of the former, all efforts in favour of the latter 'would be null and of no effect, they shall deliberate and vote with full and absolute freedom ; provided that they do not contravene the fundamental principles and compacts of this Union, that they prefer the good of all to that of their own Province in particular, and that they follow the dictates of their conscience in what it prescribes to them, even when they have instructions to the contrary. Such instructions, however, cannot be anticipated, nor can they be imagined to be given deliberately and with a perfect knowledge of their consequences. Whilst no Deputy acting with good faith shall incur any risk on account of bis vote or opinion, the Provinces, nevertheless, may revoke the powers given to him whenever they please, and transfer them to another, who shall be bis Substitute. LIII. For the same reason, they shall have perfect and absolute freedom in the debates, nor can they in any other place be accused, prosecuted or tried for what they may have written or spoken in the exercise of their duties in Congress; on the contrary, they shall be free and exempt from all arrest and imprisonment, during the time of their Sessions, and on their road to and from the place of their residence, or when employed upon any commission; unless and except for some capital crime or other delinquency which is punished by infamy or the confiscation of property, for treason or secret conspiracy against the State, or for disturbing the public peace and tranquillity. LIV. The Congress can also, for just and lawful reasons, remove any Deputy, who has rendered himself liable to such a proceeding, by his misconduct, or by such reprehensible excesses as may compromise the honour of the Body at large, the secrecy of their deliberations, or the general good and interests of the Union ; and the Province which he represents shall, without objection or excuse, deprive him of bis powers and nominate another in bis place. LV. In the aforesaid cases, if the delinquencies or crimes committed by a Deputy be such as are injurious to the Union, and are subject to the cognizance of Congress ; so soon as the said Deputy shall have been expelled therefrom by a formal resolution to that effect, lie shall be given over to the Judicial Court of the Congress, by which he shall be tried and punished according to Law; but if it be a common crime, having no connexion with bis representative functions, he shall be placed at the disposal of his Province, in order to be prosecuted at its suit. LVI. The Deputies shall from this time henceforth continue in the exercise of their functions for the time appointed by their Provinces; but it is recommended to the latter, that, their Representatives being 2 in number, as above mentioned, each of them should be renewed annually, commencing with the earliest- or first, an operation which might be effected in the next year, 1812, so that the newly elected might all enter upon their duties, if possible, at the same time, viz., on the 1st of January, 1813. LVII. The Congress cannot determine the important questions of :-the declaration of War, or the conclusion of Peace ;-the number of Troops and the sum of money to be furnished by the Provinces for the common defence, or for that of any one of them in particular ;the building or purchasing', and the arming, of Ships of War ;-the conclusion of Treaties of Alliance, Commerce, Boundaries, &c., with Foreign Nations or States ;-the imposition of Taxes ;-the granting of Letters of marque and reprisal in time of Peace ;-the borrowing of money upon the credit of the revenues of the United Provinces ;-the alteration of the law and value of the current money ;-the admission of Foreign coin, and the fixing the value of the same;-the issue of paper money ;-nor the alteration of the weights and measures in present use. It cannot determine upon matters connected with ecclesiastical patronage or abuses, in which the supreme power of a State ought naturally to interfere ;-the expulsion of a Deputy for conduct reprehensible in bis private as well as in bis public capacity ;-the appointment of Generals in Chief or Commanders by sea and land, and Consuls and other public Agents in Foreign States;-unless with the concurrent and unanimous votes of 2-third parts of the Deputies actually present in the place of the Session of the Congress. It is equally incapable of naming and appointing the Secretaries of State, the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Commissioners, Accountants and Treasurers of the Customs, Superintendents, Accountants and Treasurers of Mints, Administrators and Accountants-General of the Post-office, the Captain of its Guard, and to the other principal employments of responsibility and confidence ;-unless with the concurrent and unanimous votes of 2.thirds of the Members present, which ought to be at least 2-third parts of the number of Members resident in the place where the Congress holds its Sessions. The other questions of Government shall be decided by the majority of the said 2-third parts of concurrent and approving votes ; that is to say, by 7 votes, if the said 2 concurring parts were for example 112. A less number than these 2-third parts, qualified to vote in the Congress, could only adjourn the question to another day, or debate upon the means of enforcing the attendance of the other Deputies, by the infliction of the pains and penalties provided for that purpose by the Congress itself for the due regulation of its duties and proceedings. The Deputies, therefore, shall submit to all the decisions and resolutions made and determined upon in this manner, even when contrary to their own judgment, and shall subscribe to, obey, and fulfil them : in like manner they shall be consented to by the respective Provinces, since they will have become, by the approval of the Deputies, part of the Law of the Union : the Deputies, however, shall possess the right of protest, and may even insist upon the publicity of their protests, where the nature of the question does not require secresy or reservation, in which case their votes shall be entered on the Journals; and when the cause which required secresy no longer exists, they may be published. LVIII. The stipends, fees, or salaries of their Representatives must, for the present, be at the charge of the Provinces ; until they can be provided out of the General Fund of the Congress, the number of the Representatives permanently fixed, and the powers of the Union distributed. LIX. The exercise of these powers belongs to Congress, over all the objects within its control ; but as the Judicial branch would distract much of its attention from other more important branches, such for instance as the common defence and the general welfare of the Union, the Congress shall create, from without its body, whatever Court or Courts it may think fit for the proper administration of justice ; reserving tie executive and legislative branches for its own management and direction, whether in its totality or by sections, according to the number of Deputies and the gravity of the matters which may occupy its attention. LX. For the due organization of these powers, and the more punctual discharge of its duties, the Congress shall make such regulations as it may judge fit, until a definitive Constitution shall settle the details of the general government of the Union. LXI. When the dangers by which we are now encompassed shall have been removed, the Provinces which are definitively to compose the Union consolidated, and their Population exactly known, for which object, as well as others, they have been called upon to exert their energies, and to lose no time in forwarding their Registers drawn up with all the accuracy and distinctness in their power, the Grand National Convention shall be convoked upon this same basis of the Population, in order to establish for themselves the said Constitution ; unless the Provinces prefer to commit this work to the Congress, subject notwithstanding to their sanction and approval. LXII. For this purpose the materials shall be prepared, with all the prudence, discretion, and observation acquired by experience ; and all Persons belonging to the Union, who are distinguished by their superior sagacity, shall be invited to offer their ideas, and enlighten their fellow Citizens, that they may become disposed towards a liberal Government. LXIII. Prosecutions or suits at law belonging to the Congress, either for the infraction of its Laws, or any other delinquency which may come within its exclusive jurisdiction, and which Suits should be carried on at a distance from the place of its sitting, in order not to harass the litigating Parties with appeals, shall, at least in the first Instances, be heard and determined by Commissions or Delegations, and by such means as may be considered the most equitable, impartial, and the best calculated to discover the truth, and to secure the proper administration of justice; reserving always the last Instance, should the affair require such a step, for the High Court, which must hold its sittings within tie immediate vicinity of Congress. LXIV. But the Citizens of any Province shall be allowed, if they think fit,to appeal, and to carry their suits, pleas, or differences before the respective Courts of the Defendants appealed against, and to covenant so to do by the usual legal instruments and contracts, renouncing every other right to which they are entitled, and submitting to the Laws and Judges of the Country to which they have appealed ; and having once made this submission or renunciation, so far as it is not prejudicial to the Union, but advantageous to the private rights of the said Citizens, they shall not be at liberty to revoke or desist from it, but shall be compelled to abide by it fully and absolutely. LXV. They are also allowed to decide their differences by means of Arbitrators, if they consider it convenient ; such Arbitrators being chosen from among the Citizens of both Provinces to which the Litigants belong, or else from out of one of them, or, indeed, of a third ; subject always to the regulations and penalties made and provided thereupon, and with the express condition that no prejudice or harm can accrue therefrom to the Union. LXVI. Neither shall any innovation be introduced into the Causes or law suits now pending in the Provincial Courts of Justice; the Citizens voluntarily submitting to, and acquiescing in, the settlement of all matters affecting their interests by the Courts in which their suits were commenced. LXVII. The Congress shall create such subordinate Offices and Employments as may be required for the despatch of its affairs, and as experience may suggest, and shall select for the said Offices the Citizens best qualified to fill them, in like manner as for its Judicial Courts and Commissions. It being distinctly understood that all Officers and Employees who are in the pay of the Union, cannot be, at the same time, in the service of any particular Province, nor receive any pension, fee, or present from it, either directly or indirectly : the same must be understood of the Members or Persons composing the Congress. LXVIII. Neither can any one belonging to either of these two descriptions of Persons, receive presents, emoluments, commissions, employments, personal titles or distinctions, or hereditary honours from any Foreign Prince, King, or State; nor can the Congress grant any favours, the consequence of which would be to introduce a division of classes among the Citizens, and which could only be invented to compromise the liberty of the People. It may however reward, in some other manner, the illustrious and heroic actions by which the said Citizens may signalize themselves, but with the greatest reserve and discretion; taking care that the rewards be directed rather to the encouragement of virtue and patriotism than to the fostering of vanity and pride. LXIX. The style and appellation of the Congress shall be that of Alteza Serenissima; that of the President, when addressed by other Authorities, or in the official Communications made by him, shall be Escelencies, as shall also be that of the Executive Power, should one be created ; that of the Commissioners, or separate Members of the Congress, Ministers or Secretaries, when addressed officially, Senorias; when in their private capacity, either verbally or in writing, Merced, like every other Citizen; and that which is given by the Congress, its President, the Executive Power, Commissioners, or Individuals, to the Provincial Governments and Legislatures, Eseelencia or Senoria, as may be the practice in their respective Constitutions. With respect to Foreign Governments, and other independent Governments, they shall be addressed according to usage, or by the titles which they have assumed to themselves. LXX. The Congress shall have a limited National Guard, intended for the dignity of that Assembly, rather than for useless show and pomp, with the view of saving expense as much as possible. LXXI. The Confederation shall have a Private Seal, with which shall be sealed Patents, Despatches, Warrants, and other official Documents requiring it: the infraction or the counterfeiting of this Seal, equally with that of the current Coin, or of any other security belonging to the Union, shall be liable to the present penalties in force, and to such in addition as may be rendered necessary by the nature and enormity of the offence. LXXII. The Laws which in these and similar cases shall be henceforth in force in the different Courts of Justice throughout the Union, are those by which we have hitherto been governed in all such matters ; provided they be not contrary to the spirit of the present Articles, nor incompatible with the actual state of things, nor prejudicial to the political situation of the Kingdom or Provinces of New Granada. LXXIII. Every 6 months, or at least every year, the Congress shall publish the state of its funds, expenses, debts, revenues, expenditures, and present resources, distinguishing the different branches from whence the said funds, &c., are derived, and the objects upon which they have been employed ; and there shall also, from time to time, be printed the Records of its proceedings or deliberations, so far as can be done consistently with prudence. LXXIV. Nothing whatsoever which is contained in the present Act can be recalled or revoked, without the express consent of the Provinces, for which reason, as their sanction is indispensable, their opinion must be, as it either has been or will be heard; and nothing which shall be done or effected contrary thereto shall possess any authority or force whatsoever, as being done contrary to their express and declared will. LXXV. Should matters of grave importance arise, which have not been comprehended in the Articles of this Confederation, nor in its general Rules, and which also require the consent of the Provinces, they shall be consulted thereupon, provided that the delay in so doing be not attended with danger; but should that be the case, such measures as may be considered most judicious shall be provisionally adopted, subject always to the sanction of the said Provinces. LXXVI. The Articles of this Union being once agreed to, no Province shall have the power to refuse to carry them into effect, and may be compelled so to do by every means which are at the disposal of the Congress, and of the other Provinces adhering to it ; and the Provinces solemnly oblige themselves to accomplish this duty, without any excuse or subterfuge, to which they pledge their honour and good faith. LXXVII. The present Act shall be presented for the ratification or sanction of the Provinces, through the medium of its Legislatures, Juntas, or Provincial Governments, fully and duly authorized to that effect; a mode of procedure which must be observed in future in all similar cases. LXXVIII. The Provinces or their Representative and Legislative Bodies shall give, with as little delay as possible, their ratification, approbation, or observations upon the said Act in general, or upon one or any of its Articles in particular; hut as in the mean time we are pressed by circumstances, and as all or almost all the Provinces which have been able to express themselves freely upon this subject, have declared their determination to become united upon the principles which all agree to be those which our present situation most impeiiously demands; which are the only ones that can save us; which have been adopted and followed by the wisest Nations; and which now constitute their happiness and felicity; the present Deputies will con. tinue to accomplish the objects of their powers and instructions by forming themselves for that purpose into a Congress, a n in directing their labours and exertions to whatever they may believe to be essential for the public welfare and security. Given in a Convention of the Deputies, at Santafý de Bogota, on the 27th of November, in the year of our Lord 1811. JOSE MANUEL RESTREPO, Deputyfor the Province of Antioquia. HENRIQUE RODRIGUEZ, Deputg for the Province of Carthagena. MANUEL CAMPOS, Deputyfor Ihe Province of Ney a. CAMILO TORRES, Deputyfor the Province of Pamplona. JOAQUIN CAMACHO, Deputyfor the Province of Tunja. JOSE MANUEL RESTREPO, Secretary.