In the name of God, supreme source of all authority, we, the delegates of the Colombian States of Antioquia, Bolivar, Boyaca, Cauca, Cundinamarca, Magdalena, Panama, Santander, and Tolima, in national constitutional convention assembled, taking into consideration that the municipalities of Colombia have given their approval to the bases for a Constitution framed on the first day of December, eighteen hundred and eighty-five, and animated by the desire of strengthening the national unity, establishing justice, and insuring the benefits of liberty and peace, have decided to decree, as we do hereby decree, the following political Constitution of Colombia:
TITLE I. THE NATION AND ITS TERRITORY<title>
ARTICLE 1. 
The Colombian Nation is reorganized as a unitary Republic. 
ART. 2. 
The sovereignty is essentially and exclusively vested in the nation, and from that source all the public powers, which shall be exercised within the limits proscribed by this constitution, emanate. 
ART. 3. 
The boundaries of the Republic are the same which in eighteen hundred and ten separated the viceroyalty of Granada from the captaincies general of Venezuela and Guatemala, from the viceroyalty of Peru, and from the Portuguese possessions of Brasil; and with respect to Ecuador, they shall be the ones provisionally designated in the treaty of July ninth, eighteen hundred and fifty-six. 
The lines separating Colombia from the bordering nations shall be definitely fixed by public treaties, which shall be at liberty to deviate from the principle uti possidetis de jure, recognized in eighteen hundred and ten. 
ART. 4. 
The territory, together with the public property forming a part thereof, exclusively belongs to the Nation. 
The sections of the Colombian Union, which were called States and national Territories, shall continue to form part of the territory of the Republic of Colombia, retaining their present limits under the name of Departments. 
All doubtful boundaries shall be determined by surveying commissions appointed by the Senate. 
The national territories of former times shall be annexed to the sections to which they originally belonged.
ART. 5. 
New departments may be created by law by dividing those existing at present; but the division shall not be made; except at the request of four-fifths of the municipal councils of the territory of the proposed new Department, and upon the following conditions: 
<list>
1. That the new Department has at least, a population of two hundred thousand inhabitants. 
2. That the Department or Departments out of which the new one is to be created are left with a population of at least two hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants each.3. That the law creating the new Department has been passed by two successive regular sessions of Congress.
</list>
ART. 6. 
The present limits of the Departments shall not be changed except by a law passed, as directed in the last clause of the preceding article. Congress may, by means of a law passed in the usual manner without the above-mentioned requisite, segregate from the Departments to which they are now united, or to which they formerly belonged, the territories referred to in article 4, or the islands, and dispose of them as it may deem proper.
ART. 7. 
Besides the general division of the territory, there shall be within the limits of each Department all the subdivisions which may be needed for the proper regulation of the public service. The divisions relating to finance, military affairs, and public instruction need not coincide with the general divisions. 
TITLE II. THE INHABITANTS; NATIVES AND FOREIGNERS<title>
ART. 8. 
Colombians are: 
<list>
1. By birth: The natives of Colombia, upon any of the following conditions: That their father or mother is or has been, a citizen of Colombia, or that, if children of foreigners, they be domiciled in the Republic. The legitimate children of Colombian father and mother born in a foreign country and afterward domiciled in the Republic shall be considered Colombians by birth for the purposes of the laws which require this qualification. 
2. By origin and domicil: Those born in a foreign country of a Colombian father or mother, but domiciled in the Republic, and all Spanish-Americans who should apply to the municipal authorities of the locality where they reside, for registration as Colombians. 
3. By adoption: Foreigners who have obtained letters of naturalization. 
</list>
ART. 9. 
Colombian citizenship is forfeited by naturalization and domiciliation in a foreign country; but it may be recovered under laws enacted for that purpose. 
ART. 10. 
It is the duty of all citizens and foreigners in Colombia to live in submission to the Constitution and the laws, and to respect and obey the authorities. 
ART. 11. 
Foreigners shall enjoy in Colombia the same rights as are conceded to Colombians by the laws of the Nation to which they belong; but the stipulations made in public treaties shall be respected. 
ART. 12. 
The law shall define the status of domiciled foreigners, and their special rights and obligations. 
ART. 13. 
Colombians, who have lost their nationality, if taken with arms in their hands in war against Colombia, shall be tried and punished as traitors. 
Naturalized foreigners, and foreigners domiciled in Colombia, shall not be bound to bear arms against the country of their birth. 
ART. 14. 
Companies or corporations, legally recognized in Colombia., shall have no other rights than those corresponding to Colombian persons. 
ART. 15. 
All male Colombians over twenty-one years of age, engaged in some profession, art, or trade, or having a lawful occupation, or other legitimate and known means of support, are citizens. 
ART. 16. 
The loss of nationality carries with it the loss of citizenship. Any one, who by judicial decision has been declared to have done any of the following acts, shall also lose his citizenship: 
<list>
1. Having engaged in the service of a nation at war with Colombia. 
2. Having belonged to a faction in rebellion against the government of a friendly nation. 
3. Having been condemned to suffer corporal punishment. 
4. Having been removed from public office in consequence of criminal prosecution or impeachment. 
5. Having committed acts of violence, falsehood, or corruption in elections. 
</list>
All persons who have lost their citizenship may obtain rehabilitation from the senate. 
ART. 17. 
The exercise of the rights of citizenship is suspended: 
<list>
1. For notorious insanity. 
2. For judicial interdiction. 
3. For habitual drunkenness. 
4. For criminal prosecution, after the issue of a warrant of arrest. 
</list>
ART. 18. 
The quality of active citizenship is an indispensable condition precedent to the exercise of the right to vote and hold public offices carrying with them authority or jurisdiction. 
TITLE III. CIVIL RIGHTS AND SOCIAL GUARANTIES<title>  
ART. 19. 
The authorities of the Republic are established to protect all persons residing in Colombia in their lives, honor, and property, and secure the mutual respect of all natural rights, by preventing and punishing crimes.ART. 20. 
Private persons are answerable to the authorities only for violations of the Constitution or the laws. Public officers are answerable for the same violations, and also for exceeding their powers, or for omissions in the fulfillment of their duties. 
ART. 21. 
In case of manifest violation of a constitutional provision to the detriment of any person, the order of a superior shall not exempt from responsibility the agent who executed it. 
Soldiers in actual service are exempted from this provision. With respect to them, the responsibility shall devolve on the superior who gave the order. 
ART. 22. 
There shall be no slaves in Colombia. Any slave who enters the territory of the Republic shall be free. 
ART. 23. 
No one shall be molested in his person or family, imprisoned, or arrested, or have his domicile searched, except upon a warrant issued by competent authority, with all legal formalities, and for an offense previously defined by law. 
In no case shall there be detention, imprisonment, or arrest for debts and purely civil obligations, unless it is to secure the results of a suit. 
ART. 24. 
He who is caught flagrante delicto may be arrested and taken before the judge by any person. If the agents of the authority pursue him and he takes refuge in his own dwelling, they may enter it, for the purpose of arresting him; and if he seeks asylum in the dwelling of another person, the consent of the owner or tenant thereof shall be previously obtained. 
ART. 25. 
No one shall be compelled in criminal, correctional, or police proceedings to testify against himself or against his relatives within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity. 
ART. 26. 
No one shall be tried except in conformity with laws enacted prior to the commission of the offense with which he is charged, or by courts having no competent jurisdiction, or under forms of law different from those in each case provided. In criminal matters, the law favorable to the defendant even if enacted after the commission of the alleged offense shall be applied in preference to the restrictive or unfavorable law. 
ART. 27. 
The preceding provision shall not prevent the following functionaries, or persons, from inflicting punishment without previous trial, in the cases and within the limits established by law: 
<list>
1. Functionaries exercising authority or jurisdiction, who shall have power to punish with fines or imprisonment any person in contempt of their authority while discharging their official duties. 
2. Military chiefs, who may inflict instant punishment in order to subdue insubordination repress a military mutiny, or maintain discipline in the presence of the enemy. 
3. Masters of vessels who have the power when not in a port to repress crimes committed on board their ships. 
</list>
ART. 28. 
No person shall, even in time of war, be punished ex post facto. No punishment shall be inflicted if it is not under a law, order, or decree in which the act has been previously prohibited and the punishment for its commission established. 
This provision shall not prevent even in time of peace, if there are serious reasons to fear a disturbance of the public order, the arrest from being made by order of the Government, upon previous advice of the Ministers, of any person suspected with good reason of attempting to disturb the public peace. 
ART. 29. 
The penalty of death shall only be imposed in the gravest cases, judicially proven, of the following crimes: Treason to the country in a foreign war, parricide, assassination, arson, highway robbery in a gang of malefactors, piracy, and certain military crimes defined by the military laws. 
At no time shall the death penalty be inflicted in other cases than those provided in this article. 
ART. 30. 
There shall be no penalty of death for political offenses. These offenses shall be defined by law. 
ART. 31. 
Rights vested under a just title and according to the laws, in individual persons or corporations, shall not be disturbed or ignored by laws subsequently enacted. 
When from the application of a law enacted for the public welfare a conflict arises between individual rights and the need recognized by the law itself, the private interest shall yield to the public interest. But condemnations of property when necessary shall require full indemnity, in accordance with the following article. 
ART. 32. 
In time of peace no person shall be deprived of his property wholly or in part, except by way of punishment, or judicial compulsion, or condemnation with indemnity, or general tax or contribution according to law. 
For grave reasons of public utility, to be defined by Congress, condemnation of private property may be made by judicial order; but the owner of the property shall be indemnified for its value before the condemnation is accomplished.ART. 33. 
Only in case of war, and solely for the purpose of insuring the restoration of public order, the seizure of private property may be ordered by authorities not vested with judicial power, and without the indemnification being previous. In the case herein mentioned real property alone may be temporarily occupied, either to meet the necessities of the war, or to deprive its owners, by way of penalty, in accordance with the laws, of the yieldings thereof. The nation shall always be responsible for the seizures and condemnations made by the Government or by its agents. 
ART. 34. 
The penalty of confiscation shall not be imposed. 
ART. 35. 
Literary and artistic property shall be protected as transferable property during the life time of the author and for eighty years; thereafter; but the formalities prescribed by law for this purpose shall be observed. 
The same guaranty shall be extended to the owners of works published in countries where the Spanish language is spoken, provided that the principle of reciprocity is recognized by law in those countries. There shall be no necessity of entering to this effect into any international treaties. 
ART. 36. 
The purposes and intents of all donations inter vivos, or bequests made in conformity with the law, for objects of charity or public instruction, shall not be changed or modified by the legislative power. 
ART. 37. 
In Colombia no real property shall be inalienable or obligations irredeemable. 
ART. 38. 
The Roman Catholic Apostolic religion shall be the religion of the Nation; the public authorities shall protect it and cause it to be respected as an essential element of social order. 
It is understood that the Catholic Church is not and shall not be official, and that it shall preserve its independence. 
ART. 39. 
No one shall be molested on account of his religious opinions, or compelled by the authorities to profess tenets, or to observe practices, contrary to his conscience. 
ART. 40. 
The exercise of all forms of worship, not opposed to Christian .morals or to the law, shall be permitted. 
All acts opposed to Christian morals, or subversive of the public order, which may be performed on the occasion of, or as a pretext for, the exercise of religious worship, shall be subject to law. 
ART. 41. 
Public education shall be organized and conducted in accordance with the Catholic religion. Primary instruction supported by public funds shall be gratuitous, and not compulsory. 
ART. 42. 
The press shall be free in time of peace; but injuries to personal honor and attempts to disturb social order or public tranquility shall involve responsibility. No newspaper publication shall, without the permission of the Government, be subsidized by other governments or by foreign corporations. 
ART. 43. 
Private correspondence by mail or telegraph shall be inviolable. Letters and private papers shall not be intercepted or examined, except by the authority, by order of a functionary of competent jurisdiction, and in such cases and with such formalities as the law may establish, and for the sole purpose of securing legal evidence.The circulation of printed matter through the post-offices may be burdened' with taxes, but it shall never be prohibited in time of peace. 
ART. 44. 
Every one may engage in any honorable trade or occupation without being required to join a guild or any other association of masters or doctors. The authorities shall inspect the practice of all industries or professions in so far as they may affect public morals, or the public safety or health. The law may require proof of competency for the practice of the medical profession and its auxiliary branches. 
ART. 45. 
Any one shall have the right to present respectful petitions to the authorities on subjects of general or private interest, and expect prompt attention thereto. 
ART. 46. 
Any number of people shall be permitted to assemble peacefully. The authorities may disperse any assembly that degenerates into disorder or tumult, or that obstructs the public ways. 
ART. 47. 
The formation of companies or associations, either public or private, not opposed to morality or the legal order, shall be permitted. Popular political organizations of a permanent character are prohibited. Religious associations shall,, in order to secure the protection of the laws, file, before the civil authority, the authorization issued in their favor by their respective ecclesiastical superiors. 
ART. 48. 
The Government alone shall import, manufacture, and have in their possession, arms and munitions of war. No person shall be permitted to carry arms in a town without permission from the authorities. 1 his permission shall in no case be given to persons attending political meetings, or elections, or sessions of assemblies, or public corporations, ' whether as members or spectators. 
ART. 49. 
Legitimate and public corporations shall be recognized as judicial persons, empowered to execute civil acts, and capable to enjoy the guaranties assured by this title under such general limitations as the laws may establish for the sake of the common good.
ART. 50. 
The laws shall regulate the civil status of all persons and define their rights and duties.
ART. 51. 
The laws shall determine the responsibility to be incurred by public functionaries of all classes who violate the rights guaranteed by this title. 
ART. 52. 
The provisions contained in the present title shall be inserted in the civil code as a preliminary title, and shall not be altered except by an amendment to the constitution. 
TITLE IV. RELATIONS BETWEEN CHURCH AND STATE<title>
ART. 53. 
The Catholic Church shall freely administer, in Colombia, its own internal affairs and perform all acts of spiritual authority and of ecclesiastical jurisdiction without needing authorization from the civil power; and, as a body corporate, represented in each diocese by its respective legitimate prelate; it shall have also power to perform civil acts in its own name, a right recognized to it by the present Constitution.
ART. 54. 
Priestly functions are incompatible with the fulfillment of political office. Catholic priests may, nevertheless, be employed in matters of public instruction or charity.ART. 55. 
The buildings intended for Catholic worship, the seminaries for religious instruction, and the residences of bishops and parish priests shall not be taxed, or occupied for any other purposes. 
ART. 56. 
The Government shall have power to negotiate agreements with the Holy Apostolic See with a view to the adjustment of pending questions, and the definition and establishment of the relations between the civil and the ecclesiastical authority. 
TITLE V. THE NATIONAL POWERS AND THE PUBLIC SERVICE<title>
ART. 57. 
All public powers shall be limited, and separately discharged by the functionaries in whom they are respectively vested. 
ART. 58. 
The law-making power shall be vested in the Congress. The Congress shall be composed of a Senate and a House of Representatives. 
ART. 59. 
The President of the Republic is the chief of the Executive power, and he shall exercise it with the indispensable cooperation of the ministers. The President and the ministers, and in each particular case the President with the minister of the respective department, shall constitute the Government. 
ART. 60. 
The judicial power shall be exercised by a supreme court, by superior district tribunals, and by such other tribunals and inferior courts as may be established by law. The Senate shall exercise certain judicial functions. 
ART. 61. 
No individual person or body shall, in time of peace, be vested at the same time with the political or civil and judicial or military powers. 
ART. 62. 
The law shall deter mine the special cases of incompatibility of functions; the cases of responsibility of public functionaries, and the manner of enforcing it; the qualifications necessary for the fulfillment of the duties of certain offices, in cases not provided for by the constitution; the conditions of promotion and retirement on pension; and the series or class of civil or military services giving right to receive pensions from the public treasury. 
ART. 63. 
There shall be no office in Colombia whose duties are not defined by law or regulation.
ART. 64. 
No person shall receive two salaries from the public treasury except in special cases determined by law. 
ART. 65. 
No public officer shall enter upon the discharge of his office without first taking the oath to maintain and defend the constitution and to perform the duties which are incumbent upon him. 
ART. 66. 
No Colombian in the service of Colombia shall, without permission of the Government, under penalty of forfeiting his office, accept from any foreign government positions or favors. 
ART. 67. 
No Colombian shall accept from a foreign government any employment or commission near the Government of Colombia, without having previously obtained from the latter the necessary authorization.
TITLE VI. THE ASSEMBLING AND FUNCTIONS OF CONGRESS<title>
ART. 68.
The legislative chambers shall meet in ordinary session . by their own right every two years, on the twentieth of July, in the capital of the Republic. 
The ordinary sessions shall last one hundred and twenty days, at the end of which the Government may declare the chambers in recess.
ART. 69. 
The two houses shall meet and adjourn publicly, and at the same time. 
ART. 70. 
The houses shall not do business with less than one-third of their members. 
The President of the Republic in person, or through his ministers, shall open and close the houses. 
This ceremony is not essential for Congress to legitimately exercise its functions. 
ART. 71.
When, on the appointed day, the houses can not do business for lack of quorum the members present, sitting as a preparatory or provisional committee, shall have power to compel the attendance of the absentees, with such penalties as may have been prescribed by the two houses respectively; and the sessions shall be opened as soon as the requisite number of members is present. 
ART. 72. 
Congress shall meet in extra session when summoned by the Government. In extra sessions it shall deal only with such business as the Government submitted to it. 
ART. 73. 
By mutual agreement the two houses of Congress may meet in a place different from the capital, and in case of disturbance of the public order, the meeting place shall be designated by the president of the Senate. 
ART. 74.
The two houses of Congress shall meet in joint session only for the purpose of inaugurating the President of the Republic, and performing the act prescribed in article 77. 
On such occasions the president of the Senate and the president of the House of Representatives shall be respectively the president and vice-president of Congress.
ART. 75. 
All meetings of members of Congress, held for legislative purposes, outside of the conditions prescribed by the Constitution, shall be illegal; the acts done in this way shall be null, and the members taking part in said meetings shall be punished according to law. 
ART. 76. 
Congress is vested with the power of making the laws. By means of these laws it exercises the following functions: 
<list>
1. To interpret, amend, and repeal previous laws. 
2. To change the general division of the territory in accordance with articles 5 and 6, and make and change, whenever proper, the other territorial divisions defined in article 7. 
3. To confer special powers upon the Department assemblies. 
4. To regulate the administration of the government of Panama. 
5. To change, under extraordinary circumstances and for grave reasons of public convenience, the present place of residence of the high national powers. 
6. To fix every two years in ordinary session the strength of the standing army. 
7. To create all the offices required by the public service, and to fix their respective salaries. 
8. To regulate the public service, and determine on all the matters referred to in article 62. 
9. To authorize the Government to make contracts, negotiate loans, dispose of national property, and exercise other functions within constitutional limits. 
10. To vest in the President of the Republic, temporarily, such extraordinary powers as necessity or public good may demand.11. To establish the national revenues and fix the expenses of the government. Each congress shall vote a general budget of receipts and expenditures. The budget shall contain no item which has not been previously authorized by law, or provision to pay any claim not judicially recognized. 
12. To acknowledge the national debt and provide for its payment. 
13. To levy extraordinary taxes when required by necessity. 
14. To approve or disapprove the contracts or agreements entered into by the President of the Republic with private persons, companies, or corporations, in which the national treasury is interested, if the negotiation of said contracts had not been previously authorized, if the formalities prescribed by Congress had not been complied with, or if any stipulation contained in the compact is not in harmony with the law authorizing its negotiation. 
15. To determine the fineness, weight, shape, and denomination, of the national coin, and regulate the system of weights and measures. 
16. To organize the public credit. 
17. To order the execution or continuation of public works and the erection of public monuments. 
18. To promote works of utility or beneficence worthy of encouragement. 
19. To decree public honors to such citizens as may have rendered distinguished services to the country. 
20. To approve or reject treaties entered into by the Government with foreign powers. 
21. To grant, by a vote of two-thirds of the members of each house, and for grave considerations of public good, general amnesties and pardons for political offenses. In case the beneficiary of such amnesty or pardon is thereby relieved from civil responsibility toward any private individual, the Government shall be bound to pay the indemnity. 
22. To limit or regulate, the appropriation or conveyance of public lands.
</list>
ART. 77. 
Congress shall elect at its ordinary sessions, and for a term of two years, the person who shall exercise the Executive power if there is neither President nor vice-president.
ART. 78. 
The Congress and each one of its Chambers are forbidden: 
<list>
1. To make suggestions to public functionaries. 
2. To interfere by means of laws or resolutions with business exclusively belonging to other departments of the Government. 
3. To pass resolutions approving or censuring official acts. 
4. To require the Government to transmit to them the instructions given to diplomatic agents, or give information relative to negotiations of confidential character. 
5. To order any person or entity to be paid rewards, indemnities, or pensions, or other allowances of money, unless it is in satisfaction of claims already recognized by laws, subject, however, 'to the provisions of article 76, clause 18. 
6. To enact laws of proscription or prosecution against persons or corporations.
</list>ART. 79. 
Laws may originate in either house on the initiative of its respective members, or of the Cabinet ministers. 
ART. 80. 
Laws of the following classes shall be excepted from the provision of the preceding article: 
<list>
1. Such laws as must exclusively originate in the House of Representatives (article 102, clause 2). 
2. Such laws as relate to civil legislation and judicial procedure, which can only be amended by bills introduced by the respective special standing committees of either house, or by the Cabinet ministers. 
</list>
ART. 81. 
No legislative act shall become a law unless: 
<list>
1. It has passed three readings in each house, on three different days, and has been adopted by each house by a majority of its members. 
2. It has obtained the approval of the Government. 
</list>
ART. 82. 
The consideration of a bill shall not be closed on its second reading, nor shall the bill be voted on its third reading, without the presence of an absolute majority of the members who compose the house. 
ART. 83. 
The Government may take part in the discussion of the laws through the Cabinet ministers. 
ART. 84. 
The judges of the supreme court shall be entitled to be heard in the discussion of bills relating to civil legislation and judicial procedure. 
ART. 85. 
After a bill has passed both houses, it shall be sent to the Government, and if approved by it, shall be promulgated as law. If not approved, it shall be returned with the objections of the Executive to the House in which it originated. 
ART. 86. 
The President of the Republic shall be allowed six days to return a bill with objections, if it does not contain more than fifty articles; he shall be allowed ten days when the bill contains from fifty-one to two hundred articles, and fifteen days when the bill contains more than two hundred articles. 
If the President does not return the bill with his objections within the term prescribed therefor, he shall be bound to approve it and promulgate it. But if in the mean time the houses adjourn, the President shall be bound to publish the bill, whether approved or objected to, within ten days after the adjournment of the Congress. 
ART. 87. 
A bill objected to as a whole by the President shall be discussed again in the houses as if it were for a third reading. If it has been objected to only in part, it shall be placed upon its second reading with the sole object of considering the objections of the Government. 
ART. 88. 
The President of the Republic shall have no power to present new objections to a bill which has been reconsidered and passed by two-thirds of the members in each house, and he shall be bound to approve it. 
ART. 89. 
If the Government fails to approve the bills under the terms and according to the conditions established by this title, the approval and promulgation thereof shall be made by the president of the Congress. 
ART. 90. 
If a bill is objected to on the ground that it is unconstitutional, it shall be excepted from the provision of article 88.In this case, if the houses insist upon its passage, the bill shall be referred to the supreme court, which, within six days, shall pass upon the subject. If the decision of the court is favorable to the bill, the President shall approve it. If the decision is unfavorable, the bill shall be sent to the archives. 
ART. 91. 
Bills left pending at the end of the sessions of one year shall not be considered except as new bills in another session. 
ART. 92. 
The enacting clause of all laws shall be: "The Congress of Colombia decrees:" 
TITLE VIII. THE SENATE<title> 
ART. 93. 
The Senate shall be composed of three senators from each Department. Two substitutes shall be elected for each senator. 
ART. 94. 
No one shall be elected senator if he is not a native Colombian in the full enjoyment of his citizenship; thirty years of age, and has not an annual income of at least one thousand two hundred dollars, derived from property or the pursuit of an honorable occupation. 
ART. 95. 
Senators shall be elected for six years, and are re-eligible indefinitely. The Senate shall be renewed by thirds in the manner which the law may determine.
ART. 96. 
The Senate shall try all cases of impeachment of the public functionaries referred to in article 102, clause 4, prosecuted by the House of Representatives. 
ART. 97. 
In all trials by the Senate, the following rules shall be observed: 
<list>
1. As soon as the impeached official is placed on trial, he shall be, ipso facto, suspended. 
2. If the impeachment is based upon official crimes or misdemeanors or upon official unworthiness or misconduct, the power of the Senate shall not extend further than to removal from office, or temporary or permanent deprivation of political rights; but if the facts upon which the impeachment rests deserve other penalties, the impeached official shall be criminally prosecuted before the supreme court. 
3. If the impeachment is based upon a common crime, the Senate shall confine itself to declaring whether or not there is evidence enough to proceed against the impeached party, and in case of an affirmative decision it shall remand him to the supreme court for trial. 
4. The Senate may refer the preparation of each trial to a committee of its own body, reserving to itself to hear and decide the case. The decision shall be pronounced in open session by two-thirds, at least, of the senators present.
</list>
ART. 98. 
The Senate shall also have the following powers: 
<list>
1. To rehabilitate those who have lost their citizenship. This act of clemency shall wipe out, according to the circumstances of the case and of the applicant himself, either the disability to exercise electoral rights, or fill determined public offices, or in general all disqualification from the exercise of all political rights. 
2. To appoint two members of the council of state. 
3. To accept or reject the resignations of the President or vice-president of the Republic, or of the designado.
4. To confirm or reject nominations made by the President of the Republic of judges of the supreme court. 
5. To confirm or reject the appointments made by the Government of military officers from lieutenant-colonel to the highest offices in the army or navy. 
6. To grant leave to the President of the Republic to be temporarily absent from the capital unless it is for reason of sickness, or to exercise his functions outside of the capital. 
7. To permit the passage of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic. 
8. To appoint the boundary commissioners referred to in article 4. 
9. To authorize the Government to declare war against another Nation.
</list>
TITLE IX. THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES<title> 
ART. 99. 
The House of Representatives shall consist of one member for every fifty thousand inhabitants of the Republic. Two substitutes shall be elected for each representative. 
ART. 100. 
No one shall be eligible to the position of representative, if he is not a citizen in the full exercise of his rights as such, over twenty-five years of age, or has been, upon conviction of crime, condemned to corporal punishment. 
ART. 101. 
Representatives shall serve four years, and they shall be re-eligible indefinitely. 
ART. 102. 
The House of Representatives shall have the following powers: 
<list>
1. To examine the general accounts of the treasury and pass finally upon them.2. To originate all laws for the levying of taxes and for the organization of the Attorney-General's office. 
3. To appoint two councilors of state. 
4. To impeach before the Senate, whenever there may be just cause therefor, the President and the vice-president of the Republic, the ministers of the cabinet, the councilors of state, the attorney-general of the Nation, and the justices of the supreme court. 
5. To examine charges and complaints presented to it by the attorney-general, or by private persons, against any of the above named officials, except the President and the vice-president, and, if found proper, to base on said charges impeachment proceedings before the Senate.
</list>
TITLE X. PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH HOUSES AND TO THE MEMBERS THEREOF<title>
ART. 103. 
Each house shall have the following powers: 
<list>
1. To make regulations for its own government, and take the necessary measures to insure the attendance of its members. 
2. To create and fill the offices necessary for the discharge of its business. 
3. To organize, when necessary, a police force to serve in the building in which it holds its sessions. 
4. To determine whether the credentials which each member shall present on taking possession of his seat are in the form prescribed by the law. 
5. To answer or abstain from answering the messages of the Government. 
6. To call upon the ministers for written or oral information when necessary for the better discharge of their business, or for becoming acquainted with the acts of the administration, except as provided in article 78, clause 4. 
7. To appoint commissioners to represent them in official acts.
8. To appoint conferees to represent them before the other house, in case of disagreement in the formation of a law. 
9. To pass all the resolutions that they may deem proper within the limits prescribed in article 78.
</list>
ART. 104. 
The sessions of the houses shall be within the limitations prescribed by their rules. 
ART. 105. 
The members of both houses shall represent the whole Nation, and vote only in the interest of justice and the public good. 
ART. 106. 
Senators and representatives shall not be held responsible for their opinions and votes while in the	 discharge their duties. They shall be responsible for their language only to the house to which they belong; they may be called to order by the presiding officer and punished in accordance with the rules for any violation of order. 
ART. 107. 
During the sessions of Congress, and for forty days before their opening, no proceedings, whether civil or criminal, shall be instituted against any member of Congress without the permission of the house to which he belongs. In case of in flagrante delicto, he may be arrested and placed immediately at the disposal of the respective house. 
ART. 108. 
The President and vice-president of the Republic, the cabinet ministers, the councilors of state, the justices of the supreme court, the attorney-general of the Nation and the governors shall not be elected members of Congress until six months after they shall have ceased to perform the duties of their respective offices. 
Nor shall anyone be senator or representative for any Department or electoral district, if, three months prior to the election, he has exercised civil, political, or military jurisdiction or authority within its limits.
ART. 109. 
The President of the Republic shall not appoint senators or representatives to serve any executive office during their respective terms, or one year after the expiration thereof, but the offices of minister of the cabinet, councilor of state, governor, diplomatic agent, or military chief in time of war are excepted from this rule. 
The acceptance of any of these offices by a member of Congress shall cause his seat in the respective chamber to be vacated.
ART. 110. 
Senators and representatives shall not enter, either directly or through a third person, into any contracts with the Government, nor shall they accept from any person power of attorney for the transaction of business to which the Government of Colombia is a party. ART. 111. 
Whenever any senator or representative withdraws from his place, and his seat is filled by his substitute, the former shall be entitled to the traveling expenses to the capital, and the latter to the traveling expenses to his domicile. 
ART. 112. 
No increase in the salaries of the members of Congress, or in their traveling expenses, shall take effect until after the expiration of the time of service of those who voted for it.ART. 113. 
In case of temporary or permanent absence of a member of Congress, the Vacancy shall be filled by his substitute.
TITLE XI. THE PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title> 
ART. 114. 
The President of the Republic shall be elected for Six years by the electoral assemblies, voting on the same day, and in the manner determined bylaw.
ART. 115. 
The President of the Republic shall have the same qualifications as a senator. 
ART. 116. 
The President of the Republic shall be inaugurated before the president of Congress, who shall administer to him the following oath: "I swear before God to comply faithfully with the constitution and laws of Colombia." 
ART. 117.
If, for any reason, the President should not be able to take possession of his office before the president of the Congress, he shall do so before the president of the supreme court, and failing in this, before two witnesses. 
ART. 118. 
The powers of the President of the Republic respecting the legislative department are: 
<list>
1. To open and close the ordinary sessions of Congress. 
2. To call Congress to convene in extraordinary session for serious reasons of public good and after previous consultation with the council of state. 
3. To transmit to Congress at the beginning of each session a message on the acts of the administration. 
4. To transmit also, at the same time, to the House of Representatives the budget of revenues and expenses, and the general account of the treasury.5. To transmit to any house of. Congress the information which may be desired by it, if not of confidential character. 
6. To furnish efficient aid to the houses when they may request it, placing at their disposal, if necessary, the public force. 
7. To concur in the enactment of the laws, by introducing bills through the Cabinet ministers, exercising the right to veto legislative acts, and complying with the duty to approve them, in accordance with this Constitution. 
8. To issue decrees having force of legislative enactments, in the cases and with the formalities set forth in article 121.
</list>
ART. 119. 
The powers of the President of the Republic respecting the judiciary department are: 
<list>
1. To appoint the justices of the, supreme court. 
2. To appoint the justices of the superior tribunals, upon nomination made (three names for each place) by the supreme court. 
3. To appoint and remove the officers of the Attorney General's office. 
4. To watch over the prompt and full administration of justice throughout the Republic, furnishing the judicial officers, in the manner provided by law, such aid as may be necessary for the enforcement of their decisions. 
5. To cause through the respective agent of the Attorney General's office, or a special attorney appointed for the purpose, the governors of Departments, or any other national or municipal officers exercising administrative or judicial duties, to be impeached before the competent tribunal, for any violation of the, Constitution or the laws, or otter offenses committed by them in the exercise of their functions. 
6. To grant, after hearing the council of state, the commutation of the penalty of death for another inferior in degree in the penal scale, to grant pardons for political offenses and commutations of sentence for common offenses, in accordance with the laws which regulate the exercise of this power. In no case shall these pardons or commutations include the release from responsibilities incurred with respect to private persons, according to the laws. 
</list>
He shall not exercise this last prerogative with respect to the cabinet ministers, except at the request of one of the houses of Congress.
ART. 120.
It shall be incumbent upon the President of the Republic, as the chief executive officer of the Nation: 
<list>
1. To appoint and remove, at his pleasure, the cabinet ministers. 
2. To promulgate the laws, obey them, and see that they are faithfully executed. 
3. To issue all the orders and decrees necessary for the complete execution of the laws. 
4. To appoint and remove, at his pleasure, the governors. 
5. To appoint two councilors of state.
6. To appoint all the employees whose appointment does not belong to other functionaries, or corporations, according to this Constitution or any subsequent law. In all cases the President shall have power to appoint and remove his agents at his discretion. 
7. To control the public force and make military appointments, under the restrictions imposed in clause 5, article 98, and with the formalities established by law for regulating the exercise of this power.8. To preserve public order throughout the whole territory, and reestablish it if it should be disturbed. 
9. To direct, whenever he may think it proper, as commander in chief of the armies of the Republic, the operations of war. If he should personally exercise the military command outside of the limits of the capital, the vice-president shall then be charged with the other duties of the Executive office. 
10. To conduct diplomatic and commercial relations with other powers and sovereigns; to appoint at his pleasure and receive as the case may be, the corresponding agents; and to negotiate treaties and agreements with foreign powers. All treaties shall be submitted to Congress for approval; but the agreements shall, in the recess of Congress, be approved by the President if the ministers and the council of state have so previously advised. 
11. To provide for the external safety of the Republic, defending the independence and honor of the Nation and the inviolability of the territory; to declare war, with the consent of the Senate, or to make it without such consent, whenever it shall be urgent to repel a foreign invasion; and to conclude and ratify treaties of peace, provided in this case that all papers relating thereto be submitted with a report, at the next session of Congress. 
12. To permit, in the recess of the Senate, and having previously consulted the council of state, the passage of foreign troops across the territory of the Republic. 
13. To permit, after consulting the council of state, the station o foreign vessels of war within the waters of the Nation. 
14. To watch over the proper collection and management of the revenues and public funds, and order their disbursement according to law. 
15. To regulate, direct, and inspect the national public instruction. 
16. To enter into contracts for thee performance of services and the execution of public works in accordance with the fiscal laws, provided that information thereof be given to Congress in ordinary session. 
17. To organize the national bank, and exercise the necessary inspection over the banks of issue and other establishments of credit, in conformity with the laws. 
18. To grant permission, when requested, to national employees, to accept offices or , receive gifts from foreign governments. 
19. To issue letters of naturalization, in conformity with the laws. 
20. To grant patents of temporary privilege to the authors of useful inventions and improvements, in accordance with the laws. 
21. To exercise the right of inspection and supervision over institutions of common utility, in order that their revenues may be properly preserved and applied, and that in all its essentials the will of the founders may be carried out.
</list>
ART. 121. 
In case of foreign war or domestic commotion, the President may, after consultation with the council of state, and with the consent of all the ministers, shown by their signatures, declare the public order to be disturbed, and the whole or a part of the Republic in a state of siege. 
After such declaration the President shall be invested with the powers which under the laws of the country, or the International Law, are vested in him to defend the rights of the Nation or put down the uprising. The extraordinary measures or decrees of temporary legislative character, which, within the said limits, the President may take, or issue, shall be binding if bearing the signatures of all the ministers. 
The Government shall declare public order to be reestablished as soon as the commotion or the foreign danger has ceased; and the President shall send to Congress a statement of the measures taken by him and the reasons therefor. All officers shall be responsible for the abuses committed by them in the exercise of extraordinary powers.
ART. 122. 
The President of the Republic, or whoever shall act in his place, shall be responsible only in the following cases which the law shall define: 
<list>
1. For acts of violence or coercion at elections. 
2. For acts which may prevent the legislative houses from constitutionally assembling, or obstruct them or other public bodies, or authorities established by this Constitution, in the exercise of their functions. 
3. For acts of high treason. 
</list>
In the two cases first named, the penalty shall not be other than removal from office, but if the President has already ceased to exercise the functions of his office the penalty may be disqualification from serving again as President. 
No act of the President, except the appointment or removal of ministers, shall be valid and binding until signed and communicated by the respective minister who shall thereby become responsible. 
ART. 123. 
The Senate may grant to the President a temporary leave of absence. 
The President may, on account of ill health, retire, for such time as may be necessary, from the exercise of the Executive power; but notice thereof shall be given by him in due time to the Senate, or, in recess of the Senate, to the supreme court. 
ART. 124. 
The vice-president of the Republic shall perform the duties of the Executive office during the temporary absence of the President. 
In case of permanent absence of the President, the vice-president shall take his place until the expiration of his term of office. 
The death or accepted resignation of the President shall be the only causes of permanent absence.
ART. 125.
If the vice-president is not able, for any reason whatever, to discharge the duties of the Presidency during the absence of the President, the designado elected by Congress for each period of two years shall be called upon to do so. When, for any reason whatever, the Congress may have failed to elect a designado, the designado last elected shall continue to act in that capacity. In the absence of both the vice-president and the designado, the Executive office shall be filled by the ministers and the governors, the latter being called according to the distance of their respective residences to the capital of the Republic, the nearest one being called first The council of state shall designate in each case the minister who shall be called to exercise the duties of the Presidency.
ART. 126. 
The functionary in charge of the Executive office shall have the same privileges and exercise the same powers as the President whose position he fills. 
ART. 127.
The citizen elected President of the Republic shall not be reelected for the period immediately following, if he performed the duties of the Presidency within the eighteen months preceding the new election. The citizen called to act as President, who performed the functions of the position within the six months next preceding the new election, shall not be eligible to the Presidency.
ART. 128. 
The vice-president of the Republic shall be elected at the same time, by the same electors, and for the same term as the President. 
ART. 129. 
The vice-president shall have the same qualifications as the President.
ART. 130. 
The vice-president shall be the president of the council of state, and shall perform all the other duties imposed upon him by law.
ART. 131. 
If the position of vice-president becomes absolutely vacant, it shall remain vacant until the end of the constitutional term.
TITLE XII. THE CABINET MINISTERS<title>
ART. 132. 
The number, titles, and precedence of the several executive departments shall be determined by law. The distribution of the business among the several departments belongs to the President. 
ART. 133. 
Cabinet ministers shall have the same qualifications as the representatives. 
ART. 134. 
The ministers are the organs of communication between the Executive and Congress; they introduce bills in both houses, take part in the debates, and advise the President to approve the legislative acts or object to them. Each minister shall submit to Congress within the first fifteen days of each session a report on the condition of the business pertaining to his department and of the reforms which experience may advise to be introduced. The house may require the attendance of the ministers. 
ART. 135. 
The ministers, as superior, chiefs of the administration, may exercise, in certain cases, Presidential authority under direction of the President. Under their own responsibility they may annul, reform, or suspend the acts of their subordinate officers. 
TITLE XIII. THE COUNCIL OF STATE<title>
ART. 136. 
The council of state shall consist of seven members, to wit: The vice-president of the Republic, who shall be the chairman, and six councilors appointed in accordance with this Constitution. The cabinet ministers may be heard in the council; but they shall have no vote.
ART. 137. 
The office of councilor of state is incompatible with any other public position. 
ART. 138. 
The councilors of state shall serve four years; but one-half of their number shall be renewed every two years. 
ART. 139. 
The council shall be divided, for the performance of its proper duties, into such committees as the law or its own Rules may establish. 
ART. 140. 
The law shall determine the number of substitutes to be given to each councilor, the rules to be observed for their appointment, the nature of the service to be rendered by them, and their responsibility.
ART. 141. 
The council of state shall have the following powers: 
<list>
1. To act as supreme advisory board in matters relating to the administration of the Government. It shall necessarily be heard in all the cases set forth by the Constitution and the laws. The opinions of the council shall not be binding upon the Government except when advising the commutation of the death penalty. 
2. To frame the bills and codes of laws to be submitted to the houses and propose such reforms as may be deemed proper in the several branches of legislation. 
3. To decide, without recourse, either as a court of original and final jurisdiction, or on appeal, all controversies, if so permitted by law, between private individuals and the Government. In this case the council shall have a standing committee which shall take cognizance of these controversies, the Government to be represented before it by an attorney, as provided by law. 
4. To keep a formal register of their opinions and resolutions and transmit to Congress through executive channels, and within the first fifteen days of the ordinary session, a true copy thereof, excepting only such matters as the council may consider secret. 
5. To enact its own Rules and hold every month as many meetings as may be necessary for the transaction of its business. 
</list>
And all other powers the laws may grant to it.
TITLE XIV. THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT<title>
ART. 142. 
The functions of the attorney-general's department shall be exercised, under the supreme direction of the Government, by an attorney-general of the nation, by Government attorneys in superior district tribunals, and by the other functionaries designated by law. The House of Representatives shall exercise special functions of this nature. 
ART. 143. 
The officers of the attorney-general's department shall defend the interests of the Nation, promote the execution of the laws, judicial decisions, and administrative orders, supervise the official conduct of the public employees, and prosecute those who may be guilty of crimes and misdemeanors disturbing social order. 
ART. 144. 
The term of office of the attorney-general shall be three years. 
ART. 145. 
The special functions of the attorney-general of the Nation are the following: 
<list>
1. To see that all public functionaries in the service of the Nation should properly discharge their duties. 
2. To arraign before the supreme court the functionaries who are to be tried by that body. 
3. To see that all Government attorneys should faithfully discharge their duties, and cause them to be responsible for the illegal acts they may commit. 
4. To appoint and remove at his pleasure his immediate subordinates. 
</list>
And all other functions the law may assign to him. 
TITLE XV. THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE<title> 
ART. 146. 
The supreme court shall be composed of seven justices. 
ART. 147. 
The justices of the supreme court shall hold their offices for life, unless removed for bad behavior. The law shall determine the causes of misconduct, and the procedure and formalities to be observed in rendering judicial decisions in such cases. Justices who accept any other office from the Government shall vacate their positions.
ART. 148. 
The president of the supreme court shall be elected every four years by the court itself. 
ART. 149. 
Seven substitutes shall be appointed to fill the temporary vacancies which may occur on the supreme bench. Whenever a permanent vacancy occurs, either by death, accepted resignation, constitutional provision, or judicial decree, a new appointment shall be made to fill the place. 
ART. 150. 
The justices of the supreme court shall be Colombians by birth, in the exercise of the full rights of citizenship, and of at least thirty-five years of age. They are also required to have presided as judges over any superior district tribunal, or any tribunal of the former States, or have practiced, with credit, for five years at least, the profession of law, or have been professors of jurisprudence in some public institution. 
ART. 151. 
The supreme court shall exercise the following functions: 
<list>
1. To take cognizance, in conformity with the law, of the cases and causes taken to it on writs of error. 
2. To adjust conflicts of jurisdiction between two or more district tribunals. 
3. To take cognizance of cases and causes to which the Nation is a party, or which involve a controversy between two or more Departments. 
4. To pass, finally, upon the validity of any legislative act, objected to by the Government as unconstitutional.5. To pass, in conformity with the law, upon the validity or nullity of any departmental ordinances suspended by the Government, or impeached before the tribunals by private parties, as jeopardizing civil rights. 
6. To try the cases of high national functionaries impeached before the Senate and charged with offenses which under article 97 come under its jurisdiction. 
7. To take cognizance of all cases of impeachment for violation of the Constitution, or laws, or for malfeasance in office, against diplomatic or consular agents of the Republic, governors, members of the judicial power, commanders, or generals in chief of the national forces, and the superior officers of the national treasury.
8. To take cognizance of all cases of litigation of, or with, diplomatic agents accredited to the Government of the Nation, when so provided by international law. 
9. To take cognizance of all cases relating to maritime navigation, or the navigation of rivers in the territory of the nation. 
</list>
And all other functions which the law may assign to it. 
ART. 152. 
The court shall appoint and remove at its pleasure its subordinate officers. 
ART. 153. 
In order to facilitate the prompt administration of justice the national territory shall be divided into judicial districts, and in each district there shall be a superior tribunal, the organization and functions of which shall be determined by law. 
ART. 154. 
No one shall be a justice of a superior tribunal who is not a citizen in the exercise of his rights, of at least thirty years of age, and has not, for at least three years, performed judicial functions or practiced the profession of law with credit, or given instruction in law in a public institution. 
ART. 155. 
The provisions of art. 147 shall apply to the justices of the superior tribunals. Said justices shall he responsible to the supreme court, in the manner to be determined by law, for malfeasance in office and for the commission of any acts derogatory to official dignity.
ART. 156. 
The law shall organize the inferior courts, and determine their functions and the time of service of the judges. 
ART. 157. 
No one shall be a judge who is not a citizen in the exercise of his rights, versed in the science of law, and enjoying a good reputation; The second of these requisites is not indispensable in respect to municipal judges. 
ART. 158. 
The responsibility of the inferior judges shall be enforced before their respective superiors. 
ART. 159. 
Judicial offices shall not be cumulative, and they are incompatible with the exercise of any other salaried office, or with any participation in the practice of law. 
ART. 160. 
Judges shall not be suspended from the exercise of their functions except in the cases and with the formalities prescribed by law, nor shall they be removed without a judicial decision. Nor shall they be transferred to any other office without leaving their places vacant. The salaries of justices and judges shall not be abolished or diminished to the prejudice of those who at the time are holding the offices.ART. 161. 
Every decision shall state the reasons on which it is based. 
ART. 162. 
The law may cause criminal cases to be tried by jury. 
ART. 163. 
Courts of commerce may be established. 
ART. 164. 
The law may establish tribunals with jurisdiction over cases arising out of injuries to private parties by executive acts of the Departmental authorities and the council of state shall have power to decide all conflicts between the several departments of the administration.
TITLE XVI. THE PUBLIC FORCE<title>
ART. 165. 
All Colombians shall be bound to bear arms when public necessity may demand it, to defend the national independence 'and the institutions of the country. The conditions which exempt from military service shall be determined by law. 
ART. 166. 
The Nation shall keep a standing army for its defense. The law shall determine the manner of maintaining the strength of this army, and regulate the promotion, as well as the rights and duties of military men. 
ART. 167. 
When the strength of the standing army is not fixed by express law in one Congress, the provisions of the preceding Congress relating thereto shall continue in force. 
ART. 168. 
The army is not a deliberative body. It shall not assemble except by order of the legitimate authority; nor shall it address petitions, except on subjects which relate to the good service and morals of the army, and in accordance with its laws.ART. 169. 
Military men shall not be deprived of their ranks, honors, and pensions, except in the cases and in the manner which the law shall determine. 
ART. 170. 
Courts - martial or military tribunals shall take cognizance, under the military penal code, of all offenses committed by military men in active service, and in relation to the same service. 
ART. 171. 
The law may organize and establish a national militia. 
TITLE XVII. THE ELECTIONS<title>
ART. 172. 
All the citizens shall elect directly municipal councilors and deputies to the departmental assemblies. 
ART. 173. 
Citizens who know how to read and write or have an annual revenue of five hundred dollars, or real estate to the value of one thousand and five hundred dollars, shall vote for electors and directly elect representatives.
ART. 174. 
The electors shall' vote for president and vice-president of the Republic.
ART. 175. 
The senators shall be elected by the departmental assemblies, but in no case shall any member of the said assemblies, who served as such during the year in which the election is made, be elected senator.
ART. 176. 
There shall be one elector for each one thousand inhabitants. There shall also be one elector for each district containing less than one thousand inhabitants.
ART. 177. 
The electoral assemblies shall be renewed for each presidential election, and the persons declared to be legitimate members of such assemblies shall not be deprived of the right of exercising their functions except by a judicial decision, carrying with it the loss or suspension of the rights of citizenship.
ART. 178. 
For the election of representatives each Department shall be divided into as many electoral districts as may be necessary to secure one representative for each district. The division to which the preceding paragraph refers shall be made by law, or, if no law is enacted, by the Government. Municipal districts containing more than fifty thousand inhabitants shall be made electoral districts, and shall elect one or more representatives according to their population. Excesses of population which in the aggregate exceed twenty-five thousand inhabitants, shall add one representative to the number elected by the District, at the rate of one for every fifty thousand. The law shall fix the rules of this additional election.
ART. 179. 
The suffrage shall be exercised as a constitutional function. The person who votes or elects does not impose any obligation on or confer any representation to the candidate or functionary elected. 
ART. 180. 
There shall be judges of election, vested with legal jurisdiction to decide all questions which may arise concerning the validity or nullity of the elections, or the particular votes cast. These judges shall be responsible for their decisions, and shall be appointed in the manner and for the term provided by law. 
ART. 181. 
The law shall determine everything else concerning the elections and the counting of the votes, insuring the independence of both functions; and it shall define the crimes which may impair the purity or freedom of the suffrage, and prescribe the proper penalties.
TITLE XVIII. DEPARTMENTAL AND MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION<title>
ART. 182. 
The departments, shall be divided for administrative purposes into provinces, and the provinces into municipal districts. 
ART. 183. 
There shall be in each department an administrative body called "the departmental assembly," composed of deputies, at the rate of one for each twelve thousand inhabitants.
The law may change the rate established in this article. 
ART. 184. 
The assemblies shall meet in ordinary session every two years, in the capital of the department.
ART. 185.
The assemblies shall direct and encourage, by means of ordinances and with resources belonging to the department, primary schools and charitable institutions, the industries already established and the introduction of new ones, immigration, the importation of foreign capital, the colonization of lands belonging to the department, the opening of roads and navigable canals, the construction of railways, the exploitation of forests belonging to the department, the improvement of rivers, everything relating to the local police, the supervision of the revenues and expenses of the districts, and generally all that relates to local interests and internal progress.
ART. 186. 
The departmental assemblies may also create or abolish municipalities in accordance with the basis of population determined by law, and reduce or enlarge the limits of the municipal districts as local interests may require. If the reduction or enlargement is objected to by a number of inhabitants residing in the locality, the final decision in the matter shall belong to Congress. 
ART. 187. 
The assemblies of the departments may, by the authorization of Congress, exercise other functions in addition to their own.
ART. 188. 
The property, rights, values, or actions, which, under laws or decrees passed or issued by the national Government, or for any other reason, belong to the extinguished sovereign States, are hereby conveyed to the respective departments and shall belong to them during their legal existence. The real property specified in article 202 is not included in this conveyance. 
ART. 189. 
The assemblies shall vote every two years the budget of revenues and expenses of their respective departments, and shall make the appropriations necessary according to law, to meet their expenses. 
ART. 190. 
The assemblies of the departments shall, in order to meet their expenses, levy taxes under the conditions and within the limits prescribed by law.
ART. 191. 
The ordinances of the assemblies shall be binding as long as they are not suspended by the governor or by judicial authority. 
ART. 192. 
All persons injured by acts of the assemblies may apply for redress to the competent tribunal, which shall begin, in grave cases, by suspending the execution of the act complained of. 
ART. 193. 
In each department there shall be a governor who shall exercise the functions of the executive power, as agent of the central administration, and as superior chief of the departmental administration. 
ART. 194. 
The governors shall be appointed for a period of three years, and may be reappointed. 
ART. 195. 
The duties of the governors shall be: 
<list>
1. To obey the orders of the Executive and cause them to be obeyed in their departments. 
2. To direct the administrative action in the department, appointing and removing their agents, reforming and revoking the acts of the latter, and providing all that may be necessary in the different branches of the administration. 
3. To be the organ of the department and represent it in political and administrative matters. 
4. To assist the administration of justice within the limits prescribed by law. 
5. To exercise the right of supervision and protection over all official bodies and public establishments. 
6. To approve, in the manner determined by law, the ordinances enacted by the departmental assemblies. 
7. To suspend, by their own movement, or at the request of interested parties, by means of an order setting forth the reasons for the suspension, within ten days after their date, any ordinances of the assemblies enacted without authority, in violation of law or to the detriment of the rights of third parties, and to submit the order of suspension to the Government for its ratification or rejection. 
8. To revise the acts of the municipal councils and of the mayors, to suspend the former and to repeal the latter, by orders setting forth the reasons for the suspension or repeal, which reasons should only be those of lack of jurisdiction or illegality. 
</list>
And such other powers as may be conferred upon them by law.ART. 196. 
The governors shall be subject to administrative and judicial responsibility. They shall be removable by the Government, and responsible before the supreme court for offenses committed in the exercise of their functions. 
ART. 197. 
The governors may request the aid of the armed force, and the military chief shall obey their instructions, unless special orders on the subject are given by the Government. 
ART. 198. 
In each municipal district there shall be a popular corporation, to be designated by the name of municipal council. 
ART. 199. 
The municipal councils shall administer by means of resolutions and local regulations the government of the district; levy, in accordance with the ordinances of the assemblies, all local taxes and determine the expenditures; keep an annual register of the movement of the population and take a census whenever required by law. They shall perform all the other functions which may be assigned to them. 
ART. 200. 
The head of the administration in the district is the mayor, who has the double character Of agent of the governor and representative of the people. 
ART. 201. 
The Department of Panama shall be subject to the direct authority of the Government, and shall be ruled by special laws. 
TITLE XIX. FINANCE<title>
ART. 202. 
The following property shall belong to the Republic of Colombia: 
<list>
1. The estates, revenues, lands, valuables, rights, and actions which belonged to the Colombian Union on the fifteenth day of April, eighteen hundred and eighty-six. 
2. The vacant lands, mines, and salt works which belonged to the States, the ownership of which is now vested in the Nation, without prejudice to the rights acquired by third parties from said States, or from the Nation on the ground of indemnification. 
3. All mines of gold, silver, platinum, and precious stones to be found in the national territory, without prejudice to the rights vested in discoverers or explorers under previous laws. 
</list>
ART. 203. 
The Republic shall he responsible for the foreign and domestic debts already recognized or which may be hereafter recognized, and for the expenses of the national public service. The law shall determine the order and manner of 'meeting these obligations. 
ART. 204.
No indirect tax, or increase of a tax of this kind already in existence, shall be collected until six months after the promulgation of the law establishing the tax or the increase.
ART. 205. 
No alteration in the customs tariff shall take effect until ninety days after the approval of the law making it; and all increases or decreases in the import duties shall take effect by tenth parts during the ten following months. This provision and that of the preceding article shall not be construed as restrictive of the extraordinary powers of the Government in any case in which it may be clothed therewith. 
ART. 206. 
Each Executive Department shall prepare, every two years, the budget of its expenditures and deliver the same to-the treasury department, which shall then prepare the general budget of the Nation, and submit it to the approval of Congress, together with an estimate of the revenues to be raised to meet the national obligations.If Congress fails to act on the budget for the corresponding fiscal period of two years, the budget of the two previous years shall be available. 
ART. 207. 
No expenditure of public money shall be made without previous authorization by Congress, the assemblies of Departments, or the municipal councils; nor shall any appropriation be diverted from the object for which it was made. 
ART. 208. 
Whenever, in the judgment of the Government, the necessity arises for an indispensable expenditure, the houses not being in session, and no appropriation having been made or the one granted being inadequate, a supplemental or extraordinary appropriation may be made, to be used, by the respective ministry. These appropriations shall be granted by the council of ministers upon proof of their necessity, and after consulting the council of state. The legalization of these credits belongs to Congress. The Government may petition Congress for appropriations additional to the budget of expenses.
TITLE XX. AMENDMENT OF THIS CONSTITUTION AND ABROGATION OF THE FORMER ONE<title>
ART. 209. 
This Constitution may be amended by a legislative act, discussed and passed after three separate readings in the usual manner by Congress, submitted by the Government to the next following Congress for its definite action, and discussed and finally passed in the latter by two-thirds of the members of both houses.
ART. 210.
The Constitution of the eighth of May, eighteen hundred and sixty-three, which by reason of accomplished facts ceased to be in force, is hereby abrogated; and, in the same manner, all legislative provisions in conflict with this Constitution are hereby repealed. 
TITLE XXI. (ADDITIONAL) TRANSIENT PROVISIONS<title>
ARTICLE A. 
The first Presidential term shall begin on the seventh day of August of the present year. On the same day the first constitutional term of the vice-president of the Republic and of the designado shall begin. The first constitutional term of the councilors of state and of the attorney-general of the Nation shall begin on the first day of September of the present year. The new justices of the national supreme court shall enter upon the discharge of the duties of their offices on the first day of September of the present year. 
ART. B. 
The first constitutional Congress shall assemble on the twentieth day of July, eighteen hundred and eighty-eight. 
ART. C. 
As soon as this constitution is adopted the national council of delegates shall assume legislative functions and all the other functions which, in accordance with this constitution, belong to the Congress, and separately, to the Senate and to the House of Representatives. It shall furthermore exercise immediately the powers given to it by article 77. 
ART. D. 
Before the date of the assembling of the first constitutional Congress the national council shall again exercise legislative functions, if called to meet in extra session by the Government. 
ART. E. 
The election of members of the council of state, which belongs to the Senate and House of Representatives, shall be made by the national council in two separate acts, the vote being cast in each act for two persons. The one receiving in each act the largest number of votes shall be declared a councilor for the term of four years, and the one receiving the next highest number of votes shall be councilor for the term of two years. In case of equal number of votes, the decision shall be made by lot. The two councilors whose appointment belongs to the Government shall be named simultaneously, and then it shall be decided by lot, before the council of ministers, who shall serve for four years and who for two.
ART. F. 
In order to secure the proper performance 9f clause 2, art. 141, the council of state shall have power to add to, each of its sections one or two persons learned in the law to act as special advisers. These additional councilors shall cease to act on the twentieth day of July, eighteen hundred and eighty-eight. 
ART. G. 
The revenues and taxes existing under the law, in the late States of the Union shall continue in the respective Departments, as long as no other provisions are male by the legislative power. The revenues which by decrees of the Executive power, have been lately set apart for the service of the Nation, shall be excepted from the foregoing provision. ART. H.
As long as the legislative power does not provide otherwise, the laws existing in the several States shall continue in force in the respective Departments. The national constitutional convention when assuming the functions of a legislative body shall at once proceed to enact a law in regard to the adoption of codes and the unification of the national legislation. 
ART. I. 
The laws of the late States which were denounced before the Federal supreme court and were suspended by it, and the others upon which the said court did riot act unanimously, shall be referred to the council of delegates for final decision as to their validity or nullity. 
ART. J. 
If before the enactment of the law referred to in Art. H, it should happen for any one to be tried for any of the offences mentioned in article 29, the trial shall be conducted according to the code of the late State of Cundinamarca, approved October sixteenth, eighteen hundred and fifty-eight. 
ART. K. 
Pending the enactment of a law regulating the public press, the Government shall have power to prevent and punish abuses committed through it. 
ART. L. 
All acts of legislative character promulgated by the President of the Republic before the date of the approval of this Constitution shall continue in force, even if they are in conflict with the provisions of the same until they are expressly abrogated by the legislative body or repealed by the Government. 
ART. M. 
The President of the Republic shall freely appoint the first time the justices of the supreme court and of the superior tribunals, and shall submit such appointments to the approval of the national council. 
ART. N. 
All absolute vacancies among the members of the national council, from and after the date on which said council becomes a legislative body, shall be filled by appointments made by the governors of the departments. 
ART. 0. 
This Constitution shall go into effect, as far as the high national powers are concerned, on the day of its approval. In regard to the nation it shall go into effect thirty days after its publication in the Diario Oficial. Given at Bogota on the 4th of August, 1886.