In the Name of God, Supreme Legislator of the Universe, 
We, the Representatives of Colombia in Congress assembled, in the exercise of the powers we have received from the People to constitute and establish the form of government and to organize the same in accordance with the political principles which they have professed, and with their wishes and desires, have agreed to the following CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA<title>
TITLE I THE COLOMBIAN NATION AND ITS TERRITORY<title>
Article 1: 
The Colombian Nation is a union of all Colombians under the same political pact. 
Article 2: 
The Colombian Nation is irrevocably free and independent of all foreign power or domination, and it is not and never shall be the patrimony of any family or person. 
Article 3: 
Sovereignty resides basically in the Nation. From it emanate the political powers which may not be exercised except within the limits prescribed by this Constitution. 
Article 4: 
The territory of Colombia comprises the Provinces which constituted the Viceroyalty of New Granada and the Captaincy-General of Venezuela. 
Article 5: 
In the interest of better administration the territory of Colombia shall be divided into Departments, Provinces, Cantons, and Parishes.
TITLE II THE RELIGION OF COLOMBIA<title>
Article 6: 
The Apostolic Roman Catholic Religion is the religion of the Republic. 
Article 7: 
It is the duty of the Government, in exercising the patronage (peitronato) of the Colombian Church, to protect it and not tolerate the public exercise of any other religion.
TITLE III COLOMBIANS<title>
Article 8: 
Colombians are such either by birth or by naturalization. 
Article 9: 
The following are Colombians by birth:
<list>(1) Those born free in the territory of Colombia and their children, even though the latter may have been born abroad; 
(2) All emancipated slaves born in the territory of Colombia. 
</list>
Article 10: 
The following are Colombians by naturalization: 
<list>
(1) Those not born in the territory of Colombia who were domiciled therein on the day the place of their residence underwent its political transformation and who submitted themselves to the Constitution of 1811; 
(2) Children of Colombian father or mother who were born outside the territory of Colombia and who have returned to the Republic and declare before the duly constituted authorities that they wish to be Colombians; 
(3) Aliens who obtain letters of naturalization; 
(4) Aliens who have served or who shall serve in one or more campaigns with honor, or who have rendered other important services to the Republic in the promotion of independence, upon obtaining permission of the Executive to that effect.
</list>
TITLE IV DUTIES OF COLOMBIANS AND THEIR POLITICAL RIGHTS<title>
SECTION I DUTIES OF COLOMBIANS<title>
Article	11: 
The duties of Colombians are: 
<list>
(1) To live in submission to the Constitution and laws; 
(2) To respect and obey the Government and authorities, and to assist and defend them when necessary; 
(3) To contribute to the public expenses; 
(4) To serve and defend the fatherland, even at the sacrifice of life if necessary; 
(5) To watch over the preservation of public liberties.
</list>
SECTION 2 THE POLITICAL RIGHTS OF COLOMBIANS<title>
Article 12: 
Colombians are equal before the law whatever may be their circumstances or station in life. 
Article 13: 
There shall be no hereditary employments, honors, or distinctions. Everyone has an equal right to vote and is eligible for public office if he is a citizen and has the necessary qualifications. 
Article 14: 
To enjoy the rights of citizenship it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian; 
(2) To be married or twenty-one years of age;(3) To know how to read and write, but this qualification shall not be obligatory until the year 1840; 
(4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of 300 pesos, or in default of this, to be engaged in some profession or business that produces an annual income of 15o pesos, other than as a menial, domestic servant, or day laborer. 
</list>
Article 15: 
The rights of citizenship are lost: 
<list>
(1) For accepting employment from another country without permission of the Government, if already in the employ of Colombia; 
(2) For rendering service to the enemies of Colombia; 
(3) For being condemned to suffer corporal punishment, until restored to citizenship. 
</list>
Article 16: 
The rights of citizenship are suspended: 
<list>
(1) For becoming naturalized in a foreign country; 
(2) For mental derangement; 
(3) For being employed as a domestic servant; 
(4) For nonpayment of sums due the national or municipal treasuries; 
(5) For being declared a vagabond; 
(6) For being an habitual drunkard; 
(7) For being a declared bankrupt; 
(8) For being subject to a criminal prosecution, after issue of the warrant of imprisonment; 
(9) By judicial decree.
</list> 
TITLE V PARISH AND ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES<title> 
SECTION I PARISH ASSEMBLIES<title>
Article 17: 
In every Parish, regardless of population, there shall be held a Parish Assembly every four years on the day appointed by law. 
Article 18: 
Without awaiting any order, the parochial judges shall convoke the Assembly on the appointed day. 
Article 19: 
The Parish Assembly shall be composed of the qualified voters of the Parish and shall be presided over by one of the parish judges assisted by the curate and three inhabitants of good repute whom the judge shall choose from among the parish voters. 
Article 20: 
Voters are the inhabitants of the Parish who are in full enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, but any citizen present in the Parish because of being in the service of the Republic shall have the right to vote. 
Article 21: 
The function of the Parish Assembly is to vote for 61 Elector or Electors to which the Canton is entitled. 
Article 22: 
To be an Elector it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a duly qualified parochial voter; 
(2) To be twenty-five years of age; 
(3) To be a resident of one of the Parishes of the Canton, it being understood that a resident is one who has been registered in the Parish for at least a year, or who is present in the Parish in some kind of public! service; 
(4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of 1,500 pesos, or an annual income of 200 pesos accruing from the exercise of any profession requiring a scientific degree, or from a useful and respectable trade or calling, or a salary of 400 pesos. 
</list>
Article 23: 
Those who obtain the greatest number of votes shall be declared constitutionally chosen Electors. In case of a tie, the choice shall be decided by lot.
SECTION 2 ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES<title>
Article 24: 
The Electoral Assembly shall be composed of Electors chosen by the Parish Assemblies, and it shall be presided over by an Elector chosen by the Assembly after it has been opened by the Governor of the Province. 
Article 25: 
Every two years on the day appointed by law the Electoral Assembly shall meet in the capital of the Province, provided two thirds of the members elected attend. 
Article 26: 
The term of office for Elector shall be four years. Permanent or temporary vacancies shall be filled when necessary by those who have the greatest number of votes in the election registers. 
Article 27: 
The function of the Electoral Assembly is to vote for: 
<list>
(1) The President of the Republic; 
(2) The Vice-President; 
(3) The Senator for the Province and his Alternate (Suplente); 
(4) The Representative or Representatives for the Province, and for an equal number of Alternates (Suplentes); 
(5) The Deputy or Deputies of the Departmental Assembly, and their Alternates (Suplentes). 
</list>
Article 28: 
The Electoral Assemblies may never give any instructions to members of Congress.Article 29: 
The register of elections for President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be sent to the Senate uncanvassed. That for Senators, Representatives, and Deputies to the Departmental Assemblies shall be canvassed and sent to the presiding officers of the respective bodies, and those elected shall be informed thereof.
SECTION 3 PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH ASSEMBLIES<title>
Article 30: 
He who sells his vote or buys that of another for himself or for a third party shall lose his right to vote and his eligibility to office. 
Article 31: 
Elections shall be public, and no one carrying arms may attend them. 
Article 32: 
The Parish and Electoral Assemblies shall meet for eight successive days, at the end of which time they shall be considered dissolved. Any action taken by the Assemblies which is not part of the electoral process for which they are convoked, and anything done after the expiration of the period mentioned, is not only null, but contrary to public security. 
Article 33: 
A special law shall regulate these elections and shall determine the formalities which are to be observed in them. TITLE VI THE LEGISLATIVE POWER<title>
Article 34: 
The Legislative Power shall be exercised by the Congress composed of two Houses, the Senate and House of Representatives. 
Article 35: 
Congress shall assemble annually on the second of February even when it has not been convoked, and its ordinary sessions shall last ninety days. In case of necessity they may be prolonged thirty days more.
SECTION I POWERS OF CONGRESS<title>
Article 36: 
The following are the exclusive powers of Congress: 
<list>
(1) To vote appropriations in view of the estimates which the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to it, and any extraordinary sums for unforeseen expenses; 
(2) To vote the national imposts, duties, and taxes; 
(3) To enact necessary measures for the conservation, administration, and alienation of the national property; 
(4) To contract debts on the credit of Colombia;(5) To establish a national bank; 
(6) To determine and make uniform the weight, value, type, and denomination of money; 
(7) To fix uniform weights and measures; 
(8) To create Tribunals and Courts that may be necessary; 
(9) To create or abolish public offices and to determine, diminish, or augment their salaries; 
(10) To grant personal rewards to those who may have performed great services for the Republic; 
(11) To establish the laws of naturalization; 
(12) To decree public honors to the memory of great men; 
(13) To fix annually the size of the land and sea forces for the following year, to determine their organization and recruitment, and to provide for the construction and equipment of the Navy; 
(14) To declare war on the basis of the facts presented by the Executive, and to instruct him to make peace; 
(15) To give its consent and approval to treaties of commerce, peace, amity, offensive and defensive alliance, neutrality, cession, acquisition, or change of territory which have been concluded by the Executive; 
(16) To promote by legislation public education in the national universities and colleges, the arts and sciences, establishments of general utility, and to concede for a limited time exclusive privileges for their support and encouragement; 
(17) To grant general pardons for any grave reason of public convenience; 
(18) To select the seat of Government and change it when deemed necessary; 
(19) To create new Departments, Provinces, and Cantons, abolish them, or form others from those already established; and to fix their boundaries in any manner conducive to better administration for reasons submitted by the Executive and after granting a hearing to the District Houses; 
(20) To allow or refuse passage of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic; 
(21) To grant or refuse permission to foreign naval squadrons to remain in the ports of the Republic for more than two months; 
(22) To draw up national codes of all kinds, and to enact laws and decrees necessary for the regulation of the different branches of the administration, and to interpret, amend, and annul existing legislation;(23) To accept or reject resignations offered by the President and Vice-President of the Republic.
</list>
SECTION 2 CONCERNING THE ENACTMENT OF LAWS<title>
Article 37: 
Laws and decrees may originate in either House upon introduction by members thereof or by the Executive, subject to that exception provided in Article 63, paragraph 5. 
Article 38: 
Each bill and decree shall be debated on three separate days in accordance with the rules of each House. 
Article 39: 
Bills and decrees which have not been admitted to debate in the House of origin may not be introduced again until the next session of Congress; but this does not prevent the use of any of the articles therein from being a part of another bill which may be introduced. 
Article 40: 
Bills and decrees admitted and discussed in due form shall pass to the other House, which shall in accordance with the same procedure grant or refuse its consent or propose such amendments, additions, or modifications as it may deem proper. 
Article 41: 
If the House in which the bill originated believes that the proposed amendments or modifications are not well founded, it may insist a third time with new arguments upon the admission of the hill in its original form. 
Article 42: 
Although approved by both Houses of Congress, no bill shall have the force of law unless sanctioned by the Executive. I he approves it, he shall publish it and command that it be obeyed as law; should he disapprove of the bill, he shall return it to the House of origin with his objections within fifteen days. 
Article 43: 
Said House shall examine the objections and discuss the bill de novo; should the objections be considered well founded and should they affect the bill in toto, the bill shall be placed in the archives and may not be reconsidered until a subsequent session of Congress; if the objections are limited only to certain points, the objections shall be considered and the House shall decide upon what to do. 
Article 44: 
If the said House by a two-thirds vote of the members present decides that the Executive's objections do not relate to the bill its entirety, such decision shall be sent to the other House. If the latter House finds the objections well founded, it shall so report to the House of origin and return the bill in order that it may be placed in the archives according to the provisions stated in the preceding article; but if by a two-thirds vote of the members present the second House concludes that the Executive's objections are not well founded, the bill shall be returned to the Executive for his sanction, which may not be denied under these circumstances. 
Article 45: 
If, after the period prescribed in Article 42, the Executive has not returned the bill or decree with his objections, it shall have the force of law and as such shall be promulgated, unless Congress in the meantime shall have suspended its meetings or recessed, in which case it must be presented within the first fifteen days of the next session. 
Article 46: 
In the laws and decrees enacted, Congress shall use this formula: The Senate and House of Representatives of the Republic of Colombia, in Congress assembled, decree-- 
Article 47: 
Laws shall be promulgated in a formal manner. This formality, their publication, and the time from which they are to be considered as published shall be determined by law.
SECTION 3 THE SENATE<title>
Article 48: 
The Senate of the Republic shall be composed of citizens elected to that office by the Electoral Assemblies, there being one Senator for each Province.
Article 49: 
The term of office for Senators shall be eight years, one fourth of them being elected every two years. 
Article 50: 
To be a Senator, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian by birth in full enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be forty years of age; 
(3) To be a native or resident of the Department in which is located the Province where the election takes place; 
(4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of 8,000 pesos, or in default of this, an annual income of 1,000 pesos accruing from real property, or one of 1,500 pesos accruing from some employment, business, or profession requiring a scientific degree. 
</list>
Article 51: 
The Senate, acting as a court of justice, shall take cognizance exclusively of accusations brought against the. President and Vice-President of the Republic, Secretaries and Councilors of State in those cases of responsibility specified in the Constitution, and against Justices of the High Court of Justice and the Attorney-General of the Nation for any grave offenses committed in the performance of their duties.Article 52: 
In order that the Senate may proceed in the cases mentioned in the preceding article, accusations must be brought by the !louse of Representatives. 
Article 53: 
The Senate may entrust the trial to a committee of its own members, reserving to itself the judgment and sentence, which shall be pronounced in open session by at least two thirds of the Senators present. 
Article 54: 
From the moment an accusation has been received by the Senate, the accused shall be suspended from office. 
Article 55: 
With respect to common crimes committed by the Executive, as described in Article 110, paragraph 7, the function of she Senate shall be to suspend this official from office and deliver him to the competent Tribunal. 
Article 56: 
The law shall regulate the course and formalities of these trials and shall determine the penalties which the Senate may impose. 
Article 57: 
The Senate shall submit to the Executive ternaries to be used in making appointments to the offices of Justice of the High Court Justice, Archbishop and Bishop, as well as give its consent to the appointments of general officers of the Army and Navy.
SECTION 4 THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES<title>
Article 58: 
The House of Representatives shall be composed of Representatives chosen by the Electoral Assemblies at the ratio of one for each 40,000 persons and another for any remainder of more than 20,000. When the population shall have increased by 500,000 persons, the ratio shall be one for every 50,000 persons and another for any remainder of more than 25,000. If the population is diminished by 500,000 persons, the ratio shall be reduced to one for each 30,000 persons and another for any remainder of more than 15,000. 
Article 59: 
Any Province whose population does not reach the above-mentioned figures shall nevertheless elect one Representative. 
Article 60: 
The term of office for Representatives shall be four years.
Article 61: 
One half of the Representatives are to be elected every two years. 
Article 62: 
To be a Representative, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian citizen in the full enjoyment of the rights of citizenship;(2) To be a native or resident of the Province in which the election takes place; 
(3) To be thirty years of age; 
(4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of four thousand pesos, or in default of this, an annual income of five hundred pesos accruing from real property, or one of eight hundred pesos accruing from some employment, business, or profession requiring a scientific degree. 
</list>
Article 63: 
The following are powers peculiar to the House of Representatives: 
<list>
(1) To bring charges, on its own initiative or at the instance of any citizen, against the President of the Republic or against the Vice-President when exercising the powers of President in the cases of high treason specified in Article 87; 
(2) To bring charges in the same manner against the Secretaries and Councilors of State, the Attorney-General of the Nation, and the Justices of the High Court of Justice for misconduct in office; 
(3) To scrutinize the expenditures of national income and to examine the annual account presented by the Secretary of the Treasury; 
(4) To watch over everything concerning the national credit, to examine at each session the books and documents of the commission, and to name in accordance with law the principal officers of that establishment; 
(5) To initiate laws relating to imposts and taxes.
</list>
SECTION 5 PROVISIONS COMMON TO BOTH HOUSES<title>
Article 64: 
The Senate and House of Representatives may not begin their sessions without the attendance of two thirds of the entire membership of the respective Houses, and any number attending on the day appointed shall have the power to compel the attendance of absent members; however, on the expiration of thirty days after the day on which Congress should have met, the Houses shall be permitted to open the session with the attendance of only a majority, but they shall not be able to continue without the attendance of at least two thirds of those present in the town where the session is being held. 
Article 65: 
There shall be joint sessions only: 
<list>
(1) To open the sessions of Congress; 
(2) To complete the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic; 
(3) To receive the oath taken by these officers;(4) To accept or reject their resignations; 
(5) To examine the account of the national debt. 
</list>
In such joint sessions the President of the Senate shall preside, and in his absence the President of the House of Representatives. 
Article 66: 
The Houses shall hold their sessions in the same town; neither shall be able to suspend its sessions for more than two days or remove to another place without the consent of the other. 
Article 67: 
Vacancies in the Houses resulting from death, resignation, removal, or any other cause shall be filled by the respective alternates, and when for similar reasons the latter are unavailable, the Governor of the Province, at the request of the proper House, shall convoke an extraordinary session of the Electoral Assembly to choose a new member. 
Article 68: 
The sessions of both Houses shall be public, but they may be held in secret when it is deemed expedient. 
Article 69: 
Each House shall have the right to establish rules necessary for its regulation and the direction of its business. It may inflict upon any of its members who shall violate them the penalties which may be prescribed, and punish those members lacking in decorum or interrupting the deliberations. 
Article 70: 
Such rules do not require the sanction of the Executive. 
Article 71: 
The following may not be Senators or Representatives: the President and Vice-President of the Republic, Secretaries and Councilors of State, Justices of the High Court of Justice and of the Courts of Appeals, Prefects of Departments, Governors of Provinces, and others who may be excluded by law. 
Article 72: 
Senators and Representatives, while the sessions last and during the time necessary for proceeding thereto and returning home, may not be accused or arrested for any civil action, or prosecuted or imprisoned for any criminal action until the House to which they belong has suspended them from office and delivered them to the competent Tribunal, unless they have been taken in flagrante delicto for an offense meriting corporal punishment. 
Article 73: 
Senators and Representatives are not responsible at any time or to any authority for speeches or opinions expressed in the Houses.
Article 74: 
While in office, Senators and Representatives may not be appointed to any office under the Executive.TITLE VII THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title> 
SECTION I THE HEAD OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER<title>
Article 75: 
The Executive Power is entrusted to an officer known as the President of the Republic. 
Article 76: 
In case of death, resignation, or physical or mental incapacity of the President, the Vice-President shall take charge of the Executive Power. 
Article 77: 
The President of the Republic shall be elected by the Electoral Assemblies. When no candidate receives an absolute majority of electoral votes cast in the Assemblies, Congress, which has the power to scrutinize elections, shall name the three candidates who have received the greatest number of votes and from them shall choose the President of the Republic. 
Article 78: 
This election shall take place in a continuous session and by secret balloting. If on the first ballot no one obtains two thirds of the votes of the members present, the voting shall be confined to the two candidates receiving the most votes, and should neither of the two then obtain the two thirds, the voting shall continue until that result is obtained. 
Article 79: 
The election of the Vice-President of the Republic shall follow the same procedure employed in the election of the President. 
Article 80: 
The election of the Vice-President of the Republic shall take place in the fourth year after that of the President. 
Article 81: 
In the event of the death, resignation, or mental or physical incapacity of the Vice-President of the Republic while he is in charge of the Executive Power, the President of the Senate shall exercise those functions until a new election of President and Vice-President is held, for which the necessary orders shall be immediately issued. Persons chosen at such extraordinary elections for filling such vacancies shall remain in office until the end of the constitutional period. 
Article 82: 
To be President or Vice-President of the Republic, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian by birth; 
(2) To be forty years of age; 
(3) To have resided in the Republic for at least six years preceding the election, but this shall not be required of those who have been absent in the service of the Republic.
</list>Article 83: 
The term of office for President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be eight years reckoned from the fifteenth day of February, and they may not be re-elected to the same office during the next succeeding period of eight years. 
Article 84: 
Persons who have been in charge of the Executive Power for at least two years immediately preceding the ordinary election may not be re-elected President or Vice-President of the Republic for the period following such election. 
Article 85: 
The functions and powers of the Executive are: 
<list>
(1) To preserve domestic order and tranquility and to protect the country against foreign attack; 
(2) To sanction the laws and decrees of Congress and issue all regulations and orders necessary for their execution; 
(3) To convoke Congress for ordinary sessions and for extraordinary sessions should the welfare of the Republic require it; to open the sessions and to inform Congress of the state of the nation; 
(4) To direct the land and sea forces, and to distribute them for the defense of the Republic; 
(5) To use the national militia for internal security; 
(6) To declare war with the previous authorization of Congress; 
(7) To appoint and remove freely the Secretaries of State and the Councilors of State; 
(8) To select, from ternaries submitted by the Senate, the Justices of the High Court of Justice, Archbishops, and Bishops; and with the consent of the Senate, to appoint the general officers of the Army and Navy; 
(9) To appoint, with the advice of the Council of State, Ministers Plenipotentiary, Envoys, and all other Diplomatic Agents and Consuls General; 
(10) To direct diplomatic negotiations and enter into treaties of commerce, peace, amity, alliance, neutrality, cession, acquisition, or change of territory, and to ratify them with the previous consent and approval of Congress; 
(11) To appoint, with the advice of the Council of State and from ternaries submitted by Departmental Assemblies, the Judges of the Courts of Appeals; 
(12) To appoint, with the advice of the Council of State, Prefects of Departments and Governors of Provinces; in making these appointments attention shall be given to ternaries submitted by the Departmental Assemblies, which, however, shall not be binding; 
(13) To appoint, with the advice of the Council of State, the Attorney-General of the Nation and his agents, departmental as well as provincial, and the canonical dignitaries and prebendaries of the churches of Colombia; 
(14) To appoint in accordance with law all civil, military, and treasury officials whose appointment is not given by law to another authority; 
(15) Acting through the Public Ministry (Ministerio Publico), to see that justice is administered by the Tribunals and Courts and that their decisions are executed; 
(16) To commute sentences of capital punishment with the advice of the Council of State, provided always that it be done for some special reason of public expediency or on the recommendation of the Court which handed down the sentence, or without the necessity of such recommendation if the Court be consulted previously upon the matter; but this power does not extend to penalties imposed by the Senate; 
(17) To see that the public taxes and revenues are collected and expended in accordance with law; 
(18) To suspend from office, with the consent of the Council of State, employees of the executive branch whether political or financial and to consign them without delay to the competent Court along with the documents and reasons for the suspension. 
</list>
Article 86: 
The Executive is not permitted: 
<list>
(1) To take personal command of the land and naval forces without the express consent of Congress, in which case the person who is to succeed him shall take charge of the Executive Power; 
(2) To deprive any Colombian of his liberty or inflict any punishment upon him. When public welfare and security demand the arrest of anyone, he shall be able to decree such arrest, but before the expiration of forty-eight hours he shall place the person arrested at the disposal of the competent Judge; 
(3) To obstruct the course of judicial proceedings, or impede the progress of cases being tried according to the procedure prescribed by law; 
(4) To prevent the elections provided for by this Constitution, or prevent persons elected from entering upon their duties; 
(5) To dissolve the Houses or suspend their sessions; 
(6) To leave the territory of the Republic while in office or for one year thereafter; 
(7) To exercise the Executive Power while absent from the capital in some other part of the Republic;(8) To use the funds and revenues destined for the public service in any manner other than that prescribed by law. 
</list>
Article 87: 
The responsibility of the Executive attaches only to the following cases, which are crimes of high treason: 
<list>
(1) For entering into any conspiracy against the liberty and independence of Colombia; 
(2) For being involved in any plot to overthrow the Constitution of the Republic or the form of government established by it; 
(3) For refusing to sanction laws and decrees approved by Congress when, in accordance with the Constitution, he is obliged to do so.
</list>
SECTION 2 SECRETARIES OF STATE<title>
Article 88: 
The Ministry of State is divided into the following four departments: 
<list>
(1) Interior and Justice; 
(2) Treasury; 
(3) War and Navy; 
(4) Foreign Relations. 
</list>
Article 89: 
Each Ministry shall be headed by a Secretary of State; the law shall organize the Ministries and regulate their functions. 
Article 90: 
Secretaries of State must authorize all decrees, regulations, orders, and enactments issued by the Executive. Acts not having this authorization and all communications not made through the channels of the proper Ministry shall not be executed, even though they carry the signature of the Executive. 
Article 91: 
Secretaries of State shall give the Houses all information and reports on their respective Ministries which may be required. They shall be admitted to debates on bills presented by the Executive, and they shall attend other debates whenever the respective House may deem it necessary; but they shall not have the right to vote. 
Article 92: 
During the first ten days of the sessions, the Secretaries of State shall give to each House a report on the state of their respective Ministries. 
Article 93: 
In the exercise of their duties, Secretaries of State are responsible:
<list> 
(1) For treason as provided in Article 87, paragraphs I and 2; 
(2) For bribery and corruption; 
(3) For violation of the Constitution; 
(4) For nonobservance of law;(5) For abuse of power against the liberty, property, and security of a citizen; 
(6) For embezzlement of public funds; 
(7) For all grave crimes and offenses committed in the exercise of their duties. 
</list>
Article 94: 
Neither a written nor verbal order from the Executive can absolve a Secretary from his responsibility.
SECTION 3 THE COUNCIL OF STATE<title>
Article 95: 
To assist the Executive there shall be a Council of State composed of the Vice-President of the Republic, who shall preside, the Secretaries of State, the Attorney-General of the Nation, and twelve Councilors selected from among the citizenry without distinction of class. 
Article 96: 
To be a Councilor of State it is necessary to be a Colombian in the full enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, and to be of good repute. 
Article 97: 
The Council of State shall: 
<list>
(1) Give its opinion concerning the sanctioning of laws and all important and general business of public administration, and in all other instances where the Executive may require it; 
(2) Prepare, discuss, and draft bills which are to be presented to Congress in the name of the Executive; 
(3) Give advice in those cases referred to in Article 85, and give the necessary information respecting the qualifications, merits, and circumstances of persons involved in the case. 
</list>
Article 98: 
The Executive is not required to follow the advice of the Council of State. 
Article 99: 
Councilors of State are responsible to the Senate for opinions they may give which are contrary to the provisions of the Constitution or laws.
SECTION 4 THE PUBLIC MINISTRY (MINISTERIO PUBLICO)<title>
Article 100: 
The Public Ministry shall be entrusted to an agent of the Executive known as the Attorney-General of the Nation, who shall represent the Government before the Tribunals and Courts and promote, before any authorities whatsoever, whether civil, military, or ecclesiastical, the national interests and all that relates to public order. 
Article 101: 
The Attorney-General of the Nation shall reside in the capital of the Republic and shall communicate directly with the Executive through the Secretaries of State. 
Article 102: 
To be Attorney-General of the Nation it is necessary to be a Colombian in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship and a lawyer in good standing and of good repute. 
Article 103: 
The Public Ministry shall be regulated by a law which shall designate its agents and powers and determine whatever may be deemed necessary for the exercise of its functions. 
TITLE VIII THE ARMED FORCES<title>
Article 104: 
The function of the armed forces is to defend the independence and liberty of the Republic, to maintain public order, and to secure the observance of the laws. 
Article 105: 
The armed forces shall never assemble as such for purposes of deliberation. They are essentially obedient to the constituted authorities and to their chiefs in accordance with the laws and ordinances. 
Article 106: 
With regard to jurisdiction, discipline, trials, and penalties, individuals in the Army and Navy are subject to the military ordinances. 
Article 107: 
Members of the national militia while not in actual service may not be subjected to military law or to the punishments provided by it, but they shall, like other citizens, be subject to the regular laws and ordinary Judges; it being understood that they are in actual service when they are paid by the State, although some may serve gratuitously, or when engaged in the training exercises required by law. 
Article 108: 
Officers of the Army and Navy must be Colombians and may not be deprived of their rank except by sentence passed in a proper trial.
TITLE IX THE JUDICIAL POWER<title>
Article 109: 
Justice shall be administered by a High Court of Justice, Courts of Appeals, and other Tribunals and Courts already established or which may be established by law.
SECTION I THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE<title>
Article 110: 
There shall be in the capital of the Republic a High Court of Justice whose powers shall be:
<list>(1) To take cognizance of all cases involving Ministers Plenipotentiary, Envoys, and Diplomatic Agents accredited to the Government of the Republic in accordance with international law and existing treaties; 
(2) To take cognizance of all controversies arising out of contracts or engagements entered into by the Executive or in his name; 
(3) To settle conflicts between Courts of Appeals, and between them and other tribunals; 
(4) To hear appeals from decisions handed down by the Courts of Appeals as are provided by law; 
(5) To take cognizance of complaints against the Courts of Appeals for abuse of authority, or for neglect, denial, or delay in the administration of justice; 
(6) To hear cases of responsibility brought against Judges of the Courts of Appeals for misconduct in the performance of their duties; 
(7) To take cognizance of criminal charges carrying a penalty of corporal or otherwise infamous punishment brought against the President and Vice-President of the Republic after they have been suspended from office by the Senate in accordance with Article 55; 
(8) To take cognizance of all criminal charges brought against Secretaries and Councilors of State, the Attorney-General of the Nation, and Justices of the High Court itself; 
(9) To hear questions concerning the interpretation of any law which may be directed to it by the Superior Tribunals and, acting through the Executive, to advise Congress of its opinion thereon; 
(10) And anything else provided by law. 
</list>
Article 111: 
To be a Justice of the High Court of Justice, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian by birth; 
(2) To be forty years of age; 
(3) To have been a Judge in one of the Courts of Appeals.
</list>
SECTION 2 THE COURTS OF APPEALS<title>
Article 112: 
In order to facilitate the promptest administration of justice, judicial districts shall be established, and in each there shall be a Court of Appeals, whose powers shall be determined by law. 
Article 113: 
To be a Judge of the Court of Appeals it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian; 
(2) To be a lawyer in good standing; 
(3) To be thirty-five years of age;(4) To have been a Judge of first instance or Assessor for at least three years, or to have been creditably engaged in the practice of law for at least six years.
</list>
SECTION 3 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM<title>
Article 114: 
Justices of the High Court and of the Courts of Appeals and other Judges may not be removed from office except by judicial sentence, or suspended from office unless a legally admitted accusation is pending against them; nor may they be transferred to any other office unless they have voluntarily left their judicial posts. 
Article 115: 
The Tribunals and Courts shall exercise no other functions than that of judging and seeing that their decisions are executed. 
Article 116: 
All Tribunals and Courts are obliged to give opinions in support of their decisions. 
Article 117: 
There shall be no more than three instances in any case. 
Article 118: 
Trials and decisions of Tribunals shall be public, but the Judges may deliberate in private. 
Article 119: 
Justices of the High Court of Justice shall be responsible for misconduct in office to the Senate, Judges of the Courts of Appeals to the High Court, and other Judges to the Courts of Appeals. 
TITLE X INTERNAL GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC<title> 
SECTION I ADMINISTRATION OF DEPARTMENTS AND PROVINCES<title>
Article 120: 
The head of the government of each Department shall be the Prefect, a subordinate of the Executive, whose immediate agent he is, and with whom he communicates directly through the proper Ministry. 
Article 121: 
The head of each Province shall be a Governor who s politically subordinate to the Prefect of the Department. 
Article 122: 
To be Prefect or Governor, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be thirty years of age; 
(3) To have rendered previous service to the Republic and to be of good repute;(4) To have resided in the territory of the Republic at least three years preceding appointment. 
</list>
Article 123: 
The term of office for Prefects and Governors shall be four years. 
Article 124: 
The civil and military authority of the Departments and Provinces may not be entrusted to the same person under any circumstances or pretext whatsoever. 
Article 125: 
The Cantons shall be governed by an officer subordinate to the Governor, and his title and term of office shall be determined by the law which organizes the internal political regime of the Republic and designates the powers of the functionaries mentioned in this section.
SECTION 2 THE DEPARTMENTAL ASSEMBLIES<title>
Article 126: 
For better administration there shall be established Departmental Assemblies having the power to deliberate and decide upon the municipal and local questions of the Departments, and to report upon everything which may concern the general interests of the Republic. 
Article 127: 
In Departments having a population of eighty thousand there shall be a Departmental Assembly; but if in the opinion of any such Assembly there is not sufficient wealth and other conditions necessary for the support of such establishments are lacking, Congress shall combine it with the nearest Department. 
Article 128: 
The Departmental Assembly shall be composed of Deputies from the Provinces situated in the Department who are chosen by the Electoral Assemblies after such Assemblies have completed election of Representatives to Congress, and said Deputies shall be chosen in accordance with the same formalities. The term of office for Deputies shall be four years. 
Article 129: 
To be Deputy in a Departmental Assembly, it is necessary: 
<list>
(1) To be a Colombian in the full exercise of the rights of citizenship; 
(2) To be twenty-five years of age; 
(3) To be a native or resident of the Province in which the election takes place; 
(4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of four thousand pesos, or in default of this, an income of five hundred pesos accruing from real property, or one of eight hundred pesos accruing from some employment, business, or profession requiring a scientific, degree. 
</list>
Article 130: 
The functions of Departmental Assemblies are: 
<list>
(1) To submit to the Executive in ternary names of persons to be appointed Judges of the Courts of Appeals; 
(2) To submit to the Executive lists of persons eligible for the offices of Prefect of Department and Governor of Province; 
(3) And any other functions provided by law. 
</list>
Article 131: 
Departmental Assemblies shall hold annual sessions at such time as is appointed by law; the sessions shall be public and shall be held daily for forty days, but they may be prolonged to sixty days in cases of necessity. 
Article 132: 
Departmental Assemblies shall never assume the character of representatives of the People, nor may they in any case or under any pretext perform functions other than those provided by the Constitution and laws. Any action contrary to this shall be considered as an attempt against public order and safety. 
Article 133: 
The organic law of these Assemblies shall indicate their other powers and their place of meeting in the several districts.
SECTION 3 THE MUNICIPAL COUNCILS<title>
Article 134: 
There shall be Municipal Councils in the capitals of the Provinces and in those cities in the Cantons designated by the Departmental Assemblies. These Councils shall be organized by a law which shall designate their powers and determine the number of members, their term of office, and the manner of election.
TITLE XI CIVIL RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES<title>
Article 135: 
All public officials are responsible for their conduct in the exercise of their functions as prescribed by the Constitution and laws. 
Article 136: 
Colombians have equality before the law in that whether its provisions are intended to protect or to punish, they are the same for all and the law favors them in equal degree for the preservation of their rights. 
Article 137: 
Colombians are at liberty to settle their differences by arbitration at any stage of the proceedings; they may change their domicile, absent themselves from the Republic as well as return to it, provided they observe the legal formalities and do nothing which is prohibited by law. 
Article 138: 
No Colombian may be deprived of trial by the ordinary Judges, nor may he be tried by special commissions or extraordinary tribunals. 
Article 139: 
No Colombian may be taken or arrested except by competent authority unless he is discovered in flagrante delicto, in which case anyone may arrest him and take him before a Judge. 
Article 140: 
Except in cases of imprisonment by virtue of a legal warrant or of correctional punishment, no Colombian may be arrested or sent to prison in a criminal matter except for an offense deserving corporal punishment. 
Article 141: 
Within twelve hours at the most after the arrest or imprisonment of any individual, the Judge shall issue an order over his own signature stating the facts of the case, and a copy of the same shall be delivered to the prisoner if he demands it. The Judge who neglects this formality and the jailer who does not apply for such order after the lapse of twelve hours shall be punished for arbitrary detention, and neither of them shall employ any more force or confinement than is absolutely necessary for the detention of the prisoner or person arrested. 
Article 142: 
No Colombian is obliged to give evidence in any criminal case against himself, his spouse, ascendants, descendants, or brothers and sisters. 
Article 143: 
No penalty shall be applied to the innocent, however near his relationship to the guilty. 
Article 144: 
No one shall be confined in a prison which is not publicly known and legally authorized as such. 
Article 145: 
No Colombian shall be sentenced or punished except for violation of a law in operation before the commission of his offense, nor until after he has been prosecuted, heard, and legally convicted.
Article 146: 
No Colombian shall be deprived of his property, nor shall it be applied to any public use without his consent. Should the public interest, legally ascertained, require this, the owner shall receive adequate prior compensation. 
Article 147: 
The military shall not be billeted or lodged in private houses without the consent of the occupants; the civil authorities shall in accordance with law prepare quarters and lodgings for officers and men who are in service during peace and war. 
Article 148: 
The penalty of confiscation is hereby abolished, but this does not include forfeitures or fines assigned by law to certain crimes. 
Article 149: 
No kind of labor, industry, or trade not contrary to public morals shall be prohibited to Colombians, and everyone is at liberty to engage in whatever business he pleases except those which may be absolutely indispensable to the subsistence of the State. 
Article 150: 
The entail of estates as well as every other description of entail is prohibited. 
Article 151: 
Every Colombian has the right to publish freely his thoughts and opinions without previous censorship, subject, however, to legal responsibility. 
Article 152: 
The domicile of a Colombian is inviolable; it cannot entered except when necessary and in accordance with the formalities required by law. 
Article 153: 
Correspondence is likewise inviolable. Letters shall be neither intercepted nor opened at any time except by competent authority and under circumstances prescribed by law. 
Article 154: 
All Colombians have the right to assert claims before officials when done with the proper moderation and respect; anyone may present in writing to Congress or the Executive whatever he deems conducive to the general welfare of the Nation; but no individual or association of individuals may petition the authorities in the name of the People, much less arrogate unto themselves the character of the People. Those who contravene this provision shall be arrested, prosecuted, and tried in accordance with the law. 
Article 155: 
The public debt is guaranteed. 
Article 156: 
No money shall be drawn from the National Treasury for any use other than that prescribed by law and in conformity with the budget approved by Congress, which shall be regularly published every year. 
TITLE XII INTERPRETATION AND AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION<title>
Article 157: 
Every public functionary and employee upon entering upon his office shall take an oath to maintain and defend the Constitution and to fulfill faithfully and exactly the duties of his office. 
Article 158: 
The President and Vice-President of the Republic take their oaths in the presence of a joint session of Congress if it in session, and, if not, in the presence of the Council of State, the Tribunals, and principal officers in the capital. The Presidents of the Houses of Congress shall take their oaths in the presence of their respective Houses. Members of the Houses shall take their oaths in the presence of their respective Presidents. Other functionaries and employees shall take theirs at the hands of the Executive or the official charged with administering oaths. 
Article 159: 
Congress has the power to resolve any doubt which may arise concerning the meaning of any of the articles of this Constitution. 
Article 160: 
Any alteration in one or more of the articles of this Constitution, or any additions thereto may be proposed in either House; whenever the proposal shall be supported by at least one fifth of the members present and admitted to debate by a majority, it shall be debated according to the forms prescribed for bills; if the proposed change be pronounced necessary by a two-thirds vote of the members present, it shall be sent to the other House. 
Article 161: 
If the reform or addition is approved in the other House in accordance with the provisions of the preceding article, it shall be sent to the Executive for the sole purpose of being published and circulated, and he shall submit it to the Congress again during its session the following year. 
Article 162: 
In the session of the following year, Congress shall take under consideration the reform or addition approved in the preceding session, and if accepted by a two-thirds vote of the members present in accordance with the formalities provided in Article 160, it shall be considered a part of this Constitution and sent to the Executive for publication. 
Article 163: 
The Executive may not present bills having for their purpose the interpretation of any one or more articles of this Constitution, or any for its amendment; he may, however, in either case offer his own opinions on the subject. 
Article 164: 
The power of Congress to amend the Constitution shall not include the power to change the form of government, which shall always be republican, popular, representative, and responsible.
TRANSITORY ARTICLES<title>
Article 165: 
The next Constitutional Congress shall meet on February 2, 1831. 
Article 166: 
During the opening days of the sessions of 1832, 1834, and 1836 lots shall be cast to determine which Senators' terms of office shall expire in order that the membership may be renewed by fourths as directed by the Constitution. In the session of 1832 lots shall be cast in the House of Representatives in order that the membership may be renewed by halves. 
Article 167: 
The first Vice-President of the Republic to be elected by the Electoral Assemblies at the time the President is chosen shall remain in office only four years. Done in the Constituent Congress in Bogota the 29th of April 183o, and of Independence the twentieth.