CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Costa Rica – San José December 7, 1871.

WE, the Representatives of the people of Costa Rica, lawfully convoked for the purpose of establishing justice, providing for the common defence, promoting the general welfare, and securing the benefits of freedom, imploring the aid of the Sovereign Euler of the Universe for the attainment of those ends, have decreed and confirmed the following 

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION.

TITLE  I. Of the Republic.

ART. I. The Republic of Costa Rica is free and independent. 
II. The sovereignty resides exclusively in the nation. 
III . The limits of the territory of the Republic are as follows: the Atlantic Ocean on the north, the Pacific on the south, next to the United States of Colombia, those of the uti possidetis of 1826,and next to Nicaragua those fixed by the Treaty of April 15, 1858.

TITLE II. Of the Costaricans.

IV. The Costaricans are native or naturalised. V. The natives are : 1. All who are born in the territory of the Republic, excepting those who, being children of a foreign father or mother, have to follow that condition in conformity with the law. 2. The children of a Costarican father or mother born out of the territory of the Republic and whose names are inscribed in the civic register by desire of their parents while they are under 21 years of age, or at their own desire when they attain that age. 3. The children of a foreign father or mother born in the territory of the Republic, who after they are 21 years of age are

inscribed in the civic register at their own desire, or at the desire of their parents before that age. 

4. The inhabitants of the province of Guauacaste who had definitively settled therein from its incorporation with this Republic up to the Treaty of April 15, 1858, concluded with that of Nicaragua, are also natives. 
VI. The naturalised are : 1. Those who have acquired that qualification in virtue of previous laws. 2. The foreign woman married to a Costarican. 3. The natives of other nations who, after residing a year in the Republic, obtain the necessary letter. 
VII . The qualification of a Costarican is lost and regained for the causes and by the means which the law determines. 

VIII . The duties of the Costaricans are to observe the Constitution and the laws, to serve the country, to defend it, and to contribute to the public expenses. 

2. Of the Citizens. 

IX. The Costarican citizens are, all the natives of the Republic, or persons naturalised therein, who are full 21 years of age, or 18 if they be married or professors of any science ; provided that in both cases they possess besides, some property or honest calling, the profits or gains whereof are sufficient to maintain them in accordance with their condition. 

X. The exercise of the citizenship is suspended, lost, and regained for the causes which the law determines. 

XI . Those who have lost their citizenship, unless it be by treason to the country, may be reinstated on giving lawful reasons for the accordance of the favour. 

3. Of Foreigners. 

XII. Foreigners enjoy all the civil rights of citizenship in the territory of the nation, they may exercise their employment or trade, possess real property, buy it and dispose of it, navigate the rivers and coasts, perform their worship freely, make wills and marry according to the laws. They are not obliged to become citizens, nor to pay extraordinary forced contributions.

TITLE III. 1. Of the National Guarantees.

XIII. The Powers into which the Government of the Republic is divided are independent of each other. 
XIV . No one can claim the sovereignty for himself; any one who does so commits a crime against the nation. 

XV. No authority can enter into compacts, Treaties, or Conventions which are adverse to the sovereignty and independence of the Republic. Any one who commits this crime shall be considered a traitor. 

XVI. No authority can assume powers which the law does not grant to it. 
XVII . The orders of the Legislative or of the Executive Power which are contrary to the Constitution are void and of no effect, whatever may be the form in which they are issued. It is the same with the acts of those who usurp public functions, and also with offices conferred without the requirements demanded by the Constitution or the laws. 

XVIII . The Legislative Power alone has the right to decide upon the alienation of the property belonging to the nation, to decree loans, and to impose taxes. 
XIX . The public functionaries are not the proprietors but the depositaries of authority. They are subject to the laws and must never consider themselves superior to them. 

XX. The public functionaries are responsible for any infraction of the Constitution or of the laws. They are accused by popular action. 

XXI. Every public functionary shall take oath to observe and fulfil the Constitution and the laws. 

XXII . The military force is subordinate to the Civil Power, it is essentially passive and must never deliberate. 

XXIII . The Republic does not recognize hereditary title, or venal offices, nor does it allow the foundation of entails. 

XXIV. The penalty of disgrace is not communicable. The use of torture and the penalty of confiscation are prohibited. 

2. Of the Personal Guarantees. 

XXV. All men are equal before the law. 

XXVI . The law has no retroactive effect. 
XXVII . Every man in the Republic is free ; no one who is tinder the protection of its laws can be a slave. XXVIII . Every Costarican can remove to any part of the Republic or out of it, provided he is free from all responsibility, and he may return when it suits him. 

XXIX . Property is inviolable ; no one can be deprived of what belongs to him unless for the public interest legally proved, and with previous indemnification justly assessed by experts nominated by the parties, who are not only to estimate the value of the thing taken but also that of the consequent damages vouched for. In case of war or internal commotion it is not indispensable that the indemnification be made beforehand. 

XXX . The domicile of the inhabitants of the Republic is inviolable and cannot be forced, except in the cases and with the formalities prescribed by the law. 

XXXI. In no case can the private papers of the inhabitants of the Republic be seized, nor yet examined. 

XXXII . The secrecy of written or telegraphic correspondence is inviolable, and such as may be intercepted shall have no legal effect. 

XXXIII. All the inhabitants of the Republic have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms, whether it be for the purpose of treating private matters or of discussing political affairs and â€¢examining the public conduct of the functionaries. 

XXXIV . No person or assembly of persons can assume the title or the representation of the people, claim their rights, or make petitions in their name. The infringement of this Article is sedition. 
XXXV. The right of petition may be exercised individually or collectively. 
XXXVI . No one can be molested or prosecuted for any act that does not infringe the law, nor for the manifestation of his political opinions. XXXVII . All may communicate their ideas by word of mouth or in writing, and may publish them by means of the press without previous censure; but they are responsible for any abuse committed in the exercise of this right, hi the cases and the manner prescribed by the law. 
XXXVIII. The trial of civil and criminal cases is the exclusive function of the authorities established by the law. No Commission, tribunal, or judge shall be created for cases already determined, nor shall any one be subjected to military jurisdiction except those belonging to the army, and only for the crimes of sedition and rebellion, for those committed whilst on service or under requisition for service, against discipline, and any others in campaign, in which cases they shall be tried according to martial law. 
XXXIX . In criminal matters no persons are obliged, to give evidence against themselves, nor as witness against wife or husband, progenitors, offspring, or other relations within the third degree of consanguinity, or second of affinity. 

XLI . No one can be detained without presumptive proof of having committed an offence, and without a written order from a judge or an authority charged with public order, unless he be a declared criminal fugitive, or be taken in the fact; but in every case he must be placed at disposal of a competent judge within the rigorous term of 21 hours. XXI. Every inhabitant of the Republic has the right of Habeas Corpus.

XLII . No one shall be subjected to any punishment without having been heard and convicted on trial and without an executory sentence passed on him by a judge or competent authority. Corporal compulsion, contumacy, and other penalties of this nature in civil cases, and those of fine or arrest in matters of police, are excepted. 
XLIII. No punishment can be imposed on any one unless it has been appointed by a pre-existent law for the offence or misdemeanour that he has committed. 
XLIV. No person can be imprisoned for debt except in the sole case of fraud legally proved. 
XLV. The punishment of death shall only be imposed in the Republic in the following cases: 1. For the crime of homicide premeditated and certain, or premeditated and treacherous. 2. For the crimes of high treason ; and 3. For those of piracy. 
XLVI . The crime of high treason consists in invading the territory of the Republic with armed force, or adhering to its enemies and giving them aid and assistance. The Costaricans or the foreigners in the service of the nation will incur the punishment assigned to this crime, provided the invasion be effected; and the crime of piracy consists in robbing on the high seas, with acts of depredation or violence against persons or things without lawful authority. 

XLVII . Every Costarican or foreigner who appeals to the laws is to find a remedy for the injuries or damages that he has suffered in his person, property, or honour. He is to receive justice promptly, fully, without denial, and in strict conformity with the laws. 

XLVIII . All Costaricans or foreigners have a right to settle their disputes in civil matters by means of arbitrators, whether before or after the commencement of a suit. 

XLIX. The same judge cannot act in different instances, if it be the same point that is to be decided. L. Private act3 which do not affect public order or public morality, or which do not produce injury or prejudice to others,, are beyond the action of the law.

TITLE IV .Of Religion. 
LI. The Catholic Apostolic Roman religion is the religion of the Republic: the Government protects it and does not contribute from the public revenue to the expenses of other religious services, but tolerates the exercise of them.

TITLE V. Of Education. 
LII . The primary education of both sexes is obligatory, gratuitous, and paid for by the nation. It is under the immediate direction of the municipalities, and the ultimate inspection of the Executive Power. 
LIII . Every Costarican or foreigner is at liberty to give or receive such instruction as he thinks fit in the establishments which are not paid for out of public funds.

TITLE VI. 1. Of the Suffrage.

LIV. There are two degrees of suffrage. 
LV. The right of suffrage in the first belongs to all the citizens acting as such. That of voting in the second belongs exclusively to the electors chosen by the former. LVI. The first exercise it at popular meetings, the second in electoral assemblies. 
LVII. The purpose of those meetings is the nomination of electors for the district at the rate of 3 principals and one substitute for each thousand persons of the population; but the district which does not contain so many shall still nominate the said 4 electors. Â§ 2. Of the Electoral Assemblies. 
LVIII . These are composed of the electors nominated at the popular meetings. 
L1X. To be an elector it is required : 1. To be a citizen acting as such. 2. To be full 21 years of age. 3. To be able to read and write. 4. To be an inhabitant of the province to which the district that appoints them belongs. 5. To possess a capital of not less than 500 dollars, or an annual income of 200. 
LX. The President of the Republic, the Bishop, the Magistrates of the Court of Justice, and the Governors cannot be electors. 
LXI . The office of Elector is obligatory according to the law; it continues for 4 years, and those who fill it are re-eligible without restriction. 
LXII . The functions of the Electoral Assemblies are : 1. To vote for the President of the Republic. 2. To elect the Deputies for each province at the rate of one principal for each 8,000 inhabitants, or for a residue which exceeds 4,000, and one substitute for each 12,000. The province of Guanacaste, however, shall elect two principal deputies and one substitute, and the Comarca of Puntarenas one principal and one substitute. 3. To elect the persons who are to compose the municipalities, and to perform the other elections which the law assigns to them. 

LXIII . A special law will regulate upon these bases the qualification of the citizens, and the elections as may best conduce to the legality, freedom, and order of the suffrage in its two degrees.

TITIE VII. Of the Government.

LXIV . The Government of the Republic is popular, representative, alternative, and responsible, and it is exercised by 3 distinct Powers, which are denominated Legislative, Executive, and Judicial.

TITLE VIII. Of the Legislative Power.
1. Organization of the Constitutional Congress. 

LXV. The Legislative Power is delegated by the people to a corporation which is denominated Constitutional Congress. 

LXVI. The Constitutional Congress is formed of Deputies elected by the Electoral Assemblies in the proportion fixed in paragraph 2, Article LXII of this Constitution. 

LXVII. The Deputies are to hold their places for 4 years, having to be renewed by moieties every two years, and being capable of re-election without restriction. Those who are to leave their seats at the first period of renovation will be decided by lot.

LXVIII. The members of the Congress are absolutely irresponsible for the opinions and votes which they give therein, and they enjoy immunity of person from the time that they have been declared elected till 10 days after the close of the sessions. The law will determine the mode of proceeding against them during that time. 
Sole §. This immunity consists in that they cannot be prosecuted civilly nor be detained or arrested for criminal matters, unless they have been previously suspended by the Constitutional Congress, â€¢except in the case of being taken in the fact. 

LXIX. The Congress will assemble every year on the 1st day of May, although it may not have been convoked, and its ordinary sessions shall continue for 60 days, which may be extended to 90 if necessary. LXX. It shall also hold extraordinary sessions when convoked for the purpose by the Executive Power. The Decree which convokes it shall specify the matter which the Congress is to attend to exclusively. 

LXXI . The Deputies to the Congress cannot accept offices from, the Executive Power during the sessions. They can only accept the Secretaryships of State and diplomatic appointments by vacating their place in the Congress. Neither can they be members of the municipality. 
LXXII . To be a Deputy it is required: 1. To be a Costarican by birth or naturalisation with a residence of 4 years since the acquisition of the letter of naturalisation.

2. To possess all the qualifications required for an elector excepting the 4th.

2. Attributions of the Congress. 
LXXIII . The exclusive attributions of the Congress are: 1. To open and close its sessions at the time appointed by the law, and to suspend them when it thinks fit, in order to continue them within the year, leaving, meanwhile, a committee of redaction if necessary. 2. To open the electoral proceedings, test the qualification, and scrutinise the votes for President of the Republic, and declare his election when it takes place by absolute majority; but if there be not an absolute majority, to elect one of the persons who have obtained the largest number of votes, and in case two or more have obtained an equal number, and another a larger number, than they, the Congress, is to elect the President of the Republic from among them. 3. To appoint the persons who are to form the Supreme Court of Justice, and the co-judges mentioned in Article CXXVIII , 2, title X of this Constitution; to receive from them and from the President of the Republic the oath which they are to take; to accept or reject the resignations of the persons belonging to the Supreme Powers; to solve the doubts which arise in case of the physical or moral incapacity of the President of the Republic, and to declare whether there ought to be a new election or not. In this last case the Secretaries of State shall report to the President of the Congress so that he may convoke an extraordinary session for the said purpose. 4. To approve or reject public Conventions, Concordats, and Treaties. 5. To give or refuse its consent for the entry of foreign troops into the Republic, and for the station of squadrons in its ports. 6. To authorise the Executive Power to declare war. 7. To suspend constitutional order, by three-fourths of the votes present, in case of internal commotion or foreign aggression, provided that the suspension be deemed indispensable to save the Republic. This suspension shall continue for the time required by the circumstances on which it is founded, but it cannot in any case exceed 60 days without a fresh declaration by the Congress. 

Sole §. The suspension mentioned in this attribution shall never include the guarantee set forth in Article XLV, title III , § 2 of this Constitution. 

8. To nominate at every ordinary assembly two persons from among the members of the Congress, or out of it, and classified as

first and second, who are to exercise the Executive Power by order of the Congress on occasions) of temporary or absolute default of the President of the Republic; and both must possess the qualifications required in him. Failing the President and the designated persons, the Secretaries of State shall proceed as provided at the end of attribution 3 of this Article. 9. To receive the accusations that are brought against the President of the Republic, the members of the Supreme Powers, the Secretaries of State, and the Diplomatic Ministers of the Republic, and to declare by two-thirds of the votes whether there is or is not reason to indict them; and if the decision he in the affirmative to place them at the disposal of the Supreme Court of Justice, so that they may be tried according to law. 10. To decree the suspension of any of the persons who are mentioned in the preceding attribution, when they are to be prosecuted for ordinary offences, 11. To examine the annual reports which the Secretaries of State are to present, as well as the accounts of the Treasury expenses, and to vote the general estimates, and in the same assembly, or in the extraordinary sessions, to decree the extraordinary expenses which may be required. 12. To fix every year the maximum of the armed force at sea and on land, which in time of peace the Executive may maintain in active service ; and at the same time, or in the extraordinary sessions, to determine to what extent the said force may be augmented in cases of external war or armed insurrection. 13. To enact laws, reform them, interpret them, and abrogate them. 14. To establish the national taxes and imposts. 15. To decree the alienation of the national property or the application thereof to public uses. 16. To authorise specially the Executive Power to negotiate loans, or to enter into other contracts, with power to pledge the national revenues for their security. 17. To confer military rank from that of colonel inclusive upwards. 18. To grant personal and honorary rewards to those who have rendered great and important services to the Republic, and to decree honours to their memory. 19. To settle the alloy, pattern, form, and denomination of the coins, and to fix the weights and measures. 20. To promote the progress of the sciences and arts, and to insure to authors or inventors, for a limited time, the exclusive right to their respective writings or discoveries. 21. To create establishments for teaching and promoting the

sciences and arts, to assign them an income for their maintenance, and to endeavour, in particular, to disseminate primary education. 22. To create the tribunals and courts of justice, and all other offices necessary for the public service. 

§ 3. General Provisions. 
LXXIV. The following persons cannot be elected as Deputies: 1. The President of the Republic and the Secretaries of State. 2. The principal magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. 3. Those who exercise jurisdiction or authority over a whole province. 
LXV. The office of a deputy is incompatible with that of a subordinate in the service of the other Supreme Powers. 
LXXVI . The Congress cannot open its sessions, nor exercise the functions appertaining to it without the presence of two-thirds of its members. LXXVII . When the day appointed for opening the sessions arrives, the opening cannot take place, or if it has taken place the sessions cannot be continued, in default of the quorum required by the preceding Article ; the members present, whatever may be their number, shall compel the absent ones to appear, under the penalties established by the law, and the sessions shall be opened or continued as soon as there is a sufficient number. 

LXXVIII . The President of the Congress shall take the legal oath to it, and the deputies shall take the oath to the President. 

LXXIX . The Congress shall sit in the capital of the Republic, and two-thirds of the votes are required either to transfer its sittings to another place, or to suspend its sessions for a fixed time. 

LXXX. The sessions of the Congress shall be public, except when there is reason to discuss any matter in secret session. 

LXXXI . The Congress shall adopt the necessary regulations for the order and direction of its work, and for its own internal government. Sole Â§. In conformity with those regulations, it may impose the correctional penalties established therein upon its members, when they break the regulations. 

LXXXII . It is the business of the Congress to verify the powers of its members, and to decide upon the applications that are made to annul their elections. 

LXXXIII . The vacancies which occur in the Congress shall be filled by the respective substitutes; and if there be not a sufficient number of them to fill the vacancies, other new ones shall be appointed for the current period. 

LXXXIV . The deputies represent the nation and not the province that has appointed them.
4. Of the Enactment of the Laws.

LXXXV. The laws and other legislative acts may originate in the Congress on the proposal of any of its members, and in the Executive Power through the Secretaries of State. 

LXXXVI . No project of law shall be approved in the Congress, before it has passed through 3 debates, each on a different day. 

LXXXVII . No projeet of law although approved by the Congress shall have force of law without the sanction of the Executive Power. If he think fit to give it his sanction, he shall do so by ordering its execution and publication ; but if he refuse his sanction f he shall return the project to the Congress with a statement of his objections. 
LXXXVIII . The Executive Power may object to any project of law, either because he considers it altogether inexpedient or because he thinks it requires alterations or improvements, and in this case he will propose them. 

LXXXIX . On reconsideration of the project by the Congress, with the observations of the Executive Power, if the Congress should reject the latter and the project should be again approved by two-thirds of the votes, it shall be considered as sanctioned and shall be ordered for execution as a law of the Republic. If the modifications be adopted, the project shall be returned to the Executive Power, who cannot then refuse to sanction it. If the modifications be rejected, and two-thirds of the votes do not agree for the re-adoption, of the project, it shall be placed in the archives, and it cannot be considered again until the following ordinary legislature. 

XC. In order that a project of law shall be considered as objected to by the Executive Power, it must be returned to the Secretary's office of the Congress without fail within the fixed term of 10 working days. Unless this be done the project shall be deemed a law of the Republic. 

XCI. The sanction of the Executive Power is necessary for all the resolutions of the Legislative Power, except the following: 1. Those which are passed for the elections that are to take place, and upon the resignations or excuses that are sent in. 2. The resolutions of the Congress to transfer its sessions to another place, to suspend its sessions, or to prorogue the ordinary sessions for as long a time as this Constitution allows. 3. The decrees which are issued declaring that there is or is not cause of action against any person belonging to the Supreme Powers, by reason of accusation brought against them. 4. The regulations agreed to by the Congress for its internal government.

XCII . The Congress shall commence all the laws and legislative acts with this formula: The Constitutional Congress of the Republic of Costa Rica, &c. Â§ 5. Of the Permanent Committee. 

XCIII . During the recess of the Legislative Power, there shall be a Permanent Committee composed of 5 persons appointed by the Congress from its own members at the close of its ordinary, sessions. 

Sole §. The Committee mentioned in this Article shall appoint a President and a Secretary from its own members on the day of its installation; it shall be entitled to the services of the clerks in the Secretary's office of the Congress, and the archives of the Congress shall be at its disposal. 

XCIV. The attributions of the Permanent Committee are as follows: 1. To interpret the law, when consulted by a competent authority in cases of doubt arising thereupon. 2. To attend to the affairs pending in the Legislative Power at the time of its going into recess, and to prepare them for decision in the next sessions thereof. 3. To suspend Constitutional order in concert with the Executive Power and at his request in the cases and on the conditions provided in paragraph 7, Article LXXIII of this Constitution. 
4. To issue urgent Decrees on the proposal of the Executive Power; and these must be submitted to the Congress at its next meeting so that it may approve, reform, or abrogate them. 
5. To form part of the Council of Government when the Executive Power requires it, to treat of some important or serious affair; in this case the opinion of the Committee is purely of a consultative character. 
6. To draw up such projects of law as it thinks expedient, in order to submit them to the deliberations of the Congress at its next sessions. 7. To make suitable regulations for its internal government.

TITLE IX. Of

the Executive Power.
1. Of the President of the Republic. 

XCV. There shall be a President in Costa Rica, who, as Chief of the nation, shall exercise the Executive Power. 
XCVI. To be President of the Republic it is required: 1. To be a Costarican by birth. 2, Of secular condition. - 3. To be full 30 years of age. 4. To have all the qualifications required for an elector. 

XCVII . The period of the President of the Republic shall be 4 years; and he cannot be re-elected until an equal period has elapsed since he relinquished the authority. 

XCVIII . The President of the Republic shall take possession of his office on the 8th day of May, and on the termination of the constitutional period the exercise of his functions ceases by that fact. 

XCIX. If the President elect should not be able to take the Constitutional oath before the Congress on the day prescribed in the preceding Article, or during its ordinary sessions, he shall do so before the person in charge of the Executive Power, with the proper solemnity. 
C. When the office of President of the Republic shall become vacant by death, resignation, or other cause, there shall be an extraordinary election, provided that more than a year be wanting to complete the Constitutional period. 

CI. The President of the Republic cannot go out of the territory of Costa Rica so long as his office lasts, nor within a year after he has given up the authority, unless by permission of the Congress. Â§ 2. Of the Duties and Attributions of the Executive Power.

CII. The duties and attributions of the Executive Power are : 1. To appoint and remove the Secretaries of State at will, and any other persons employed under him. 2. To maintain the order and tranquillity of the Republic, and to repel every external attack or aggression. 3. In the recesses of the Congress he can exercise the authority granted to the Legislative Power in paragraph 7, Article LXXIII , of this Constitution, in concert with the permanent Committee, in such <3ases, and with such limitation for the duration of the suspension, as provided in the said paragraph. 4. To fulfil and execute the Constitution and the laws, and to cause them to be fulfilled and executed, by his agents and subordinates, in such parts as concern them. 5. To take care that they be fulfilled and executed by the other public officials who are not subordinate to him, acting for this purpose through their immediate superiors. 6. To dispose of the naval and military force for the defence and security of the Republic, to maintain order and tranquillity therein, and for all other purposes required by the public service. 7. To dispose of the public treasure in accordance with the laws. 8. To convoke the Congress for its ordinary meetings, and for extraordinary ones when required by some serious cause of public

convenience; complying, in the latter case, with the provision at the end of Article LXX of this Constitution. 9. To conduct the diplomatic negotiations, conclude public Treaties and Conventions with the Governments of other nations, and to exchange them after they have been approved and ratified by the Congress. 10. To appoint, in concert with the Council of Government, the Ministers Plenipotentiary, and Envoys Extraordinary, and Consuls of the Republic. 11. To receive the Diplomatic Ministers, and admit the Consuls of other nations. 12. To exercise the right of ecclesiastical patronage according to the laws, to make the presentations and appointments thereby assigned to him, and to perform all other acts in church affairs which devolve upon him by law. 13. To grant or refuse the pass for Pontifical decrees, conciliars, bulls, briefs, and rescripts, and any other despatches from the ecclesiastical authority. 14. To declare war against another Power or nation, when authorised to do so by the Legislative Power, and to make peace when that Power thinks it expedient. 15. To issue the respective commissions to the persons whom the Congress shall have invested with any of the military grades which it has the right to confer. 16. To confer military rank up to lieutenant-colonel inclusive, and to appoint any officials whose appointment is not assigned by law to another authority. 17. To grant retirement to commanders and officers of the army, and to accept or reject the resignations of their places offered by themselves. 18. To grant letters of naturalization in accordance with the law. 19. To commute, in concert with the Council of Government, the punishment of death for the next in degree, and that of penal servitude, labour on the public works, imprisonment and seclusion for banishment or confinement, previously hearing the Supreme Court of Justice for every case of commutation. 20. To grant amnesties and general or individual pardons for political offences. 21. To issue commissions for navigating and privateering, the latter only in time of war, and by way of reprisal. 22. To report in writing to the Congress, at the opening of its sessions, on the political state of the Republic, and on the general state of the various branches of the Administration ; indicating the measures that he considers necessary for their improvement.

23. To qualify minors, in accordance with the law, so that they may administer their property. 24. To reinstate, in accordance with the law, those who have lost their citizenship, or are suspended from the exercise of it. 25. To supply the consent for contracting marriage to those who require it by law, excepting that of father or mother. 26. To appoint the Governors of the provinces and districts as his agents. 27. To make the regulations necessary for the internal management of his departments, and to issue such other regulations and ordinances as may be required for the prompt execution of the laws.

 3. Of the Responsibility appertaining to him who exercises the Executive Power. 

CIII . He who exercises the Executive Power is responsible for the abuses that he commits in his official conduct. 1. When their purpose is to favour the interests of a foreign nation against the independence, integrity, and liberty of Costa Rica. 2. When they tend, directly or indirectly, to impede the elections provided in this Constitution, or to restrict the electoral freedom which the electors ought to enjoy. 3. "When their purpose is to prevent the Congress from assembling or from continuing its sessions at the times when it ought to do so in accordance with this Constitution, or to restrict the freedom and independence which it ought to enjoy in all its acts or deliberations. 4. When the Executive refuses to order the publication and execution of the laws and legislative acts in the cases wherein according to this Constitution he has no right to refuse. 5. When he prevents the tribunals and courts of law from investigating the matters which are within the competency of the Judicial Power, or restricts the freedom with which they ought to judge. 6. In all other cases wherein by an act or omission the Executive violates any express law. 

CIV. Neither the President of the Republic, so long as he continues in his post, nor the person in charge of the Executive Power, can be either prosecuted or condemned for ordinary offences, until after the Congress has declared, on accusation brought, that there is cause for indictment. 

4. Of the Secretaries of State. 

CV. For the dispatch of the business which belongs to the
Executive Power, he shall have the State offices determined by the law. 

CVI. Each of these offices shall be under the charge of a Secretary of State, but the Executive Power may place two or more of them under the charge of one Secretary. CVII. To be a Secretary of State it is required: 1. To be a Costarican by birth or naturalization, but in the latter case he must have resided for at least 10 years in the country, and be married, or a widower, with legitimate offspring. 2. An acting citizen. 3. Of secular condition. 4. 25 years of age, of well-known ability, and to possess the other qualifications required for an elector. CVIII. The decisions, resolutions, and orders of the President of the Republic shall be signed by each Secretary in the branches which are committed to him ; without this signature they shall not be valid, and consequently can have no legal effect. CIX. The decisions, resolutions, orders, and any other dispositions communicated by the Secretaries of State, are void and of no effect, unless they have been previously signed by the President of the Republic in the proper book; and those functionaries shall be responsible for the results, besides incurring the charge of substitution for which they will be liable to the penalties established by the laws.

CX. The Secretaries of State shall present to the Congress every year, within the first 15 days of the ordinary sessions, a report on the state of their respective branches, and at any time such projects of law as they consider expedient, as well as any other reports required of them. The Secretary of the Treasury shall send in with his report the account of the expenditure for the preceding year, and the estimate of that for the next. 

CXI. The Secretaries of State may attend the debates of the Congress and take part therein without vote. 

5. Of the Government Council. 
CXII . The President of the Republic shall have a Government Council composed of the Secretaries of State to discuss and deliberate upon the matters which the President himself submits to it. 

CXIII . When the gravity of any affair may require it the Government Council can be augmented by the members of the permanent committee, and other persons whom the President of the Republic may think fit to invite.

TITLE X. 1. Of the Judicial Power.

CXIV. The Judicial Power of the Republic is exercised by the

Supreme Court of Justice, and by the other tribunals and courts of justice established by the law. 

CXV. No power or authority can transfer actions pending before another power or authority unless for defectum videndi, and in the cases provided by the law ; nor can any power or authority re-open suits that have been concluded. 
CXVI. The functionaries who administer justice cannot be suspended from their places without a previous declaration that there is cause for indictment; nor can they be dismissed unless in virtue of executory sentence. 
CXVII. All the tribunals and courts which the law establishes under any denomination bathe department of justice are subordinate to the Supreme Court. CXVIII. The Supreme Court has the appointment of its respective Secretaries, Judges of First Instance, and the other functionaries designated by the law ; it also decides upon their resignations and grants them leave when they apply for it. CXIX. The law will define the jurisdiction, the number and the duration of the tribunals and courts of law established or to be established in the Republic, their attributions, the principles which are to regulate their proceedings, and the method of exacting their responsibility. 

2. Of the Organisation, of the Supreme Court of Justice. 

CXX. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of a President, 7 Magistrates, and a Fiscal; and for affairs which do not devolve upon the full Court, it shall be divided into two Chambers under the denomination of first and second. The President of the Supreme Court of Justice shall preside over the former, and a magistrate nominated by the Congress over the latter. 

CXXI. Each Chamber shall consist of its President and two Magistrates; but when either of the Chambers is to decide in Third Instance of a written trial, it shall consist of 5 members, having an addition of two magistrates nominated for the purpose. 

CXXII. Both Chambers and the Magistrates of Third Instance shall try in full Court all the cases which the law appoints. The Fiscal Magistrate shall have a seat in the full Court and a vote according to the law. 

CXXIII. To be a Magistrate it is required : 1. To be a Costarican by birth. 2. An actual citizen. 3. Of the secular condition. 4. To be 30 years of age. 6. To possess the diploma as Advocate of the Republic.

6. To possess a capital of 3,000 dollars of his own, or if not to give corresponding security. CXXIV. Persons who are connected by relationship of consanguinity or affinity up to the second degree inclusive cannot be appointed as Magistrates. 

CXXV. The period of the Supreme Court shall be 4 years, and its members can be re-elected without restriction. CXXVI. The condition of a Magistrate is incompatible with that of service under the other powers. CXXVII. To make up for any deficiency of the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice in each of the two Chambers, and of the Fiscal, lots shall be drawn for special co-judges amongst the advocates who possess the same qualifications, who are not in the service of the other Supreme Powers, nor subordinates in the Court itself, and who do not reside at more than 4i leagues from the capital. CXXVIII. The Congress at the election of the Magistrates of the Supreme Court, shall appoint besides 6 co-judges who possess the same qualifications as the principals, except that of Advocate, and these shall be called upon to supply the deficiencies of the special co-judges.

TITLE XI. Of the Municipal System.

CXXIX, The territory of the Republic shall still be divided into provinces for the purposes of the general administration of the national affairs ; the provinces into cantons and these into districts. This division maybe varied for fiscal, political, and judicial purposes, by the general laws of the Republic, and for the purposes of municipal administration by municipal ordinances. CXXX. In the capital of each province there shall be a municipality whose business it shall be to attend to the administration, to guard and promote the interests and establishments of the province, to the compilation and custody of the civic register, and the census of the population; and it shall have the exclusive management and application of the municipal funds, all in conformity with the respective laws. CXXXI. There shall be in each province a Governor, agent of the Executive Power, and appointed by him, with the qualifications and attributions defined by the law.

TITLE XII. Of the Observance of the Constitution, the Oath, and Reforms.

CXXXII. In its first ordinary sessions the Congress shall take notice of any infraction of the Constitution, and ascertain whether the delinquents have been made responsible, in order to provide as may be necessary in consequence.


2. Of the Constitutional Oath. 

CXXXIII. The oath which is to be taken by the public functionaries according to the provision of Article XXT, 1, title III of this Constitution, shall be in the following form : Do you swear to God and promise the country to observe and defend the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, and to fulfil the duties of your office faithfully? Yes, I swear. If you do so may God assist you, and if not, may He and your country call you to account. 

3. Of the Reformation of the Constitution. 
CXXXIV. The Legislative Power may reform this Constitution partially, in absolute accordance with the following provisions: 1. The proposition in which the reformation of one or more Articles is solicited may be presented to the Congress, signed by at least one-third of the members present. 2. This proposition shall be read 3 times with an interval of 6 days, to decide whether it shall be admitted for discussion or not. 3. In case of an affirmative, it shall be referred to a committee appointed by absolute majority of the Congress, to present its opinion of the proposition in the term of 8 days. 4. On the presentation of the opinion the discussion shall take place by the same stages as are established for the enactment of the laws; the said reformation cannot be adopted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the votes of the Congress. 5. When it is decided that the reformation ought to be made, the Congress shall draw up the project for the purpose, by means of a committee, and in this case the absolute majority is sufficient for its approval. 6. The aforesaid project shall be referred to the Executive Power, who, after consulting the Government Council, shall present it with his message to the Congress at its next ordinary meeting. 7. The Congress shall discuss the project at its first sessions, and what shall have been decided by two-thirds of the votes shall form part of the Constitution, and shall be communicated to the Executive Power for its publication and observance. 8. The Constitution may also be reformed on the unanimous initiative of the municipalities of the Republic, when they agree upon the necessity for doing this in regard to the provisions which they indicate. 

CXXXV. The general reformation of this Constitution, if the project be passed by the stages mentioned in the preceding Article, can only be effected by a Constituent Assembly convoked for the purpose. 

CXXXVI. All previous Constitutions are abrogated by the

present, and from the date of the publication of this no other shall rule. 

Given in the city of San Jos é on the 7th of December, 1871, the 50th year of Independence.
