+(,121/,1(
Citation: 1 Amos J. Peaslee Constitutions of Nations 2d ed. 576 Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline (http://heinonline.org) Thu Oct 27 16:05:34 2011 -- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license agreement available at http://heinonline.org/HOL/License -- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

576

Constitutions of Nations

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA
November 8, 1949
We, the Representatives of the people of Costa Rica, freely elected Deputies to the National Constituent Assembly, invoking the name of God and reaffirming our faith in Democracy, decree and enact the following: CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA
TITLE

I

THE REPUBLIC

Sole Chapter Art. 1. Costa Rica is a free and independent democratic Republic. Art. 2. Sovereignty resides exclusively in the Nation. Art. 3. No one may usurp this sovereignty; anyone who does so commits the crime of treason to the country. Art. 4. No person or group of persons may assume representation of the people, usurp their rights, or make petitions in their name. Violation of this article is sedition. Art. 5. The national territory is bounded by the Caribbean Sea, the Pacific Ocean, and the Republics of Nicaragua and Panama. The boundaries of the Republic are those fixed by the Cafias-Jerez Treaty of April 15, 1858, confirmed by the Cleveland Award of March 22, 1888 with respect to Nicaragua, and by the Echandi Montero-Fernindez Ja6n Treaty of May 1, 1941 in regard to Panama. Coco Island, located in the Pacific Ocean, forms a part of the national territory. Art. 6. The State exercises complete and exclusive sovereignty over the air space above its territory and over its territorial waters and continental shelf, in accordance with principles of International Law and with treaties in effect. Art. 7. No authority may make pacts, treaties or agreements which are opposed to the sovereignty and independence of the Republic. Anyone who does so shall be tried for treason to the country. Any treaty or convention negotiated by the Executive Power, in reference to the territorial integrity of the political organization of the country, shall require the approval of the National Assembly by a vote of not less than three fourths of its full membership and a vote of two thirds of a Constituent Assembly called for the purpose. Art. 8. Foreign states may only acquire within the territory of the Republic, on the basis of reciprocity, real property necessary for the

Costa Bica

577

headquarters of their diplomatic representations, without prejudice to the terms of international agreements. Art. 9. The Government of the Republic is popular, representative, alternative and responsible. It is exercised by three distinct and independent Powers: Legislative, Executive and Judicial. None of these Powers may delegate the exercise of their proper functions. Art. 10. Provisions enacted by the Legislative Power or the Executive Power which are contrary to the Constitution shall be absolutely void, as well as the acts of anyone usurping public functions, and appointments made without fulfilling the legal requirements. The Supreme Court of Justice, by a vote of not less than two thirds of its members, has the power to declare the unconstitutionality of provisions of the Legislative Power and decrees of the Executive Power. The law shall designate which courts are to decide upon the constitutionality of other provisions of the Executive Power. Art. 11. Public officials are mere depositaries of authority and cannot usurp powers which the law does not grant them. They must take an oath to observe and comply with this Constitution and the laws. Action to demand penal responsibility for their acts is public. Art. 12. The Army as a permanent institution is proscribed. For vigilance and the preservation of the public order, there will be the necessary police forces. Only through continental agreement or for the national defense may military forces be organized; in either case they shall always be subordinate to the civil power; they may not deliberate, nor make manifestations or declarations in indivudual or collective form.
TITLE II
COSTA RICANS

Sole Chapter Art. 13. The following are Costa Ricans by birth: (1) A child born in the territory of the republic of a Costa Rican father or mother; (2) A child born in a foreign country of a native-born Costa Rican father or mother, who is registered as such in the Civil Register by wish of the Costa Rican parent during its minority, or by its own wish up to the age of twenty-five years; (3) A child born in Costa Rica of foreign parents, who is registered as a Costa Rican by wish of either of its parents during minority or by its own wish up to twenty-five years of age; (4) An infant, of unknown parents, found in Costa Rica.* Art. 14. The following are Costa Ricans by naturalization: (1) Those who have acquired this status by virtue of former laws; (2) Nationals of the other countries of Central America, who are of good conduct, who have resided at least one year in the Republic, and who declare before the Civil Registrar their intention to be Costa Ricans; (3) Native-born Spaniards and Ibero-Americans who obtain the appro*

See transitory articles. This footnote refers to all articles so marked.

578

Constitutions o/ Nations

priate certificate from the Civil Registrar, provided they have been domiciled in the country during the two years prior to application; (4) Central Americans, Spaniards and Ibero-Americans who are not native-born, and other foreigners who have been domiciled in Costa Rica for a minimum period of five years immediately preceding their application for naturalization, in accordance with the requirements of the law; (5) A foreign woman who by marriage to a Costa Rican loses her nationality or who indicates her desire to become a Costa Rican; (6) Anyone who receives honorary nationality from the Legislative Assembly. Art. 15. Anyone who applies for naturalization must give evidence in advance of good conduct, must show that he has an occupation or known means of livelihood, and must promise to reside in the Republic regularly. For purposes of naturalization, domicile implies residence and stable and effective connection with the national community, in accordance with regulations established by law. Art. 16. Costa Rican nationality is lost: (1) By adoption of another nationality; (2) Whenever a naturalized Costa Rican is voluntarily absent from the country for more than six years consecutively, unless he shows that he has retained permanent ties therein. Art. 17. Loss of Costa Rican nationality does not extend to the spouse or children. Acquisition of nationality includes minor children in accordance with regulations established by law. Art. 18. Costa Ricans must observe the Constitution and the laws, must serve and defend their country, and contribute to the public expenses.
TITLE III
FOREIGNERS

Sole Chapter Art. 19. Foreigners have the same individual and social rights and duties as Costa Ricans, with such exceptions and limitations as this Constitution and the laws establish. They may not intervene in the political affairs of the country, and are subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of justice and the authorities of the Republic, and may not resort to diplomatic intervention except as provided in international conventions.
TITLE

IV

INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES

Sole Chapter Art. 20. All men are free within the Republic; no one under the protection of its laws can be a slave. Art. 21. Human life is inviolable. Art. 22. Every Costa Rican may move about and remain in any part of the Republic or elsewhere, provided he is free from liability, and return when convenient to him. No requirements may be demanded of Costa Ricans which may impede their entry into the country. Art. 23. The domicile and any other private premises of the inhabitants

Costa Rica

579

are inviolable. However, they may be entered by written order of a competent court either to prevent the commission of or escape from crimes or to prevent serious damage to persons or property, subject to the provisions of law. Art. 24. The private documents and written or oral communications of the inhabitants of the Republic are inviolable. However, the law shall determine those cases in which the courts may order the seizure, search, or examination of private papers whenever this is absolutely necessary to clarify matters submitted to their cognizance. The law shall also determine in what instances competent officials may examine account books and papers pertaining thereto, for necessary fiscal purposes. Correspondence that is seized, regardless of its kind, shall have no legal effect. Art. 25. Inhabitants of the Republic have the right to associate together for lawful purposes. No one may be compelled to form a part of any association whatever. Art. 26. Everyone has the right to meet peacefully and unarmed, whether it be for private business or to discuss political affairs and consider the public conduct of officials. Meetings on private premises need no prior authorization. Those which are held in public places shall be regulated by law. Art. 27. The right to petition any public official or official body, either individually or collectively, is guaranteed, as is also the right to receive prompt redress. Art. 28. No one may be disturbed or molested for an expression of his opinions nor for any act which does not infringe the law. Private actions which do not harm public morals or order or which do no injury to others are outside the scope of the law. However, no political propaganda may be carried on in any way by clerical or secular persons invoking religious motives or making use of religious beliefs. Art. 29. Everyone may communicate his thoughts by word of mouth or in writing and publish them without previous censorship; but they shall be responsible for abuses committed in the exercise of this right, in such cases and in the manner established by law. Art. 30. Free access to administrative departments is guaranteed, for purposes of information on matters of public interest. State secrets are excluded from this provision. Art. 31. The territory of Costa Rica shall be an asylum for all who are persecuted for political reasons. If their expulsion is decreed on legal grounds, they shall never be sent back to the country where they were persecuted. Extradition shall be regulated by law or by international treaties and shall never be granted for political offenses or any connected therewith, as defined by Costa Rica. Art. 32. No Costa Rican may be compelled to abandon the national territory.

580

Constitutions of Nations

Art. 33. All men are equal before the law. Art. 34. No law shall have retroactive effect to the detriment of any person whatever, or to acquired property rights or to established legal situations. Art. 35. No one may be tried by a commission, court, or judge specially appointed for the case, but exclusively by the courts established in accordance with this Constitution. Art. 36. In criminal matters no one is obliged to testify against himself or against a spouse, ascendants, descendants or collateral relatives within the third degree inclusive of consanguinity or affinity. Art. 37. No one may be detained without substantiated evidence of having committed an offense and without a written order from the judge or authority charged with the maintenaiace of public order, unless the person concerned is a fugitive from justice or is caught in the act; but in all cases he shall be placed at the disposition of a competent court within a peremptory period of twenty-four hours. Art. 38. No person may be imprisoned for debt. Art. 39. No one shall be made to suffer a penalty except for a crime, wrong, or misdemeanor punishable by pre-existing law, and in consequence of a final sentence imposed by competent authority, after opportunity has been given to the accused to plead his defense, and upon the necessary proof of guilt. Judical compulsion in civil or labor matters or detentions ordered in cases of insolvency, bankruptcy or receivership do not constitute violations of this article or of the two preceding articles. Art. 40. No one may be subjected to cruel or degrading treatment or to life imprisonment, nor to the penalty of confiscation. Any statement obtained by means of force is null and void. Art. 41. Everyone shall receive reparation for injuries or damage to their persons, property, or moral interests through recourse to the laws. Justice must be prompt, thorough, without denial, and in strict accordance with the laws. Art. 42. The same judge may not serve in various stages of a case if the decision deals with the same point. No one may be tried more than once for the same punishable offense. The reopening of decided criminal cases and judgments which are res judicata is prohibited, except for review. Art. 43. Everyone has the right to settle his differences in civil matters by means of arbitrators, even after a lawsuit has been initiated. Art. 44. A court order is necessary for a person to be held incommunicado for more than forty-eight hours; it may be extended only for ten consecutive days, and in no case shall it prevent judicial inspection. Art. 45. Property is inviolable; no one may be deprived of what is his except for legally proven public interest after compensation in accordance with the law. In case of war or internal disorder, it is not necessary that compensation be made in advance. However, payment shall be made not later than two years after termination of the state of emergency. For reasons of public necessity, the National Assembly, by a vote of

Costa Rica

581

two-thirds of its full membership, may impose limitations on property, in the social interest. Art. 46. Private monopolies are prohibited, as well as any act, even if it originates by virtue of a law, which threatens or restricts the freedom of commerce, agriculture or industry. Action by the State directed toward impeding any monopolistic practice or tendency is in the public interest. Enterprises organized as de facto monopolies must be subject to special legislation. Establishment of new monopolies by the State or municipalities requires the approval of two-thirds of the full membership of the National Assembly. Art. 47. Every author, inventor, producer, or merchant shall temporarily enjoy exclusive ownership of his work, invention, trademark or commercial name, in accordance with the law. Art. 48. Every person has the right of habeas corpus if he believes himself illegally deprived of his liberty. This writ is exclusively within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, which determines whether to order appearance of the accused, and due obedience or any other pretext may not be alleged to prevent it. To maintain or re-establish the enjoyment of other rights conferred by this Constitution, everyone also has the right of amparo in such courts as the law may determine. Art. 49. A contentious-administrative jurisdiction is established as a function of the Judicial Power for the purpose of protecting anyone in the exercise of his administrative rights when these are violated by definitive measures of any kind taken by the Executive Power or its agents, by the Municipalities or any autonomous or semi-autonomous institutions of the State acting as public officials and using regulated powers.
TITLE

V

SOCIAL RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES

Sole Chapter Art. 50. The State shall work for the greatest well-being of all the inhabitants of the country, by organizing and stimulating production and the most adequate distribution of wealth. Art. 51. The family, as the natural element and basis of society, is entitled to the special protection of the State. Mothers, children, the aged, and the destitute infirm are also entitled to such protection.
Art. 52. Marriage is the essential basis of the family and rests on equa-

lity of rights of the spouses. Art. 53. Parents have the same obligations toward children born our of wedlock as those born within it. Everyone is entitled to know who his parents are, according to law. Art. 54. Any personal limitation based on the nature of filiation is prohibited. Art. 55. The special protection of women and children shall be

582

Constitution of Nations

entrusted to an autonomous institution known as the Patronato Nacional de la Infancia, in collaboration with other State institutions. Art. 56. Labor is a right of the individual and an obligation to society. The State should endeavor to see that everyone has lawful and useful employment, duly remunerated, and to prevent the establishment on that account of conditions which may in any way curtail a man's freedom or dignity or degrade his labor to the status of mere merchandise. The State guarantees the right to free choice of work. Art. 57. Every workingman is entitled to a minimum wage, fixed periodically, for a normal working day, which will provide for his wellbeing and a decent living. Wages shall always be equal for equal work under identical conditions of efficiency. All matters relating to the fixing of minimum wages shall be entrusted to a technical organization established by law. Art. 58. A regular working day for daytime work may not exceed eight hours a day or forty-eight hours a week. The regular working day for night work may not exceed six hours a day or thirty-six hours a week. Overtime work shall be paid at fifty percent above the stipulated wage or salary. However, these provisions are not applicable in certain welldefined exceptional cases, as determined by law. Art. 59. All workers are entitled to one day of rest after six consecutive days of work and to annual paid vacations, the duration and time of which shall be regulated by law, but they shall in no case be less than two weeks for every fifty weeks of continuous service; all without prejudice to welldefined exceptions established by legislation. Art. 60. Both employers and workers may organize freely, for the exclusive purpose of obtaining and preserving economic, social, or occupational benefits. Foreigners are prohibited from exercising direction or authority in unions. Art. 61. The right of employers to the lockout and of workers to strike is recognized except in public services, in accordance with provisions of law and regulations on the subject, which must prohibit any act of coercion or violence. Art. 62. Collective labor agreements shall have the force of law, if entered into in accordance with the law by employers or employers' unions and legally organized trade unions. Art. 63. Workers discharged without due cause are entitled to compensation unless they are covered by unemployment insurance. Art. 64. The State shall promote the creation of cooperatives as a means of obtaining better living conditions for workers. Art. 65. The State shall promote the construction of low-cost housing and create a "family patrimony" for workers. Art. 66. Every employer must adopt measures necessary for the health and safety of workers in his enterprises. Art. 67. The State shall sponsor technical and cultural training for workers. Art. 68. No discrimination shall be made in regard to wages, advan-

Costa Rica

583

tages, or working conditions, as between Costa Ricans and foreigners, or with respect to any group of workers. Under equal conditions, Costa Rican workers should receive preference. Art. 69. Rural "share cropper" contracts shall be regulated in order to assure a rational exploitation of the land and an equitable distribution of its produce between proprietors and tenants. Art. 70. A jurisdiction for labor shall be established under the Judicial Power. Art. 71. The laws shall give special protection to women and minors in their work. Art. 72. Until such time as unemployment insurance exists, the State shall maintain a permanent, technical system of protection for those involuntarily unemployed and shall strive to restore them to employment. Art. 73. Social security is established for manual and intellectual workers, regulated by a system of compulsory contribution by the State, employers, and workers to protect them against the risks of illness, disability, maternity, old age, death, and other contingencies determined by law. The administration and regulation of social security shall be entrusted to an autonomous institution. The social security funds and reserves may not be transferred or used for purposes other than those for which they were created. Insurance against occupational risks shall be exclusively at the expense of employers and shall be governed by special provisions. Art. 74. The rights and benefits to which this chapter refers may not be renounced. Their enumeration does not exclude others which may be derived from the Christian principle of social justice or which the law may indicate; they shall be equally applicable to all the concurrent factors in the process of production and regulated by social and labor legislation so as to achieve a permanent policy of national solidarity. Art. 75. The legislature may establish exceptions to the provisions of this chapter in behalf of institutions devoted exclusively to charitable purposes and social welfare. This provision does not extend to the principle of freedom to join unions.
TITLE VI
RELIGION

Sole Chapter Art. 76. The Apostolic Roman Catholic Religion is that of the State, which contributes to its maintenance, without impeding the free exercise in the Republic of other worship that is not opposed to universal morality or good custom.
TITLE VII
EDUCATION AND CULTURE

Sole Chapter Art. 77. Public education shall be organized as an integral process correlated in its various phases, from the pre-school period to the university.

584

Constitutions of Nations

Art. 78. Primary education is compulsory; this, the pre-school stage, and secondary education are free and supported by the Nation. The State shall facilitate the pursuit of higher studies by persons lacking their own resources. The awarding of appropriate scholarships and assistance shall be a function of the Ministry of Education through such organizations as the law may specify. Art. 79. Freedom in teaching is guaranteed. However, all private educational centers shall be under the supervision of the State. Art. 80. Private initiative in educational matters is to be stimulated by the State, in such form as the law may provide. Art. 81. The public education administration shall be in the hands of a superior board comprised as the law may provide, presided over by the Minister of Education. Art. 82. The State shall provide food and clothing for indigent pupils, according to law. Art. 83. The State shall organize and support adult education, designed to combat illiteracy and to provide cultural opportunities for those who desire to improve their intellectual, social and economic position. Art. 84. The University of Costa Rica is an institution of higher learning which is independent in the performance of its functions and has full juridical capacity to acquire rights and contract obligations, as well as to determine its own organization and form of government. Art. 85. The State shall endow the University of Costa Rica with its own funds; will create the necessary revenues and will contribute to its maintenance by an amount not less than ten percent of the annual budget of the Ministry of Public Education, to be paid in monthly installments.* Art. 86. The State shall train a teaching staff in special institutions and the University of Costa Rica. Art. 87. Freedom in teaching is a fundamental principle of university instruction. Art. 88. In the discussion and enactment of bills relating to matters under the jurisdiction of the University of Costa Rica, or directly related thereto, the Legislative Assembly must previously obtain the advice of the University Council. Art. 89. Among the cultural aims of the Republic are: to protect its natural beauty, to preserve and develop the historical and artistic patrimony of the Nation, and to support private initiative in scientific and
artistic progress.

TITLE VIII
POLITICAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES

Chapter I Citizens Art. 90. Citizenship is the aggregate of political rights and duties which pertain to Costa Ricans of either sex, over twenty years of age. Art. 91. Citizenship is suspended only on the following grounds:

Costa Rica

585

(1) By judicially declared interdiction; (2) By a judgment which imposes the penalty of suspension of the exercise of political rights. Art. 92. Citizenship is restored in such cases and by such means as the law may provide. Chapter II Suffrage Art. 93. Suffrage is a primary civic function and is exercised by direct and secret voting before election boards, by citizens inscribed in the Civil Registry. Art. 94. A naturalized Costa Rican citizen may not vote until twelve months after obtaining naturalization. Art. 95. The law shall regulate the exercise of suffrage, in accordance with the following basic principles: (1) Autonomy in the electoral function; (2) Effective guarantees of freedom, order, honesty, and impartiality on the part of government officials; (3) Identification of the voter by means of a certificate (cedula) and photograph; (4) Prohibition against a citizen voting elsewhere than at his residence; (5) Guarantees for representation of minorities. Art. 96. The State may not make any deduction whatever from the salaries of public officials for the payment of political debts. Art. 97. In discussing and enacting bills relating to electoral matters the Legislative Assembly must consult the Supreme Electoral Tribunal; if its opinion is not followed, a vote of two thirds of the total membership is required. Within six months prior to and four months after a popular election, the Legislative Assembly, however, may not enact into law any bills on the subject of which the Supreme Electoral Tribunal has indicated disapproval. Art. 98. All citizens have the right to join parties in order to participate in national politics. However, the formation or functioning of parties which by their ideological programs, methods of action, or international connections, are intended to destroy the bases of the democratic organization of Costa Rica or threaten the sovereignty of the country, is prohibited, when so determined by the Legislative Assembly by a vote of two thirds of its members on the advice of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal.* Chapter III The Supreme Electoral Tribunal Art. 99. The organization, direction, and supervision of acts pertaining to suffrage are exclusively the function of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal which has complete independence in carrying out its functions. All other electoral organs are subordinate to the Tribunal. Art. 100. The SupremeEll ectoral Tribunal shall consist of three Magistrates and three alternates, appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice

586

Constitutionsof Nations

by a vote of not less than two thirds of its members; they must have the same qualifications as to be a member of that Court and shall be subject to the same responsibilities as those established for members of that body. Art. 101. The Magistrates of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall hold office for six years. One principal and one alternate shall be renewed every two years, but they may be reelected. The Magistrates of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal enjoy the same immunities and prerogatives as members of the Supreme Powers.* Art. 102. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal has the following functions: (1) To convoke popular elections; (2) To appoint the members of the Electoral Boards, according to law; (3) To interpret, with exclusive and compulsory effect, all constitutional and legal provisions relating to elections; (4) To hear appeals from decisions rendered by the Civil Registrar and the Election Boards; (5) To investigate, on its own or through delegates, and to render decisions on any claim made by parties as to political partiality of State officials in the exercise of their functions or of political activities by officials who are prohibited from engaging therein. A verdict of guilty rendered by the Tribunal shall be compulsory grounds for removal and shall incapacitate the guilty party from holding a public office for a period of not less than two years, without prejudice to any penal liability that may be demanded. However, if the investigation includes charges against the President of the Republic, Ministers of Government, Diplomatic Ministers, the Comptroller or Assistant Comptroller General of the Republic, or Magistrates of the Supreme Court, the Tribunal shall report the findings of its investigation to the Legislative Assembly; (6) To adopt, with respect to the public force, pertinent measures to assure that elections are carried out under conditions of unrestricted freedom and guarantees. In case military recruitment is ordered the Tribunal likewise may adopt suitable measures to assure that the electoral process is not disturbed, in order that all citizens may freely cast their votes. The Tribunal may enforce these measures itself or through delegates; (7) To conduct the official count of the votes cast in elections for President and Vice Presidents of the Republic, Deputies to the Legislative Assembly, members of Municipalities and Representatives to Constituent Assemblies; (8) To issue the official declaration of the election of the President and Vice Presidents of the Republic, within thirty days after the voting, and for other officials cited in the preceding paragraph, within a period specified by law; (9) Any other functions entrusted to it by this Constitution or by law. Art. 103. There is no appeal from the decisions of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, except for betrayal of trust. Art. 104. Exclusively subordinate to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal is the Civil Registrar, whose functions are: (1) To keep the Central Registry of Civil Status and draw up the lists of voters; (2) To decide on applications to acquire or recover Costa Rican citizenship, as well as cases of loss of nationality; to carry out judicial sentences which suspend citizenship and to pass upon steps taken to recover it. The decisions rendered by the Civil Registrar, in accordance with the powers granted herein, may be appealed to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal; (3) To issue certificates of identity; (4) Any other powers indicated in this Constitution or the laws.*

Co8ta Rica

587

TITLE

IX

THE LEGISLATIVE POWER

Chapter I Organizationof the Legislative Assembly Art. 105. The power to legislate resides in the people, who delegate this power, by means of suffrage, to the Legislative Assembly. Art. 106. The Deputies have this character for the Nation and shall be elected by provinces. The Assembly consists of forty-five Deputies; however, whenever the population exceeds one million three hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants, a new Deputy shall be elected for each thirty thousand or fraction over fifteen thousand in each province. One alternate shall be named for every three titular Deputies. If two titular Deputies are elected, one alternate shall also be elected. Vacancies shall be filled by the respective alternates. Every time a general census of the population is taken, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall assign the number of deputies to each province in accordance with the population of each.* Art. 107. Deputies shall hold office for four years and may not be reelected to a succeeding term. Art. 108. The requirements to be a Deputy are: (1) To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights;
(2) To be a Costa Rican by birth, or by naturalization with ten years' residence in the country after naturalization; (3) To have attained twenty-one years of age.

Art. 109. The following may not be elected Deputies nor listed as candidates for that office: (1) The President of the Republic or anyone who is acting in that office at the time of the election; (2) Ministers of Government; (3) Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice; (4) Magistrates and alternates of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, and the Director of the Civil Register; (5) The military in active service; (6) Those exercising jursidiction and civil or police power over an entire province; (7) Managers of the autonomous institutions; (8) Relatives of whoever occupies the Presidency of the Republic, to the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, inclusive.

These disqualifications affect anyone occupying the aformentioned positions within six months prior to the date of the election.
Art. 110. A Deputy is not liable for opinions expressed in the Assembly. During its sessions he cannot be arrested on civil grounds, except by authorization of the Assembly or if the Deputy consents thereto. From the time he is declared elected as titular Deputy or alternate, until his legal term expires, he may not be deprived of his liberty on penal grounds unless he has been previously suspended by the Assembly. Such

588

Constitutions of Nations

immunity does not apply in case of flagrante delicto or if the Deputy waives it. Nevertheless, a Deputy who has been taken in flagrante delicto will be freed if the Assembly so orders. Art. 111. No Deputy may accept a position of employment with the other Powers of the State or the autonomous institutions, under penalty of losing his credentials, except as a Minister of Government. In the latter event, he will be reinstated in the Assembly when the position terminates. This provision does not affect those holding positions in charitable institutions or professorships in the University of Costa Rica. Art. 112. The legislative function is also incompatible with the holding of any other elective public office. Deputies may not enter into any contract with the State or its autonomous institutions, directly or indirectly or through representation, or obtain a concession of public property that involves a privilege, or serve as directors, administrators, or managers of enterprises which make contracts with the State for public works, furnishing of suplies, or the operation of public services. Violations of the prohibitions contained in this or the preceding article shall result in loss of credentials as Deputy. The same provision applies to a Deputy who violates any of these provisions while serving as Minister of Government. Art. 113. The law shall fix the remuneration of Deputies. Increases which may be granted shall not take effect until after the expiration of the terms of members of the Assembly in which the increases were approved. Art. 114. The Assembly shall meet in the capital of the Republic and a two-thirds vote of the whole membership shall be required to transfer its seat to some other place or to suspend its sessions for a specified period. Art. 115. The Assembly shall elect its officers at the beginning of each legislative period. The President and Vice President must fulfill the same conditions required to be President of the Republic. The President of the Assembly shall take an oath before it and the Deputies before their President. Art. 116. The Legislative Assembly shall meet each year on the first day of May, even if it has not been convoked, and its regular sessions shall last six months, divided into two periods: from the first of May to the thirty-first of July and from the first of September to the thirtieth of November.* One legislative period includes all regular and special sessions held between the first of May and the April thirtieth following. Art. 117. The Assembly may not hold its sessions unless two thirds of the total membership are present. If it is impossible to begin a session on the day indicated, or if after opening it cannot continue due to lack of a quorum, the members present shall demand that absent members attend, under penalty of sanctions established by regulations, and the Assembly shall open or continue its sessions when the required number are present. Meetings shall be public except for very special reasons in the general

Costa Rica

589

welfare, and to be made secret must attain the approval of not less than two thirds of the Deputies present. Art. 118. The Executive Power may convoke the Legislative Assembly in special sessions. At such meetings no matters other than those stated in the decree of convocation may be taken up except the appointment of officials when incumbent upon the Assembly or amendments to laws that may be necessary in acting upon matters submitted to its consideration. Art. 119. Decisions of the Assembly shall be made by absolute majority of the members present, except in those cases in which this Constitution requires a larger majority. Art. 120. The Executive Power shall place at the disposal of the Legislative Assembly such police force as the President of that body may request. Chapter II Powers of the Legislative Assembly Art. 121. In addition to other powers conferred by this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly has exclusive power to: (1) Enact, amend, repeal, and give authentic interpretation to the laws, except as stated in the chapter referring to the Supreme Electora Tribunal; (2) Designate the premises to be used for its sessions, to open and close them, to suspend or continue them when so agreed; (3) Appoint the titular and alternate Magistrates of the Supreme Court

of Justice; (4) Approve or disapprove international conventions, public treaties and concordats; (5) Give or withhold its consent to the entry of foreign troops in the national territory and for the stay of warships in its ports or airfields; (6) Authorize the Executive Power to declare a state of national defense and to make peace; (7) Suspend, by a vote of not less than two thirds of its members, in case of clear public necessity, the rights and guarantees conferred by Articles 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 30 and 37 of this Constitution. Such suspension may include all or certain of these rights and guarantees, throughout the territory or only a part of it, and for not more than thirty days; during the suspension and with respect to persons, the Executive Power may order their detention only in establishments not used for common criminals, or may order their confinement to inhabited places. He must also report to the Legislative Assembly, at its next meeting, on the measures taken to safeguard the public order or maintain the security of the State. In no case may individual rights and guarantees not listed in this section be suspended; (8) Receive the legal oath and the resignation of members of the Supreme Powers, with the exception of Ministers of Government; settle questions which may arise as to the physical or mental capacity of the person exercising the Presidency of the Republic and to decide whether to call in his legal replacement; (9) Accept or refuse impeachments made against the occupant of the Presidency, the Vice Presidents, members of the Supreme Powers and Diplomatic Ministers, declaring by a two-thirds vote of the entire Assembly whether or not there are grounds for legal action against them, and if

590

Constitutions of Nations

the decision is affirmative, to place them at the disposition of the Supreme Court of Justice for trial; (10) Order the suspension of any officials mentioned in the preceding section, if they are to be prosecuted for common crimes; (11) Fix the regular and special budgets of the Republic; (12) Appoint the Comptroller and Assistant Comptroller General of the Republic; (13) Impose taxes and national contributions and authorize those of municipalities; (14) Order the sale or application to public use of property belonging to the Nation; The following may not be permanently removed from ownership by the State: (a) Power that may be obtained from waters of the public domain within the national territory; (b) Beds of coal, wells and deposits of petroleum, and any other hydrocarbons, as well as any radioactive minerals existing in the country; (c) Wireless services. Property mentioned in (a), (b) and (c) above may be exploited only under public administration or by private parties, in accordance with the law or by a special concession granted for a limited time and on the basis of conditions and stipulations established by the Legislative Assembly. National railroads, docks, and airports-the latter while in use-may not be sold, leased, or encumbered, directly or indirectly, nor be withdrawn in any way from the ownership and control of the State; (15) Authorize the Executive to negotiate loans or to conclude similar agreements that affect the public credit, and also to approve or disapprove those already concluded. In order to negotiate loans abroad, or those which although concluded within the country must be financed by foreign capital, it is necessary that the respective plan be approved by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the Legislative Assembly; (16) Bestow honorary citizenship for noteworthy services to the Republic and decree honors to the memory of persons whose eminent activities deserve such distinction; (17) Fix the content of the unit of the currency and enact laws on coinage, credit, weights and measures. In fixing the fineness of the currency unit, the Assembly must previously obtain the advice of the technical organ in charge of currency regulation; (18) Promote the progress of the arts and sciences and to ensure to authors and inventors, for a limited time, ownership of their respective writings or inventions; (19) Create establishments for the teaching and advancement of the arts and sciences, granting them subventions for their support and endeavoring particularly to make primary education general; (20) Create courts of justice and other entities for the national service; (21) Grant general amnesties and pardons, by a vote of not less than two thirds of the entire membership, for political crimes, except those connected with elections, concerning which there shall be no pardon. (22) Adopt regulations for its own functioning, which after being adopted may not be amended except by a vote of not less than two thirds of the entire membership; (23) Appoint committees from within its membership to investigate any matter entrusted to them by the Assembly and submit the corresponding report. Such committees shall have free access to all official agencies in conducting their investigations and may request any data deemed necessary. They may receive any kind of evidence and call before them any person for purposes of interrogation. (24) Conduct interpellations of Ministers of Government, and in ad-

Costa Rica

591

dition, by a two-thirds vote of those present, censure such officials if, in the opinion of the Assembly, they are guilty of illegal or unconstitutional acts or serious errors which have resulted in or might result in clear injury to the public interest. Matters under diplomatic negotiation or which refer to pending military operations are excepted in both cases. Art. 122. The Assembly is prohibited from adopting votes of applause for official acts, or of recognizing as a charge on the Public Treasury obligations which have not been previously so declared by the Judicial Power or accepted by the Executive Power; or from granting scholarships, pensions, retirement allotments or rewards. Chapter III Enactment of Laws Art. 123. During regular sessions, legislation may be initiated by any member of the Legislative Assembly, or by the Executive Power through the Ministers of Government. Art. 124. To become a law, every bill must be the subject of three debates, each on a different day, must obtain the approval of the Assembly and the sanction of the Executive Power, and be published in the Diario Oficial, without prejudice to requirements established by this Constitution in special cases. Action taken in use of the powers enumerated in sections 2), 3), 5), 6), 7), 8), 9), 10), 12), 16), 21), 22), 23), and 24) of Article 121 do not have the status of laws and hence do not require the above procedure; they may be voted upon at a single session and must be published in the Diario Oficial. Art. 125. If the Executive Power does not approve a bill passed by the Assembly, he shall veto it and return it with pertinent objections. A veto may not be used against the Regular Budget of the Republic. Art. 126. Within ten working days from the date on which a bill passed by the Legislative Assembly is received, the Executive Power may object to it as inappropriate or in need of amendments; in the latter case, he shall propose such amendments in returning the bill. If the Executive Power does not object to a bill within the period indicated, he must approve and publish it. Art. 127. When a bill is reconsidered by the Assembly, with the observations of the Executive Power, and if the Assembly rejects them and the bill is again passed by a two-thirds vote of the total membership, it is thereby sanctioned and must be enforced as a law of the Republic. If the proposed amendments are adopted, the bill shall be returned to the Executive Power, who may not refuse his sanction. If they are rejected, and the bill is not approved by a two-thirds vote, it is to be filed and may not be considered until the next legislative period. Art. 128. If the veto is based on grounds of unconstitutionality not accepted by the Assembly, that body shall submit the bill to the Supreme Court of Justice to decide upon the issue within the following ten days. If the Court, by a vote of not less than two thirds of its full membership, rules that the bill contains unconstitutional provisions, that portion

592

Constitutions of Nations

containing them shall be considered rejected. The remaining portion is submitted to the Assembly for action, as is the entire bill if the Court rules that it does not contain provisions contrary to the Constitution. Art. 129. The laws are compulsory and take effect from the day designated therein; or if this is lacking, ten days after their publication in the Diario Oficial. No one may claim ignorance of the law, except when the law itself so authorizes. Renunciation of the laws in general, or of those in the public interest in particular, is without effect. Acts and agreements contrary to prohibitive laws shall be null and void, unless the law itself provides otherwise. A law does not become abrogated or repealed except by a subsequent law; and disuse, custom, or contrary practice cannot be claimed against its enforcement.
TITLE

X

THE EXECUTIVE POWER

Chapter I The Presidentand Vice Presidentsof the Republic Art. 130. The Executive Power is exercised, in the name of the people, by the President of the Republic and the Ministers of Government in the capacity of subordinate collaborators. Art. 131. To be President or Vice President of the Republic a person must be: (1) A Costa Rican by birth and a citizen in the exercise of his rights; (2) A layman; (3) Over thirty years of age. Art. 132. The following may not be elected President or Vice President: (1) Anyone who has served as President for any period during the eight years preceding the term for which the election is held, or a Vice President or person who may have replaced him who has served during the major portion of any term included in the aformentioned eight years; (2) A Vice President who has held such status during the twelve months preceding the election, and who as such may have occupied the Presidency for any period during such time; (3) Any ascendant or descendant relative by consanguinity or affinity, or brother of the person occupying the Presidency of the Republic at the time of the election, or of a person who has held the office for any period during the six months preceding that date; (4) Anyone who has been a Minister of Government during the twelve months prior to the date of the election; (5) The titular Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, the titular and alternate Magistrates of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the Director of the Civil Register, directors or managers of the autonomous institutions, the Comptroller and Assistant Comptroller General of the Republic. This disqualification includes persons who have held the positions indicated within twelve months prior to the date of the elections.* Art. 133. The election for President and the Vice Presidents shall be held on the first Sunday in February of the year in which these officials are to be elected.

Costa Rica

593

Art. 134. The presidential term shall be four years. Acts of public officials and of private individuals which violate the principle of alternation in the office of the Presidency or of the free presidential succession, as set forth in this Constitution, will imply treason to the Republic. The liability derived from such acts shall be imprescriptible. Art. 135. There shall be two Vice Presidents of the Republic who shall replace the President during his complete absence, in the order of their nomination. During his temporary absence, the President may call upon either Vice President to replace him. If neither Vice President can fill the temporary or permanent absence of the President, the position shall be held by the President of the Legislative Assembly. Art. 136. The President and Vice Presidents of the Republic shall assume office on May 8; and upon completion of the constitutional term of office, their functions shall cease ipso facto. Art. 137. The President and Vice Presidents shall take an oath before the Legislative Assembly; but if it cannot be taken before that body, they shall do so before the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 138. The President and Vice Presidents shall be elected simultaneously and by a plurality of votes that exceeds forty percent of the total number of valid votes cast. The candidates for President and Vice Presidents of one party must appear on a single list, to the exclusion of any other official to be elected. If none of the lists attain the plurality indicated, a second popular election will be held on the first Sunday in April of the same year between the two lists that have received the most votes, and the one obtaining the greater number of votes is elected. If at any election two lists obtain an equal number of sufficient votes, the candidate of greater age shall be considered elected as President, and for Vice Presidents the candidates of the same list. Citizens included on a list already inscribed according to law may not withdraw their candidacy for President or Vice President nor may candidates of the lists that received the greatest number of votes in a first election abstain from running in the second election.* Chapter II Powers and Duties of the Executive Power Art. 139. The following are exclusive powers and duties of the occupant of the Presidency of the Republic: (1) Freely to appoint and remove the Ministers of Government;

(2) To represent the Nation in acts of an official character; (3) To hold supreme command of the public (armed) forces; (4) To present to the Legislative Assembly, at the beginning of each annual period of sessions, a written message relating to the various matters of administration and the political state of the Republic, in which he must also propose measures which he deems important to the proper conduct of the Government and the progress and well-being of the Nation;

594

Constitutionsof Nations

(5) To request permission from the Legislative Assembly when necessary to leave the country, while holding office and for one year thereafter. Art. 140. The following are powers and duties jointly of the President and the respective Ministers of Government: (1) Freely to appoint and remove members of the public forces, employees and officials who hold positions of trust, and others as determined, in well defined cases, by the Civil Service Law; (2) To appoint and remove, subject to the prior requirements of the Civil Service Law, all other employees of their offices; (3) To sanction and promulgate the laws, regulate and execute them and see to their strict enforcement; (4) During adjournment of the Legislative Assembly, to order the suspension of rights and guarantees referred to in section 7 of Article 121, in the same instances and with the same limitations as are established therein, and to report immediately to the Assembly. A decree of suspension of guarantees is equivalent, ipso facto, to a convocation of the Assembly, which must meet within the next forty-eight hours. If the Assembly does not confirm the measure by a two-thirds vote of its entire membership, the guarantees shall be considered as reestablished. If the Assembly is unable to meet due to lack of a quorum, it shall do so the following day with any number of Deputies. In this event, the decree of the Executive Power requires approval by a vote of not less than two thirds of those present; (5) To exercise initiative in the enactment of laws and the right of veto; (6) To maintain order and tranquillity in the Nation; to take such steps as may be necessary to safeguard public liberties; (7) To provide for the collection and expenditure of the national revenues according to law; (8) To supervise the proper functioning of administrative services and agencies; (9) To execute and enforce all decisions and provisions covering matters within the jurisdiction of the courts of justice and electoral organizations, at their request; (10) To make agreements, public treaties ,and concordats, to promulgate and execute them following their approval and ratification by the Legislative Assembly, according to the provisions of this Constitution; (11) To submit to the Legislative Assembly such reports as it may request under the powers granted to it; (12) To direct the international relations of the Republic; (13) To receive Heads of State and diplomatic representatives and to admit consuls of other nations; (14) To convoke the Legislative Assembly in regular and special sessions; (15) To send to the Legislative Assembly the proposed National Budget at the time and in accordance with requirements specified in this Constitution; (16) To dispose of the public.forces to preserve the order, defense, and security of the country; (17) To issue navigation permits (licenses); (18) To establish suitable regulations for the operation of his office and issue other regulations and ordinances required for prompt execution of the laws; (19) To sign administrative contracts not included in section 14 of Article 121 of this Constitution but with the requirement of submitting them to the approval of the Legislative Assembly if they stipulate an exemption from taxes or duties, or are for the purpose of exploiting public services, or the natural wealth or resources of the State. Cases governed by special laws are excepted;

Costa Rica

595

(20) To comply with any other duties and exercise any other powers conferred by this Constitution and the laws.* Chapter III Ministers of Government Art. 141. For the conduct of business pertaining to the Executive Power there shall be such Ministers of Government as the law may provide. One Minister may be in charge of two or more departments.* Art. 142. In order to be a Minister one is required to: (1) Be a citizen in the exercise of his rights; (2) Be a Costa Rican by birth, or by naturalization with ten years' residence in the country after naturalization; (3) Be a layman; (4) Have attained twenty-five years of age. Art. 143. The position of Minister is incompatible with the exercise of any other public charge, elective or otherwise, except where special laws confer functions upon them. The rules, prohibitions, and sanctions set forth in Articles 110, 111, and 112 of this Constitution are applicable to Ministers wherever relevant. The Vice Presidents of the Republic may hold the position of Minister. Art. 144. The Ministers of Government shall submit each year to the Legislative Assembly, within the first fifteen days of the first period of regular sessions, a report on matters within their departments. Art. 145. The Ministers of Government may attend sessions of the Legislative Assembly at any time, with the right to speak but not to vote, and they must do so when the Assembly so orders. Art. 146. The decrees, resolutions, and orders of the Executive Power require the signatures of the President of the Republic and the appropriate Minister in order to be valid, and in addition, in those cases provided by this Constitution, the approval of the Council of the Government. The signature of the President of the Republic shall be sufficient for the appointment and removal of Ministers. Chapter IV The Council of Government Art. 147. The President of the Republic and the Ministers form the Council of Government, presided over by the former, to perform the following functions: (1) Request from the National Assembly a declaration of a state of national defense and authorization to order military recruitment, organize the army and negotiate peace; (2) Exercise the right of pardon in the manner specified by law; (3) Appoint and remove the diplomatic representatives of the Republic; (4) Appoint the directors of the autonomous institutions when such appointments are a function of the Executive Power; (5) Pass upon other business submitted by the President of the Republic who, if the gravity of any matter so requires ,may invite other persons to participate in the deliberations of the Council as advisers.

596

Constitutions of Nations

Chapter V Responsibilityof the Person Exercising the Executive Power Art. 148. The President of the Republic shall be responsible for the use he may make of those powers which pertain exclusively to him under this Constitution. Each Minister of Government shall be jointly responsible with the President, with respect to the exercise of powers which this Constitution grants to both. Responsibility for acts of the Council of Government shall extend to all who voted to issue the order in question. Art. 149. A President of the Republic and Minister of Government who participate in any of the acts indicated below, shall also be jointly responsible: (1) If they in any way compromise the freedom, political independence, or territorial integrity of the Republic; (2) If they directly or indirectly impede or obstruct popular elections or violate the principles of alternation in the office of the Presidency or of the free presidential succession, or the freedom, order, or honesty of the suffrage; (3) If they impede or obstruct the functions pertaining to the Legislative Assembly or restrict its freedom and independence; (4) If they refuse to publish or execute the laws or other legislative acts; (5) If they impede or obstruct the functions pertaining to the Judicial Power, or restrict the freedom of the courts to judge cases submitted to their decision, or if they in any way obstruct the functions pertaining to the electoral organs or the municipalities; (6) In any other case in which by action or omission the Executive Power violates a specific law. Art. 150. The responsibility of the occupant of the Presidency of the Republic and of the Ministers of Government for acts not involving a crime may be claimed only while they are in office and for one year after their functions cease. Art. 151. The President, Vice Presidents, or whoever occupies the Presidency of the Republic, may not be prosecuted or tried except when, after impeachment proceedings have been entered, the Legislative Assembly finds that there are grounds for initiating a penal trial.
TITLE

XI

THE JUDICIAL POWER

Sole Chapter Art. 152. The Judicial Power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice and by other courts established by law. Art. 153. In addition to the functions indicated in this Constitution, the Judicial Power shall hear civil, penal, commercial, labor, and contentious-administrative cases, as well as any others which the law may provide, regardless of their nature or the status of persons involved; shall render final decisions thereon and execute the judgments pronounced, with the assistance of the public force if necessary. Art. 154. The Judicial Power is subject only to the Constitution and the law, and the decisions rendered by it on matters within its competence

Costa Rica

597

impose no responsibilities other than those specifically set forth in legislation. Art. 155. No court may take cognizance of cases pending in another court. Only courts of the Judicial Power may request proceedings ad effectum videndi. Art. 156. The Supreme Court of Justice is the highest court of the Judicial Power and all courts, officials, and employees of the judicial branch are subordinate to it, without prejudice to the provisions of the Constitution concerning civil service.* Art. 157. The Supreme Court of Justice shall consist of seventeen Magistrates elected by the Legislative Assembly, who shall make up the several divisions (Salas) indicated by law. Art. 158. The Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be elected for eight years and shall be regarded as reelected for like periods, unless the Legislative Assembly decides otherwise by a vote of two thirds of its entire membership. Vacancies will be filled for full eight-year terms.* Art. 159. To be a Magistrate it is necessary to be: (1) A Costa Rican by birth, or by naturalization with residence in the country of not less than ten years after naturalization. However, the President of the Supreme Court must be a Costa Rican by birth; (2) A citizen in the exercise of his rights; (3) A layman; (4) Over thirty-five years of age; (5) Holder of a lawyer's degree issued or legally recognized in Costa Rica and have engaged in the profession for at least ten years. Before taking office, Magistrates must give bond as provided by law.* Art. 160. No person may be elected Magistrate who is related by consanguinity or affinity to the third degree inclusive, to a member of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 161. The position of Magistrate is incompatible with that of an official of the other Supreme Powers. Art. 162. The Supreme Court of Justice shall appoint the Presidents of the several divisions (Salas) in the manner and for the term provided by law. The President of its highest division shall also be President of the Court.* Art. 163. The election of Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be held at one of the ten sessions prior to completion of the respective period; replacements shall be made at any of the eight sessions subsequent to the one in which notice of a vacancy is received. Art. 164. The Legislative Assembly shall appoint not less than twentyfive alternate Magistrates, chosen from a list of fifty candidates presented by the Supreme Court of Justice. Temporary absences of Magistrates will be filled by lot by the Supreme Court from the list of alternates. If there is a vacancy among the alternate Magistrates, one of two candidates proposed by the Supreme Court shall be elected at the first regular or special session of the Legislative Assembly after receipt of the notice. The law shall specify the term of office and the conditions, restrictions, and prohibitions imposed on titular Magistrates, which are not applicable to alternates.

598

Constitutions of Nations

Art. 165. Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice may not be suspended except following a declaration that there is reason for the institution of proceedings or for other reasons stated in the law in the section relating to disciplinary measures. In the latter case, the order must come from the Supreme Court of Justice by secret vote of not less than two thirds of its full membership. Art. 166. Where not provided for in this Constitution, the law shall specify the jurisdiction, number, and duration of the courts, as well as their powers, the principles on which they must base their acts and the manner in which they may be held responsible. Art. 167. In the discussion and passage of bills relating to the organization or functioning of the Judicial Power, the Legislative Assembly must confer with the Supreme Court of Justice; if it departs from the views of that body, a vote of two thirds of the entire membership of the Assembly is required.
TITLE XII
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT

Sole Chapter Art. 168. For purposes of public administration, the national territory is divided into provinces; these are divided into cantons and the cantons into districts. The law may establish special circumscriptions. The Legislative Assembly, by observing the requirements for the partial amendment of this Constitution, may create new provinces, provided that the respective proposal is previously approved by a plebiscite which the Assembly shall order to be held in the province or provinces which are to be dismembered. The creation of new cantons must be approved by the Legislative Assembly by a vote of not less than two thirds of the entire membership. Art. 169. The administration of local interests and services in each canton shall be entrusted to a Municipal Government, consisting of a deliberative body composed of municipal regidores selected by popular election and such executive official as the law may determine. Art. 170. Municipal corporations are autonomous. Art. 171. Municipal regidores shall be elected for a term of four years and the position shall be gratuitous and compulsory. The law shall specify specify the number of regidores and the manner in which they shall serve. However, the municipalities of the central cantons of provinces shall consist of not less than five titular regidores and a like number of alternates. The municipal officials shall be installed on July first of the corresponding year.* Art. 172. Each district shall be represented in the Municipality of the respective canton by a titular Sindico and alternate, with the right to speak but no vote. Art. 173. Municipal ordinances may be: (1) Objected to by the official whom the law designates, by a veto with explanation;

Costa Rica

599

(2) Appealed by any interested party. In either case, if the Municipality does not revoke or amend the ordinance objected to or appealed, the case shall be referred to such court of the Judicial Power as the law may specify, for final decision.* Art. 174. The law shall specify those cases in which the Municipalities require legislative authorization to contract loans, encumber their properties or revenues, or alienate movable or immovable property. Art. 175. The Municipalities shall fix their ordinary and extraordinary budgets which, in order to take effect, must be approved by the Comptroller General, who shall supervise their execution.
TITLE XIII
THE PUBLIC REVENUES

Chapter I The Budget of the Republic Art. 176. The ordinary budget of the Republic includes all probable revenues and all authorized expenditures of the public administration during the fiscal year. In no case may budgetary expenditures exceed the probable revenues. The Municipalities and autonomous institutions shall observe the preceding rules in issuing their budgets. The budget of the Republic is to be issued for a period of one year, from January first to December thirty-first. Art. 177. Preparation of the ordinary budget is the duty of the Executive Power, to be carried out through a specialized department, the head of which shall be appointed by the President of the Republic for a term of six years. This department shall have authority to reduce or suppress any items in the proposed budgets drawn up by the Ministers of Government, Legislative Assembly, Supreme Court of Justice and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal. In the event of a dispute, the President of the Republic shall make the final decision. The Executive Power shall prepare, for each fiscal year, the proposed extraordinary budgets, for the expenditure of revenues derived from the use of public credit or from any other extraordinary source. Art. 178. The proposed ordinary budget shall be submitted to the Legislative Assembly by the Executive Power not later than September first of each year and the Budget Law must be finally enacted before November thirtieth of the same year.* Art. 179. The Assembly may not increase the expenditures in the budget submitted by the Executive Power unless it also provides for new revenues to be collected, based on advice from the Comptroller General of the Republic as to the fiscal effectiveness thereof. Art. 180. The ordinary and extraordinary budgets constitute the limit of action by the Public Powers in the use and disposition of State funds, and they may be amended only by laws initiated by the Executive Power.

600

Constitutionsof Nations

Any proposed amendment that implies an increase or creation of expenditures must be subject to the terms of the preceding article. However, when the Assembly is in recess, the Executive Power may alter the use to be made of an authorized item, or open additional credits, but only to meet urgent or unforeseen necessities in the event of war, internal disorder or public calamity. In such cases, the Comptroller may not withhold approval of expenditures ordered and the respective decree implies convocation of the Legislative Assembly into special session to act upon it. Art. 181. The Executive Power shall transmit to the Comptroller the liquidation of the ordinary and any extraordinary budgets, not later than March first following expiration of the year in question; the Comptroller must submit this to the Assembly, together with his opinion, not later than the next May first. Final approval or disapproval of the items rests with the Legislative Assembly. Art. 182. Contracts for the execution of public works made b'y the State Powers, the Municipalities, or the autonomous institutions, purchases made from funds of these entities, and sales or leases of property belonging thereto, must be through bids, in accordance with the provisions of law governing the amount involved. Chapter II The Comptroller General of the Republic Art. 183. The office of the Comptroller General of the Republic is an auxiliary institution of the Legislative Assembly in its supervision of the Public Revenues; but it has absolute functional and administrative independence in the performance of its duties. The office is in charge of a Comptroller and an Assistant Comptroller. Both officials shall be appointed by the Legislative Assembly, two years after the commencement of a presidential term, for a term of eight years; they may be reappointed indefinitely, and shall enjoy the immunities and prerogatives of members of the Supreme Powers. The Comptroller and Assistant Comptroller are responsible to the Assembly for the fulfillment of their functions and may be removed by it by a vote of not less than two thirds of the entire membership, if the proceedings show unfitness or improper conduct.* Art. 184. The powers and duties of the Comptroller's office are: (1) To supervise the execution and liquidation of the ordinary and extraordinary budgets of the Republic; No order shall be issued for payment from State funds unless the respective expenditure has been countersigned by the Comptroller's office; and no obligation of the State becomes effective unless so countersigned; (2) To examine and approve or disapprove the budgets of the Municipalities and autonomous institutions, and supervise their execution and liquidation; (3) To submit a report annually to the Legislative Assembly, at its first regular session, covering the preceding fiscal year, including details on the work of the Comptroller's office and any opinions or suggestions deemed necessary for a better handling of public funds;

Costa Rica

601

(4) To examine, audit, and close the accounts of State institutions and public officials; (5) Others conferred by this Constitution or the laws. Chapter III The National Treasury Art. 185. The National Treasury is the center of operations for all national revenue offices; this is the only organ which has the legal power to pay out funds in the name of the State and to receive sums of money which, as revenue or for any other reason, should enter the nation's vaults. Art. 186. The treasury is in charge of a National Treasurer and Assistant Treasurer. Both officials are independent in the exercise of their functions, which shall be regulated by law. They are appointed by the Council of Government, for a term of four years, and may be removed only for due cause. Art. 187. Any expenditure by the National Treasury, not relating to the salaries of the permanent personnel of the Public Administration included in the budget, must be published in the Diario Oficial. Excepted from this formality are those expenditures which for very special reasons the Council of Government believes should not be published, but in this event the Legislative Assembly and the Comptroller's office shall be notified immediately and confidentially.
TITLE XIV
THE AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS

Sole Chapter Art. 188. The autonomous institutions of the State enjoy independence in matters of government and administration, and their directors are responsible for their management. Art. 189. The autonomous institutions are: (1) The State banks; (2) The State insurance institutions; (3) Those established by this Constitution and new agencies that may be created by the Legislative Assembly by a vote of not less than two thirds of its entire membership. Art. 190. In the discussion and passage of bills relating to an autonomous institution, the Legislative Assembly shall first hear the opinion of that entity.
TITLE

XV

THE CIVIL SERVICE

Sole Chapter Art. 191. A civil-service statute shall regulate the relations between the State and public employees for the purpose of guaranteeing efficiency in administration. Art. 192. With the exceptions that are specified in this Constitution

602

Constitutionsof Nations

and the civil-service statute, public employees shall be appointed on the basis of proven ability, and may be removed only on grounds for justifiable discharge as provided in labor legislation; or in case of a forced reduction in services, either because of lack of funds or for better organization of such services. Art. 193. The President of the Republic, the Ministers of Government, and officials who handle public funds are required to declare their property, which must be appraised, in accordance with the law.
TITLE XVI THE CONSTITUTIONAL OATH

Sole Chapter Art. 194. The oath which must be taken by public officials as provided in Article 11 of this Constitution, is as follows: "Do you swear before God and promise the fatherland to observe and defend the Constitution and laws of the Republic and faithfully to fulfill the duties of your office ? - Yes, I swear. -If you so do, may God help you, and if you do not, may He and the fatherland call you to account".
TITLE XVII
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION

Sole Chapter Art. 195. The Legislative Assembly may partially amend this Constitution by adhering strictly to the following provisions: (1) A proposal in which the amendment of one or more articles is sought must be presented to the Assembly at regular sessions, signed by at least ten deputies; (2) The proposal shall be read three times at intervals of six days, to determine whether or not it shall be admitted for discussion; (3) If such action is affirmative, it shall be sent to a committee appointed by absolute majority of the Assembly, which is to submit its report within a period of eight days; (4) When this report is submitted, it is debated in accordance with procedure for the enactment of laws; the amendment must be approved by a vote of not less than two thirds of the entire membership of the Assembly; (5) After the amendment is agreed to, the Assembly shall prepare the corresponding bill, through a committee, an absolute majority for approval being sufficient in this case; (6) The bill is then sent to the Executive Power, and the latter shall send it to the Assembly with the Presidential Message at the next regular legislative period, with his observations or recommendations; (7) The Legislative Assembly, at the first sessions, shall discuss the bill in three debates, and if it is approved by a vote of not less than two thirds of the entire membership, it shall become a part of the Constitution and communicated to the Executive Power for publication and observance. Art. 196. The general amendment of this Constitution, after approval of a bill in accordance with the procedure outlined in the preceding article, can be effected only by a Constituent Assembly called for the purpose.

Costa Rica TITLE

603

XVIII

FINAL PROVISIONS

Sole Chapter Article 197. This Constitution shall take effect on November 8, 1949 and repeals all others. It maintains in force the existing juridical order, unless this is amended or repealed by the competent organs of the Public Power or is not expressly or implicitly repealed by the present Constitution.
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

Art. 13. I. Persons who are in the status mentioned in the second and third sections of Article 13 and who at the time this Constitution is promulgated have attained twenty-five years of age and have not opted for Costa Rican nationality, may do so within a period of five years from the date of promulgation. Art. 85. II. The minimum percentage to which this article refers is
obtained as follows: six percent for the year 1950, and one percent more

annually in 1951, 1952, 1953 and 1954. Art. 98. III. For the elections to be held in the present year, application of the rule contained in this article shall be entrusted to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal. Art. 101. IV. The first election of Magistrates of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall be held on May 8, 1951 and the Supreme Court of Justice shall at the same time determine by lot which titular and alternate Magistrates shall serve for two or four years in office. Until the date indicated, the present members of the Tribunal shall continue in office and the Court shall have the power to fill vacancies that may occur during the interval. Art. 104. V. Within a period of three months following the elections of 1949, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall establish, by reorganization of the Registry of Civil Status (Registro de Estado Civil) and the Electoral Registry (Registro Electoral), the single organization provided by Art. 104 of this Constitution, to be known as the Civil Registry (Registro Civil). Art. 106. VI. Until a general census of the population is taken, the deputies' seats shall be apportioned among the provinces in the same manner as for the Constitutional Congress of 1945. Art. 116. VII. The Legislative Assembly which is to be chosen at the elections to be held in October 1949, according to call for that purpose made by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, shall be installed on November eight of that year and shall terminate its functions on October 31, 1953. The President of the Republic, the Vice Presidents, and the Deputies to the Legislative Assembly who are elected at the polls in 1953, the date of which shall be fixed in due couise by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, shall hold office for four and a half years, that is: the President and Vice Presidents from November 8 of that year to May 8, 1958 and the Deputies from November 1, 1953 to April 30, 1958, in order that thereafter the presidential term may begin on May 8, the Legislative Assembly may be installed on the first of that month, and the elections for President and Deputies may be held in February of the same year.

604

Constitutionsof Nations

Art. 132. VIII. For the presidential elections of 1953 the provisions of section (1) of this article do not apply to the President of the present Government Junta. Art. 138. IX. The Vice Presidents who are to serve for the four-year term included between November 8, 1949 and November 8, 1953 shall be elected simultaneously with the Deputies to the Legislative Assembly at the elections to be held in October 1949. Art. 140. X. The Civil Service Law shall not enter into force before November 8, 1950 nor after June, 1 1953, as determined by the Legislative Assembly. That body may likewise provide that its rules be applied gradually to the various departments of the Public Administration; in any case, the law must protect all public employees included in section 2 of Article 140 not later than November 8, 1959. Until the Civil Serivce Law is in effect, the President of the Republic and the respective Ministers of Government may freely appoint and remove all officials of their departments, including the directors and managers of the autonomous institutions and members of official boards and organizations whose appointments were made prior to the date this Constitution takes effect, even if such appointments were for fixed terms. Art. 141. XI. The Ministers of Government who are appointed at the beginning of the next presidential term shall have the functions specified in existing laws concerning the Secretaries of State, until a new law is enacted on the subject. Art. 156. XII. Judicial matters for the cognizance of administrative officials shall be referred to the courts of the Judicial Power, as designated by law, not later than January 1, 1952 in the capital cities of provinces and on a date to be fixed by the Legislative Assembly for other places in the Republic. But in all cases, one year after this Constitution takes effect, appeals from orders issued by such officials shall be the exclusive jurisdiction of such courts as the Supreme Court of Justice may name or designate. Art. 158. XIII. The Supreme Court of Justice to be elected by the next Legislative Assembly at one of its first ten regular sessions shall hold office until May 15, 1955 and shall be installed eight days after its election. Until the Court thus elected is installed, the present Supreme Court of Justice shall continue to function and the provisions of Article 158 of the Constitution shall not apply. Art. 159. XVI. The present titular Magistrates may be nominated for the first Supreme Court of Justice to be elected in accordance with this Constitution even though they do not meet the requirements as to age and professional practice imposed by the fourth and fifth sections of Art. 159. Art. 162. XV. The Supreme Court of Justice to be elected when this Constitution takes effect shall, upon its installation and by secret ballot and majority vote, select its President and the presidents of its several divisions, who shall hold these positions until the Legislative Assembly enacts other legal provisions to regulate Article 162.

Costa Rica

605

Art. 171. XVI. For the elections to be held during the current year, each canton shall elect the same number of titular regidores as comprised the Municipal Administrative Councils, and one alternate for each titular position. The regidores who are elected on this occasion shall assume office on December 1, 1949 and shall hold office until November 8, 1953. Those elected in that year shall hold office until June 30, 1958. The present Municipal Administrative Councils shall continue in office until November 30, 1949. Art. 173. XVII. Until a law is enacted covering this article, cognizance of appeals from municipal rulings shall continue to be in charge of the Ministry of Government (Interior). The said law must be enacted not later than November 8, 1951. Art. 178. XVIII. The time limit indicated in Article 178 for approval by the Legislative Assembly shall not govern the budget bill for the fiscal year 1950. Art. 183. XIX. The appointment of the first Comptroller and Assistant Comptroller shall be made not later than in the year 1950, as soon as the Organic Law of the Comptroller General's Office is promulgated, and shall be for a term expiring May 8, 1956. Done in the Hall of Sessions of the National Constitutent Assembly -National Palace-San Jos6, on the seventh day of November, nineteen hundred and forty-nine.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Beeche. Estudios de derecho constitucional. San Jos6: 1910. Digesto constitucionalde Costa Rica. Ed. del Colegio de Abogados, dirigida por Marco Tulio Zeled6n. San Jos6: 1946. Leiva Quiros, Elias. Nueva cartillacivica, precedida de un estudio sobre la ensefianza del ramo. San Jos6: M. v. de Lines; 1924. May, S. and others. Costa Rica. New York: 1952. Voio Jimenez, Jorge. El aio funesto a la traici6ndel 27 de enero de 1917; para la historia Imp. cat6lica; 1918. Zeled6n, Marco Tulio. Reseiia hist6ricadel rigimen constitucional de Costa Rica. San Jos6, Costa Rica: Imprenta nacional; 1941. Zeled6n, Marco Tulio. Lecciones de ciencia constitucional y constituci6n politica de la Repihlica de Costa Rica. San Jos6: 1945.

