CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTIES OF THE WORLD

Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

ZAIRE
by JACQUES VANDERLINDEN

Issued June 1979

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1979 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

THE

REPUBLIC

OF

ZAIRE

LAW NO. 78-010 OF FEBRUARY 10, 1978 REVISING THE CONSTITUTION The Legislative Council has adopted; The Founding President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall promulgate the law the text of which follows: Article 1. The Constitution of June 24, 1967, as revised to this date, shall be modified in accordance with the text annexed to this law. Article 2. This law shall take effect on the date of its promulgation.

Kinshasa, February 15, 1978

MOBUTU SESE SEKO KUKU NGBENDU WA ZA BANGA General of the Army

ANNEX TO LAW NO. 78-010 OF FEBRUARY 15, 1978 REVISING THE CONSTITUTION OF JUNE 24, 1967 PREAMBLE We, the Zairian People, assembled in the Popular Movement of the Revolution: Guided by Mobutism: Committed to the basic options defined in the Manifeste de la N'Sele; Conscious that only a genuine appeal will permit us to affirm our personality, realize our objectives, and contribute effectively to universal civilization; Moved by a desire to guarantee unity and territorial integrity, to assure the material wellbeing of each citizen and to create conditions favorable to the moral and spiritual growth of all Zairians; Convinced that only mass mobilization, under the aegis of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, will permit the Zairian people to guarantee its political, economic, social and cultural independence; Convinced that only through African unity will the peoples of Africa be free of foreign domination; Proclaiming our adherence to the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man; Conscious of our responsibilities before God, our ancestors, Africa and the world; We solemnly adopt this Constitution.

1

TITLE I THE TERRITORY AND SOVEREIGNTY OF THE REPUBLIC Article 1. The Republic of Zaire shall be a secular, social, democratic and unitary state. Article 2. The Republic of Zaire shall include the city of Kinshasa and the eight regions enumerated hereinafter: Bandundu, Lower Zaire, Upper Zaire, Western Kasai, Eastern Kasai, Kivu and Shaba. Article 3. Kinshasa shall be the capital of the Republic of Zaire. Article 4. The emblem of the Republic shall be a light-green flag, ornamented in the center with a yellow circle in which a right hand is holding a torch with a red flame. Article 5. Its motto shall be: Peace, Justice, Work. Article 6. Its coat of arms shall consist of a leopard's head framed on the left by a palm branch and arrow, and on the right by an ivory tip and a spear, all lying on a stone. Article 7. Its anthem shall be "la Zairoise." Article 8. The Zairian people shall be organized in the Popular Movement of the Revolution. Article 9. Power shall emanate from the people, who shall exercise it through the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, who is the President of the Republic, and by the organs of the Popular Movement of the Revolution or referendum. No faction nor individual may assume this exercise. Article 10. Zairian land and the sub-surface shall belong to the State.

2

The terms of their concession shall be established by law. Article 11. Zairian nationality shall be unique and exclusive. It may not be possessed concurrently with another nationality. The terms of recognition, acquisition, and loss of Zairian nationality shall be established by law. TITTF II FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS Article 12. All Zairians are equal before the law and have a right to the equal protection of the laws. In education, in access to public office, and in all other matters, no Zairian may be subject to discriminatory measures, whether as a result of a law or an Executive act, by reason of his religion, national or ethnic origin, sex, place of birth, or residence. Article 13. Everyone has a right to life and to physical integrity. No one shall be exposed to torture nor to inhuman, degrading treatment. No one shall be put to death except in cases provided for by law and in the forms prescribed by law. Article 14. Everyone has a right to the free development of his personality, subject to the rights of others and to public order. No one may be held in slavery or servitude or a similar condition. No one may be constrained in forced or obligatory labor, except in cases provided for by law.

3

Article 15. Individual liberty shall be guaranteed. No one shall be the object of a search, arrest or detention except by virtue of law and under the terms prescribed by law. No one shall be prosecuted for an act or omission which did not constitute an infraction of law at the time it was committed and at the time of prosecution. Everyone accused of an infraction shall be presumed innocent until his guilt has been established by final judgment. Article 16. Only legally constituted courts and tribunals shall be authorized to interpret the law. No extraordinary commission or tribunal may be created under any name whatsoever. No penalty may be inflicted which is heavier than that applicable at the time when the infraction was committed. All judgments shall be accompanied by an explanation and shall be declared in public. Sessions of courts public unless publicity public order or morals; tribunals may declare a and tribunals shall be would be dangerous for in this case, courts or closed session.

Everyone has the right to defend himself or to be assisted by the defender of his choice. No one shall be removed against his will from the judge assigned to him by law. Article 17. In the Republic there shall be no State religion. Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. Everyone has the right to exercise his religion or his convictions, alone or as a group, in public or in private, by services, education,

4

practices, rites, and religious life, subject only to public order and morals. Religious sects shall be constituted under conditions established by law. Article 18. All Zairians have the right to freedom of expression. This right implies liberty to express his opinions and his feelings, namely through speech, through writing, and through pictures, while respecting public order and morality. Article 19. The family, which is the natural basis for the human community, shall be placed under the protection of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. It shall be organized in such a way as to insure its unity and stability. All Zairians shall have the right to marry and form a family. Rules regarding marriage shall be established by law. The care and education to be given to children shall constitute a right and a duty for parents which they shall exercise under the authority and with the aid of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. Article 20. National education shall provide for the training of youth. National education shall include public schools as well as private schools approved and supervised by the Popular Movement of the Revolution. Conditions for the creation functioning of educational institutions shall be established by law. Article 21. Rights to individual and collective property shall be guaranteed. These rights may not be jeopardized except by law and by reason of public interest, providing for a prior, fair indemnity to the owner whose rights are infringed. Article 22. All Zairians shall have the right to the inviolability of their domicile.

5

Public authorities may not jeopardize this right except in cases defined by law in the form prescribed by law. Article 23. All persons shall have the right to privacy in correspondence and in all other forms of communication. This right may not be infringed except in cases defined by law. Article 24. The exercise of art, commerce, and industry, as well as free circulation of goods, shall be guaranteed to all Zairians throughout the territory of the Republic under conditions established by law. Article 25. No Zairian may be expelled from the territory of the Republic. Every Zairian shall have the right to establish freely his domicile or residence anywhere in the territory of the Republic, enjoying all rights recognized by this Constitution and by law. This right may not be limited except by virtue of a law and in cases determined by law. Article 26. All Zairians shall have the right to form associations and organizations. Groups whose goal or activities are contrary to law or directed against public order shall be prohibited. Article 27. Every Zairian shall have the right and the duty to contribute, through his work, to the construction and the prosperity of the Nation. No one may be jeopardized in his work because of his origins, sex, or beliefs. The right to strike shall be recognized to all workers who exercise it within the framework of union action and in conformity with the law.

6

Article 28. Every Zairian shall be responsible for the progress of activities of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. In this regard, he has the duty through constant vigilance to support the revolution, to defend its gains, and to safeguard national unity and territorial integrity. Article 29. Every Zairian shall be an elector at eighteen years of age. Conditions for electors shall be established by law. Article 3 0. Every Zairian eighteen years of age shall be obliged to do military service; a civilian service may be, substituted, under conditions established by law. Article 31. Every foreigner present on territory of the Republic shall enjoy the protection accorded to persons and property by virtue of this Constitution, with exceptions established by law. He may not enjoy rights reserved to Zairians by this Constitution except in the cases defined and the conditions determined by law. TITLE III ORGANIZATION AND EXERCISE OF POWER CHAPTER I: THE POPULAR MOVEMENT OF THE REVOLUTION Article 32. In the Republic of Zaire, there is only one institution, the Popular Movement of the Revolution. Article 33. The Popular Movement of the Revolution is the Zairian Nation organized politically. Its doctrine is Mobutism. Every Zairian is a member of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. 7

CHAPTER II: THE PRESIDENT OF THE POPULAR MOVEMENT OF THE REVOLUTION, THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Article 34. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution shall be the President of the Republic. He shall represent the Nation. He shall guarantee national independence and territorial integrity. He shall insure the proper functionning of all organs of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. He shall be the Chief Executive. He shall determine and conduct State policy, set forth the program of the Executive Council, and insure its application. He shall preside over Congress, the Political Bureau, and the Executive Council. Article 35. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall be elected for seven years by universal, direct, secret suffrage. Any citizen who is Zairian by birth and who is forty years of age may be elected President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Article 36. Declarations of candidacy for the position of President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall be received and examined by the Political Bureau. The Political Bureau shall retain the candidacy and present it to Congress, which shall propose it to the people's vote. Election shall be by majority vote. Conditions of eligibility, of declaration of candidacy, of balloting, of the counting and

8

proclamation of results shall be determined by law. Article 37. Before taking office, the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall swear before the Nation, in the presence of the Supreme Court of Justice, which shall record it, the following oath: , elected President of the Popular "I, Movement of the Revolution and President of the Republic, I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Zaire, to maintain the independence of the Nation and the territorial integrity, to follow and preserve in all circumstances the doctrine and ideals of the Popular Movement of the Revolution." Article 38. The duties of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, President of the Republic, shall be terminated through death, resignation, dismissal or definitive disability. The Political Bureau shall declare death or definitive disability; it shall record a resignation; it shall declare dismissal according to Article 62 of this Constitution. In all cases enumerated in the first paragraph, the Political Bureau shall inform the Nation through a message. When the vacancy has been declared by the Political Bureau, the duties of President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall be temporarily exercised by the most senior of the Political Commissioners. However, the provisions of Article 40 of this Constitution shall not be applicable to him. Election of the new President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, President of the Republic, shall take place not less than thirty days and not more than sixty days after the vacancy occurs.

9

Article 39. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall set up the structures of the Popular Movement of the Revolution which are not determined by this Constitution. Article 40. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall appoint and dismiss members of the Political Bureau under conditions determined by this Constitution.

He shall appoint and dismiss the First Commissioner, State Commissioners, Officers of the Armed Forces, Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinaires to foreign powers, Regional Commissioners, as well as commanding officers of Public Administration and leaders of quasi-official organizations. He shall appoint and dismiss the President of the Judiciary Council, judges, and prosecutors. He shall appoint and dismiss members of the Audit Office. He shall receive the oath of members of the Political Bureau and of the Executive Council, the President of the Judiciary Council, Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Prosecutors of this Court, members of the Audit Office, Directors in Public Administration, Regional Commissioners, and Officers of the Armed Forces. He shall be Supreme Chief of the Armed Forces.
Article 41. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, may initiate laws.

If the Legislative Council is not in session or in case of emergency, he may, by ordinance, take measures which are normally in the realm of law. He shall assure the promulgation of laws

10

under conditions determined by Article 83 of this Constitution. Article 42. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall assure execution of laws and shall establish regulations for the police and the Public Administration. He shall exercise this power through ordinances. Article 43. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall guarantee the independence of the Judiciary Council. He may remit, commute or reduce penalties. Article 44. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall direct and supervise the foreign policy of the Republic. He shall accredit ambassadors and envoys extraordinaires to foreign powers. He shall receive credentials from ambassadors and envoys extraordinaires of foreign powers to the Republic of Zaire. Article 45. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall confer rank in national orders and national decorations according to law. Article 46. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall have the right to mint coins and to issue paper money in execution of law. Article 47. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, may declare war, with the consent of the Political Bureau.

11

He shall so inform the Nation by message. When war has been declared, the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, may proclaim martial law. Article 48. If serious circumstances imminently threaten the Nation's independence or integrity or cause an interruption in the regular functioning of the organs of the Popular Movement of the Revolution or jeopardize vital State interests, the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, may proclaim a state of emergency, with the consent of the Political Bureau. He shall so inform the Nation by message. Article 49. When military law or a state of emergency has been proclaimed, the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall be empowered to take all measures required by the circumstances. In particular, he may restrict the exercise of individual liberties and certain fundamental rights under conditions determined by this Constitution and by law. In addition, he may suspend in all or in part of the national territory, and for the duration and infractions which he may determine, the repressive action of ordinary jurisdictions and substitute that of military jurisdictions. However, he may not infringe upon rights to defense and to appeal. Article 50. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall communicate with the Legislative Council and with the people, either directly or by messages which are read and which may not give rise to any debate. At least once a year he shall give a general policy speech. Article 51. The person of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall be inviolable. 12

The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, may not be prosecuted except for deviationism, according to the provisions of Article 62 of this Constitution. CHAPTER III: ORGANS OF THE POPULAR MOVEMENT OF THE REVOLUTION Article 52. The organs of the Popular Movement of the Revolution are: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. The The The The The Congress; Political Bureau; Legislative Council; Executive Council; Judicial Council. SECTION I: CONGRESS Article 53. Congress is the supreme organ of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. It shall rule on all questions related to the doctrine and to the fundamental options of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. Article 54. Congress shall be composed of members representing the whole life force of the Nation. The method of their designation shall be established by the Political Bureau. Article 55. Congress shall meet in ordinary session and in extraordinary session when convened by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Ordinary sessions shall take place every five years, and extraordinary sessions, whenever a question of national interest so requires.

13

Article 56. At each ordinary session of the Congress, the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall present a report on the general situation of affairs of State. Article 57. The organization, functioning, and procedure of the work of Congress shall be determined by its internal regulations. SECTION II: THE POLITICAL BUREAU Article 56. The Political Bureau is the organ of conception, inspiration, orientation, and decision of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. It shall insure respect for the fundamental options of the Popular Movement of the Revolution and application of the resolutions passed by Congress. The organization, functioning and procedure of the work of the Political Bureau shall be determined by its internal regulations. Article 59. The Political Bureau shall consist of thirty members called Political Commissioners. It shall be composed of eighteen members elected by universal, direct, secret suffrage, two seats for each region, including the city of Kinshasa, as well as twelve members designated by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Political Commissioners shall be appointed by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. In this function they are People's Commissioners. With the exception of the President of the Legislative Council, the provisions of Article 80 of this Constitution shall not be applicable to them.

14

Article 60. Every citizen who is Zairian by birth and who is thirty-five years of age may be elected a member of the Political Bureau. Conditions for presenting candidacies, rules regarding incompatibility, and procedures of electoral operations shall be established by law. Article 61. Before taking office, a Political Commissioner shall take the following oath before the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, who shall record it: "I swear fidelity to the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic; obedience to the Constitution and to the laws of the Republic of Zaire; and I make a solemn pledge to protect and foster Mobutism, the foundation of our revolution." Article 62. The Political Bureau shall protect and foster Mobutism. In this regard, it has the authority to take cognizance of all acts capable of jeopardizing the doctrine of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, even those of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. An action of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, within the provisions of the preceding paragraph, shall be titled deviationism. In that event, upon a motion submitted by one of its members to the most senior Political Commissioner, the Political Bureau shall meet, with the latter presiding. The most announce this ular Movement the Republic; defense. senior Political Commissioner shall motion to the President of the Popof the Revolution, the President of the latter shall provide means of

If deviationism has been established, the

15

Political Bureau shall declare the removal of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. The vacancy thus created shall entail the application of the provisions of Article 38. Cases of deviationism and the procedure to be followed regarding leaders other than the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall be determined by law. Article 61. The Political Bureau shall issue official rulings. These rulings shall require the Legislative Council or the Executive Council, as the case may be, to draft laws or executive regulations. Article 64. The term of Political Commissioners is five years. It shall terminate through death, resignation, permanent disability as declared by the Political Bureau, or loss of mandate as declared by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, if the Political Commissioner is guilty of high treason, deviationism, or serious violation of the discipline of the Popular Movement of the Revolution or if he is excluded as provided in the electoral law. Article 65. A Political Commissioner may not be prosecuted except with the authorization of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, or unless the latter charges him.• SECTION III: THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL Article 66. The Legislative Council is the organ of the Popular Movement of the Revolution responsible for drafting laws. It shall consist of a single chamber.

16

Its members shall be called People's Commissioners. The constituency of the People's Commissioners shall be national. Article 67. The People's Commissioners shall be elected by secret, direct, universal suffrage in electoral districts determined by law. Article 68. To be eligible for the Legislative Council, it is necessary to be Zairian and not less than twenty-five years of age. Article 69. Conditions for presenting candidacy, rules on ineligibility, and procedures for electoral operations shall be determined by law. Article 70. The Legislative Council shall verify and validate the powers of its members. Article 71. The duration of the legislature shall be five years. The election of the new Legislative Council shall take place not less than thirty days and not more than sixty days before the end of the legislature. Article 72. The mandate of a People's Commissioner may be terminated by a dismissal declared by the Political Bureau in the event of serious violation of the discipline of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, by death, resignation, permanent disability, unjustified absence from more than one-quarter of the meetings of one session, or if the People's Commissioner is ineligible as provided in the electoral law. Article 73. The Legislative Council shall meet twice a year in ordinary session. The first session shall open the first Monday in April; the second, the first Monday in October.

17

The sessions shall end, respectively, the first Monday in July and the first Monday in January, unless the agenda is completed sooner. Article 7l4. The Legislative Council shall meet in extraordinary session the day following the expiration of powers of the preceding Legislative Council in order to elect the members of its Bureau. The Bureau of the Legislative Council shall be elected for the duration of the legislature. However, a new election may be held upon request of two-thirds of the members which compose the Legislative Council. It shall include: a President, two Vice Presidents, and two Secretaries. Article 75. The Legislative Council may be convened in extraordinary session by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. In that case, the convocation shall establish the agenda of the session. Article 76. At meetings of the Legislative Council, one-half of its members shall constitute a quorum. However, the Legislative Council may render its decisions only by a two-thirds majority vote of its members. Article 77. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall pronounce cloture in ordinary sessions upon motion of the Bureau of the Legislative Council and in extraordinary sessions as soon as the Legislative Council has completed its agenda. Article 78. The organization and functioning of the Legislative Council shall be determined by internal regulations. Article 79. The Legislative Council shall draft laws in conformity with the ideals and doctrine of the Popular Movement of the Revolution.

18

Article 80. The initiating of laws shall be vested concurrently with the President of the Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, and with each member of the Legislative Council. If a legislative bill has been declared urgent by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, its examination shall be given priority by the Legislative Council. Article 81. The law shall establish rules concerning: - civil rights and civil and military obligations; - nationality, the status of persons, regulation of marriage, inheritance, and gifts; - the determination of infractions which entail penalties of imprisonment for longer than six months; amnesty, the creation of new jurisdictions, and regulation of judges; - the amount and the means of collection of taxes of all kinds; regulation of currency; - regulation of the elections provided for in this Constitution; - the creation of categories of public establishments. The law shall also establish the fundamental principles of: - the general organization of national defense; - the administration of regional entities, their authority and their resources; - education;

19

- regulation of property; civil and commercial rights and obligations; - the right to work, union rights, and social security; - fundamental guarantees accorded to State civil and military employees; - transfer of private property and management of State property; - mutual insurance and savings; - the organization of production; - regulation of transport and telecommunications. Budgetary laws shall determine the resources and obligations of the State. The law shall determine the objectives of State economic and social action. The plan shall be approved by law. Without prejudice to other provisions of this Constitution, matters which are not in the area of law are regulatory. Laws on those subjects may be modified by ordinance. The provisions of this article may be specified and completed by law or by ruling. Article 82. In its October session, the Legislative Council shall vote on the budget bill. Any amendment to the budget bill entailing an increase in expenditure must provide the necessary ways and means. Any amendment entailing a reduction in revenue, which would create an imbalance in the budget must provide for a corresponding decrease in expenditures or for new revenue. If the Legislative Council has not passed on the bill presented by the Executive Council before the opening of the new term, the provisions of this bill may be enacted by the President of the 20

Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. If the budget bill for a term has not been presented in time to be promulgated before the beginning of that term, the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall request the Legislative Council to open temporary credits. In the event the Legislative Council has not ruled within two weeks of the opening of temporary credits, the provisions of the bill regarding credits shall be enacted by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Article 83. Laws shall be promulgated by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. They shall bear the State seal and they shall be published in the Journal Officiel. Article 84. The Legislative Council shall have the power to supervise the Executive Council, the Judicial Council, and public services of the State. It shall exercise this supervision by oral or written question, by challenge, or by investigative commissions instituted within its ranks. The organization and functioning of the Legislative Council's supervision shall be determined by law. Article 85. Members of the Executive Council have the right and, if they are summoned, the obligation to attend meetings of the Legislative Council, to address the Council, and to give the People's Commissioners any explanation which they deem useful. They may propose amendments to bills under discussion but they shall not participate in the vote. Article 86. No member of the Legislative Council may be prosecuted, arrested, held or 21

judged for his opinions or votes in the 'exercise of his functions. No member of the Legislative Council may be prosecuted or arrested during a session, except in cases of flagrant delicto, without the authorization of the Legislative Council. Detention of a member of the Legislative Council or prosecution of a member of the Legislative Council shall be suspended if the Legislative Council demands it, but this suspension may not exceed the length of the current session. Outside of the sessions, no member of the Legislative Council may be arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of the Legislative Council except in cases of flagrant delicto, threat to the security of the State, attack on life or bodily integrity, corruption, in the case of authorized prosecution or the execution of a conviction. SECTION IV: THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL Article 87. The Executive Council shall be the organ of execution of the Popular Movement of the Revolution. It shall be presided over by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Article 88. The Executive Council shall consist of a First Commissioner and State Commissioners. The First Commissioner shall be appointed by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. The State Commissioners shall be appointed by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, upon nomination by the First Commissioner. Their number and their duties shall be estab-

22

lis ped by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Article 89. Before taking office, the First Commissioner and the State Commissioners shall swear the following oath before the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, who shall record it: "1 swear fidelity to the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic; obedience to the Constitution and to the Laws of the Republic of Zaire, and shall fulfill loyally and faithfully the duties which are entrusted to me." Article 90. The First Commissioner shall coordinate the action of the Executive Council within the framework of the program outlined and the directives given by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. He shall keep the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, fully informed on the conduct of affairs of State. Article 91. State Commissioners shall be the chiefs of their departments. They shall apply in their departments the program established and the decisions made by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Article 92. The First Commissioner and the State Commissioners shall rule by decree. Without prejudice to the supervision of the Legislative Council recognized in Article 84, the First Commissioner and the State Commissioners shall be accountable for their action to the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. They shall be deemed to have resigned whenever the duties of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the 23

Republic, shall terminate or in the event of vacancy created by resignation, definitive disability, or dismissal of the First Commissioner. In that event, the Executive Council shall expedite current business until a new Council is formed. Article 93. The First Commissioner and the State Commissioners may not be prosecuted except with the authorization of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, or if the latter charges them. SECTION V: THE JUDICIAL COUNCIL Article 94. The Judicial Council shall consist of all courts and tribunals, as well as the Prosecutor's Office. The Judicial Council shall include: the Supreme Court of Justice, the General Council of War, the Courts of Appeal, the Court of State Security, tribunals, and the Council of War, as well as the Prosecutors attached to these jurisdictions. The organization and authority of courts and tribunals, as well as the procedure to be followed, shall be established by law. Article 95. A judge with the title of President of the Judicial Council shall preside over the Judicial Council. He shall be appointed by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Article 96. Before taking office, the President of the Judicial Council shall take the following oath before the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, who shall record it: "I swear fidelity to the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, and obedience to the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Zaire."

24

Article 97. The President of the Judicial Council shall participate in the deliberations of the Executive Council. Article 98. The President of the Judicial Council shall exercise general supervision over the activity and the sentencing policy of the courts and tribunals. The expiration of periods for appeal notwithstanding, he may, with the agreement of the parties to the action, suspend execution, and appeal to the Supreme Court for modification of any judicial decision which does not appear to be a proper administration of justice. In order to assure a unity of jurisprudence, he may issue directives having the character of general regulation. Courts and tribunals may contravene these directives only by exceptional decision. The means of exercising these prerogatives shall be established by law. Article 99. The function of declaring the law shall be vested in the Judicial Council. Judges, in the exercise of that mission, shall be independent. Decrees and judgments, as well as ordinances of courts and tribunals, shall be executed in the name of the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. Article 100. Courts and tribunals shall apply law and custom only insofar as they conform to laws and to public order. Courts and tribunals shall apply acts of administrative authorities only insofar as they conform to laws. Article 101. Without prejudice to other functions granted by this Constitution or by laws, the Supreme Court of Justice shall take cognizance of appeals as to the constitutionality of laws and of acts with the force of law, as well as appeals

25

as to the interpretation of this Constitution, appeals against decisions of last resort by courts and tribunals, appeals as to the annulment of acts and decisions of central authorities of the Republic, as well as electoral disputes. It shall judge, as first and last resort, Political Commissioners, People's Commissioners, State Commissioners, and Judges of the Supreme Court and Prosecutors of the Republic. It shall give advisory opinions on public and private legislation or regulatory acts. In case of remand after appeal, lower courts and tribunals must abide by the decree of the Supreme Court of Justice on the point of law judged by the latter. Article 102. The status of judges shall be established by law. TITLE IV TERRITORIAL ENTITIES Article 103. Regions, as well as other territorial entities, shall be organized by law. Fundamental principles of their functions, authority, and resources shall be determined by law. The Capital of the Republic of Zaire shall not be part of any Region. Its status shall be established by law. TITLE V PUBLIC FINANCE Article 104. Taxes may be established only by virtue of a law. Contribution to public obligations shall constitute a duty for each citizen and each

26

inhabitant of the Republic of Zaire. Exemption or fiscal relief may not be established except by virtue of law. Article 105. An Audit Office shall be instituted in the Republic. The Audit Office shall supervise, under conditions established by law, the management of public finances and the accounts of all organisms of the State. Members of the Audit Office shall be appointed by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. The composition, organization and functioning of the Audit Office shall be established by law. Article 106. The fiscal year of the Republic shall begin January 1 and end December 31. The general budget of the Republic shall be decreed by law. It shall be submitted each year to the Legislative Council by the Audit Office with the latter's comments. TITLE VI TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS Article 107. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements. Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties and agreements relative to international organizations and rules on international conflicts, those which commit public funds, those which modify legislative provisions, and those relative to the status of persons, those which entail territorial exchange or annexation, may not be ratified except by virtue of a law. No exchange or annexation of territory shall be valid without the agreement of the populations concerned, consulted by way of referendum.

27

If the Supreme Court of Justice, consulted by the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, or by the Legislative Council, shall declare that a treaty or international agreement includes a clause contrary to the Constitution, ratification may occur only after revision of the Constitution. Treaties and international agreements regularly ratified or approved shall have, as soon as they are published, a higher authority than that of laws, provided that each treaty or agreement is applied by the other party. Article 108. In order to promote African unity, the Republic may conclude treaties and agreements of association which involve partial abandonment of its sovereignty. TITLE VII
REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION

Article 109. Initiative for revision of the Constitution shall be vested concurrently with the President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, and half of the members of the Legislative Council, with the consent of Congress or the Political Bureau. The revision bill shall be adopted by the Legislative Council by a two-thirds majority of its members. The President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic, shall promulgate the adopted text in conformity with Article 83 of this Constitution. It shall take effect under conditions provided for in the same article.

28

TITLE VIII SPECIAL PROVISIONS Article 110. The provisions of Articles 59, paragraphs 1 and 2, 62 and 109, as well as those of Article 71 relative to the length of the legislature shall not be applicable to the Founding President of the Popular Movement of the Revolution, the President of the Republic. TITLE IX TEMPORARY PROVISIONS Article I. Providing they are not contrary to the provisions of this Constitution, legislative and regulatory texts which exist on the date on which this Constitution takes effect shall be retained until such time as they are abrogated. However, the force of laws and regulatory acts shall cease at their expiration date unless this be extended. Article II. Treaties or international agreements concluded before June 30, 1960, shall remain valid only to the extent that they are not modified by national legislation. Article III. The taking or ceding of land occurring by virtue of Article 10 of this Constitution, in the case of nondevelopment, shall involve no indemnity. Kinshasa, February 15, 1978 MOBUTU SESE SEKO KUKU NGBENDU WA ZA BANGA General of the Army

29

