+(,121/,1(
Citation: 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1052 1857-1858 Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline (http://heinonline.org) Sun Jun 13 21:34:07 2010 -- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license agreement available at http://heinonline.org/HOL/License -- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

1052

DOMINICA.

countersigning it, in the city of San Jos6, capital of Costa Rica, on
the 15th of April, in the year of our Lord 1858.

MAXIMO JEREZ. JOSE MARIA CANAS. PEDRO ROMULO NEGRETE.

CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Dominica.--Moca, February 19, 1858.

(Translation.)

-

-

IN the name of God, Creator and Supreme Law-giver of the
Universe, WE, the Representatives of the Dominican people assembled in Sovereign Constituent Congress, desiring to satisfy the expectations of our constituents, in order to ensure the national independence, to consolidate union, to promote peace and domestic security, to establish the empire ofjustice, and to give the most solemn guarantees to persons, to life, to honour, to liberty, to property, and to the equality of Dominicans, ordain and decree the following

CONSTITUTIO_
CHAPTER I. SECrIoN I.-Of the Territory.
ART. I. The territory of the Republic comprehends all that which

was called the Spanish part of the Island of Santo Domingo and its adjacent islands. The limits stipulated by the Treaty of Aranjuez of June 3, 1777, which divided it from the French part until 1793, remain definitively fixed. Sole §. No part of the Republic can ever be alienated. IL The territory of the Republic is divided into three departments, namely, Seybo, Ozama, and Sibao. They are sub-divided into five provinces, and these into communes, the limits, divisions and sub-divisions of which will be the subject of a law. iii. The city of Santiago de los Caballeros is the capital of the Republic, and the seat of the Government. 2.-Of the Nation. IV. The Dominican nation is for ever essentially and irrevocably free, independent and sovereign, it is not, and never shall be the patrimony of any family or person. The public functionaries, invested with any authority, are agents of the nation, aad responsible
SECTION

to it for their public conduct.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1052 1857-1858

DOMINICA.
CHAPTER II.
SECTION 1.-Of .Dominicane.

1053

V. The following are Dominicans: 1. All those who enjoy that quality on the publication of this Constitution. 2. All those born in the territory of the Republic, of Dominican fathers and their children. 3. All those born in the territory-of the Republic, of Dominican fathers who, having emigrated, return to fix their residence in it. 4. All Dominican Spaniards and their descendants who, having emigrated in 1844, have not taken up arms against the Republic, nor attacked it in any manner, and who return to fix their residence init. 5. All the descendants of natives of the formerly Spanish part, born in foreign countries, who shall come to fix their residence in the Republic. 6. All those born in the Dominican territory of foreign parents, who shall claim this privilege when they come of age. Vi. All foreigners belonging to friendly nations may become Dominicans by naturalization, by fixing their domicile in the territory of the Republic, and by declaring, a year beforehand, their desire to enjoy this privilege. VII. The laws shall regulate the enjoyment, the forfeiture, and the suspension of civil and political rights. VIMI. It is the duty of Dominicans: 1. To respect the Constitution and laws, and to respect and obey the authorities established thereby. 2. To contribute towards the public expenditure. 8. To serve and defend the country. 4. To watch over the preservation of public liberty. IX. All foreigners belonging to friendly nations shall be admitted into the territory of the Republic. They shall enjoy in their persons and property the same security as Dominicans, being as these are, subject to the laws and authorities of the country. SEcTION 2.-Of .Public R7iyhte of Dominicang. X. Dominicans are born and remain free and equal in right, and all are eligible for public employment. Sole §. Slavery does not exist, nor can it ever exist in the Republic. XT. Individual liberty is a sacred and inviolable right. No person can be tried nor committed to prison except in the cases established by law and in the manner which it prescribes. XI. Except in cases of flayranto dolicto, no person can be

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1053 1857-1858

'DQMINIA. imprisoned without an order stating the reason, and issued by a competent judge. XIII. Individuals caught inflagrahte delicto may be apprehended by any person, but they must be immediately taken before a competent judge. If the apprehension should occur at night, they must be taken before the judge, at the latest, by 8 o'clock in the morning _of.fhe following day, XIV. No Dominican can be withdrawn from his natural judgoi, mr be tried in civil, correctional, or criminal'cases by any commission, but only by the competent tribunal established beforehand by law. Sole §. In no case can the forms 'of trial be altered or abbreviated. XV. The penalty of death in political causes is for ever abolished. XVI. Confiscation of property can never be imposed as a Penalty. XVII. No p~erson can b6 deprived of hig property unless for some proved cause of public utility, with a just and certain indeninification t.be settled by professional persons. XVIII. The domicile is sacred and inviolable, and cannot be forced - except in those cases provided by law, and with the formalities which' it prescribes. XIX. 'Dominicans may print and publish their ideas freely without any previous submission to a censor; being, however, subject to whatever the law may determine. Sole §.The determination of the offences of the press belongs exclusively to a jury. "XX., The same laws shall prevail in the whole of the Republic, and there shall be but one statute for all Dominicans in ordinary, civil, correctional,. and criminal trials. XXI. No one shall be obliged to do that which the law does not command, nor be prevented from doing that which the law does not -pro1iibit. . XXII. The privacy of correspondence and papers is inviolable, pxcept in the cases provided by law, and with the formalities established by it. • XXIII. Dominicans have a right to meet together, and to assemble peaceably and without -arms in public and private places, conforming themselves to the laws. XXIV. All public officials are responsible for their misconduct in the discharge of their- functions, and may be denounced by any citizen without previous authorization. * XXV; N6 law can have any retroactive effect. XXVI." No law can-be made contrary to the letter or the spirit of the Constitution. In cases of doubt the text of the Constitution glust always decide.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1054 1857-1858

D0XMCA.

1055

" XXVII. Every Dominican has the right of petition on -aiiy
matter of public or private interest, and of expressing his opinion freely on the subject without any responsibility; but no associAion mor private individual can petition in the name of the people nor assume their powers. XXVIII. The Roman Catholic Apostolic Yeligion is the religion of the State.
CHAPTER II.-Of

the Government and of the Sovereignty.

XXIX. The Government of the Dominican Republic is essen. tially civil, republican, popular, representative, elective, and responsible. XXX. The sovereignty resides in the universality of the citizeng, and is exercised by 3 powers, according to the rules established by this Constitution. XXXI. These powers are, the legislative, the executive, and the juaicial; they are exercised separately, are essentially independent, and those charged with them cannot delegate them nor pass the limits fixed by the Constitution.
CHAPTER IV.-Of the SECTION

Legislative Power.

I.-Of the Congress.

XXXII. The Legislative Power is exercised by a Congress composed of a Senate and of a Chamber of Representatives.
SECTION

2.-Of the Chamber of Representatives.

XXXIII. The Chamber of Representatives is composed of the Deputies elected by the electoral assemblies at the rate of one fur each commune. XXXIV. In case of the death, resignation, or deprivation of a .representative, the Governor of the Department, by the organ of the first civil authority of the commune of which the representation is vacant, shall convoke the Electoral Assembly within the period of 15 days, in order that it may proceed to elect a new Deputy. XXXV. The Chamber of Representatives shall be elected for 4 years, and half shall be renewed every two years. XXXVI. In order to be a representative it is necessary to be in the full enjoyment of civil and political rights, to be owner of landed property, and to be domiciled in the province to which the electing commune belongs. XXXVII. Naturalized citizens cannot be made representatves until 3 years after their naturalization. XXXVIII. The Chamber of Representatives shall assemble on the 1st of February of every year, and shall be constituted when

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1055 1857-1858

1056

DOMICIA.

there is an absolute majority of its members present.

Its sessions

shall last 90 days, and may be prorogued for 30 days more by order of the Congress, or at the request of the Executive Power. XXXIX. The Chamber of Representatives, like the Senate, has the initiative of all laws, and the special faculty to adopt resolutions on the following subjects: 1. On imposts in general. 2. On the national guard. 3. On elections. 4. On the responsibility of the Secretaries of State and the other agents of the Executive Power. XL. The peculiar attributes of the Chamber of Representatives are: 1. To examine the accounts of receipts and expenditure of the public revenue, which must be presented annually to the Congress by the Executive Power. 2. To denounce officially, or at the request of any citizen, before the Senate, the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State, the Ministers of the High Court of Justice, and every other public functionary, for bad conduct or improper discharge of their duties. XI. To present candidates to the Senate for judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, and of all the other tribunals. SECTIOx 3.-Of the Senate. XLII. The Senate is composed of Senators named by the Departmental Juntas, at the rate of two for each province. The Senate is elected for 6 years, and half shall be XIII. renewed every 3 years. XLIV. To be elected Senator, it is necessary to be in the full enjoyment of civil and political rights, to be 30 years of age, to be proprietor of landed property, and to be domiciled in the province represented. Sole §. Naturalized citizens cannot be elected Senators until 5 years after their naturalization. XLV. In case of death, resignation, or deprivation of a member of the Senate during the recess of the Departmental Juntas, the Chamber of Representatives shall elect an individual not belonging to it, who shall have all the qualifications required by the Article preceding, and who shall continue in his functions until the first meeting of the Departmental Junta to which the appointment may belong. XLVI. The Senate shall assemble on the 1st of February of every year. Its sessions, in case of necessity, may be prolonged 15 days beyond those of the Chamber of Representatives.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1056 1857-1858

DOMIINICA.

1057

XLVIL The attributes of the Senate are 1. To sanction the laws which may have originated in either of the Chambers with the following formula: "Let it be communicated to the Executive Power for promulgation and execution." 2. To suspend the sanction of the laws passed by the Chamber of Representatives when there may be observations to make thereon. 8. To propose projects of law to the Chamber of Representatives upon those subjects in which that Chamber has not specially the right of initiative. 4. To elect from the candidates presented by the Chamber of Representatives, the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the other tribunals; having the power to ask for other candidates than those proposed for each judge to be appointed. 5. To accept or refuse the resignations of judges, and to try them in the cases provided by the Constitution and by the laws. 6. To decide the questions that may arise between the communes and the powers of the State. 7. To grant or refuse its consent to the promotion of the superior officers in the army and navy from lieutenant in command, inclusive, to the highest rank. 8. To try the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State, and all the public functionaries when they are denounced by the Chamber of Representatives for misconduct or improper discharge of their duties; the condemnation can only extend to the removal of the person from the exercise of his functions, and to rendering him incapable of holding or enjoying any employment of honour, of trust, or emolument in the Republic. The condemned official will nevertheless remain subject to punishment in conformity with the ordinary laws. rovisions common to both Chambers. SECTION 4.XLVIII. The co-legislative bodies shall assemble in the capital of the Republic. In extraordinary circumstances the Congress may decree and appoint another place for the legislative sessions. XLIX. Except when they meet together in Congress, each Chamber shall have its own hal; shall verify the qualifications of its members and decide any difficulties concerning them; shall appoint the officers of the respective departments in the form and for the time stipulated by their internal regulations; shall have the exclusive faculty of bringing accusations against its members, compelling absentees to attend the Chambers, and of accepting or refusing their resignations ; of arranging everything concerning its internal government, and of judging and punishing in the manner determined by its rules, its own members as well as those who 3 Y [1857-58. XLVrl.]

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1057 1857-1858

1058

DOMINlICA.

violate the rules within the precincts of the place where the sessions are held. L. The following persons cannot be Representatives or Senators: The President and Vice-President of the Republic, the Secretaries of State, the Ministers and Attorney-General of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Governors and political chiefs; neither can one person be at the same time member of the two Chambers, and during the sessions 'the exercise of any other public employment is incompatible with that of Representative and Senator. LI. The sittings shall be public, but at the request of six members in the Chambers of Representatives, or of two in the Senate, or of eight in the Congress, they may be secret. The majority shall afterwards decide whether publicity shall be given to the subject which has been before the sitting. LII. Neither of the Chambers can pass any resolution, unless an absolute majority of its member are present; for all decisions concerning the laws, the majority must be two-thirds of the members present. LIII. On the respective tables of the Chambers shall be laid the petitions addressed to them, each Chamber having the right of submitting them to the Secretaries of State, and asking for the information or explanations which they may require. LIV. The members of both Chambers are irresponsible from the moment of their installation in regard to the opinions which they may express in the discharge of their duty; they cannot be reprimanded nor tried for them at any time; their persons enjoy besides perfect immunity during the sessions from the time they leave their homes to go to the sessions until they return to them, except for treasonable crimes, acts of shameful immorality, public
scandal, or when taken in flagrante delicto. SECTION¢ 5.-Of Congress and its Attributes.

LV. The Chambers shall not assemble in one body, except in the cases provided by the Constitution, or for some grave cause of public utility. LVI. The President of the Senate is also President of the Congress, and the President of the Chamber of Representatives is the Vice-President. Sole § It belongs to the President of the Senate to convoke the Congress, to him therefore the Executive or the Chamber of Representatives must address itself for its meeting. LVII. It is the attribute of the Congress to verify the proceedings at the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, to compute the votes, to complete the election, whether it be that resulting from the electoral scrutiny, or that made by the

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1058 1857-1858

DOMINICA.

10539

Congress in virtue of Article LXXV,; to proclaim them, to receive
their oaths and to accept or refuse their resignations. LVIII. The attributes of the Congress are: 1. To decree the civil and criminal legislation. 2. To decree annually the public expenditure upon the estimates presented by the Executive Power. 3. To decree what may be necessary for the preservation, administration, improvement and disposal of the national property. 4. To contract loans on the credit of the nation and to decree the establishment of a national bank. 5. To determine and render uniform the value, weight, type, standard and name of the coin, which must not bear the bust of any person, and to regulate the value of foreign money. 6. To fix and render uniform the scale of weights and measures. 7. To decree the creation and suppression of public offices not established by the Constitution, to fix the salaries and to lessen or increase them. 8. To interpret the laws in case of doubt or obscurity, to suspend and revoke them. 9. To decree offensive war on consideration of the motives submitted by the Executive Power and to require it to negotiate for peace when it may be necessary. 10. To give or refuse its consent to Treaties of Peace, Alliance, Friendship, Neutrality, Commerce, and any others which the Executive Power may conclude. None shall have effect except by virtue of this approbation. 11. To introduce and to promote by laws public education, the progress of science, arts, and establishments of general utility. 12. To grant pardons and special amnesties with those exceptions which social or private interests may require; in no case can it grant pardon for crimes. 13. To decree under special and urgent circumstances the transfer of the Government to another place. 14. To prorogue or not the ordinary sessions of the Legislative body, on the petition of the Chamber of Representatives or of the Executive Power. 15. To decide definitively the difference between the Departmental Juntas, between these and the Corporations, and between both and the Government. 16. To decree everything concerning foreign commerce, ports of importation and exportation, roads, divisions and boundaries of departments, provinces and communes. 17. To determine what may be necessary for the periodical formation of the general statistics of the Republic. 3Y2

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1059 1857-1858

1060

DOMINICA.

18. To decree everything relating to emigration. 19. To decree the establishment of new communes. 20. To grant exclusive privileges for short periods and other advantages, and indemnification for objects of general, admitted, and proved public utility, but these shall not have the character of a monopoly. 21. To decree the creation or suppression of tribunals and courts in the departments, provinces and communes where they have not been established by the Constitution. 22. To decree the service and mobilization of the National Guards. 23. To select candidates for prelates from the list communicated by the Executive Power, in order that this may submit them to His Holiness. 24. To assemble lawfully at the ordinary period for the election of President and Vice-President, on the 15th of January. 25. In all laws and decrees to use the following formula, "The Senate and Chamber of Representatives assembled in Congress, in name of the nation decree." 26. To revise, add to, and reform the Constitution of the State in the form and manner provided therein. LIX. The Congress shall not delegate to one or more of its members, nor to any other authority, functionary, or person, any of the attributes conferred upon it by this Constitution, except in the cases expressly provided therein.
SECTIOIN

6.-Of the enactment of the Laws.

LX. The laws and decrees of the Congress may have their origin in either of the two Chambers, except those which belong exclusively to the Chamber of Representatives. LXI. Every project of law or decree admitted shall be discussed in three distinct sittings, with the interval of a day at least between each of them. LXII. In case the decree shall be declared urgent the last formality may be dispensed with. This declaration, and the reasons for it, shall be sent to the other Chamber, with the project of law or decree, in order that all may be examined. If this Chamber does not agree in urgency, it will return the project, in order that it may be discussed with the legal formalities. LXIII. The projects of law or decrees which are not admitted in both Chambers, cannot be again proposed in them until the next meeting of Congress, but this does not prevent some of their Articles forming part of other projects. LXIV. Every project of law or decree admitted and discussed in one Chamber, with the formalities prescribed by this Constitution,

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1060 1857-1858

DOMINICA.

1061

'shall be passed to the other Chamber, stating the number of days during which it has been discussed, and this Chamber, observing the same formalities, shall give or refuse its assent, or shall make the observations, additions, and modifications which it may consider fitting. LXV. If the Chamber in which the law originated does not consider the proposed observations, additions, and modifications to be just, it may insist, even twice, on the adoption of the law, giving fresh reasons. LXVI. No project of law or decree, although approved by both Chambers, shall have the force of law until it has the sanction of the Executive Power. If this approves, it will order it to be executed and published as a law; bat if the Executive Power should have any objection to the publication it shall return the law to the Chamber of its origin, with its observations, within 8 days after its receipt. LXVII. The projects which have been passed as urgent in both Chambers shall be approved or objected to by the Executive Power within two days, without inquiry into the urgency. LXVIII. The respective Chamber shall examine the observations of the Executive Power, and shall again discuss the project, if they are found to be well grounded, and to apply to the whole project, it shall be registered, and cannot be again discussed until the next meeting of Congress ; but if they apply only to certain points, these may be taken into consideration and deliberated upon as maybe convenient. LXIX. If the respective Chamber, in the opinion of two-thirds of the members present, do not find the observations of the Executive Power well grounded upon the whole of the project, it shall pass it with this expression to the other Chamber, and if this should find them just, it shall communicate its opinion to the originating Chamber, returning the project that it may be registered; but if that Chamber also should not find them well founded, in the opinion of two-thirds of its members present, the project shall be sent to the Executive Power for its approbation, which cannot be refused. LXX. If, after the term fixed in Article LXVI, and that in Article LXVII, the Executive Power shall not have returned the project of law or decree, with its observations, it shall have the force of law, and as such shall be promulgated, unless during this term the Congress shall have suspended its session or gone into recess, in which case it must be presented within the first 8 days of the next session. LXXI. The intervention of the Executive Power in the manner established in the foregoing Articles, is necessary in all the acts and resolutions of the Congress, except the following: 1. Those of which the object is to defer or remove the sessions to another place;

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1061 1857-1858

1062

DOMINqICA.

2. Any other act in which the agreement of both Chambers is not necessary. LXXIL When the Chambers do not agree to the observations of the Executive Power, and two-thirds vote in favoqr of the law, the voting shall always be nominal.
CHAPTER V.-Of the Executive Power.
SECTION 1.

LXXIII. The Executive Power is exercised by a magistrate, with the title of" President of the Republic."
SECTION

2.-Of the Election, Duration, and Qualffications of the -President and Vice-President of the Republic.

LXXIV. The President of the Republic shall be elected by electoral assemblies, in which each elector shall vote for tw6 persons, one of whom must not be domiciled in the province where the election is made. The proceedings of the elections shall be sent closed, and sealed, to the capital of the Republic, and addressed to the President of the Senate, who shall open them in public session, in presence of the Congress, and shall verify and reckon the votes. The person who shall obtain the absolute majority of votes shall be proclaimed President of the Republic. LXXV. When no citizen has obtained an absolute majority of votes, the Congress shall select the three who have obtained the largest number of votes in the electoral colleges, and shall proceed by secret voting to elect one of them. If in this first scrutiny no one should obtain an absolute majority, a new election shall be made between the two candidates who shall have obtained the largest number of votes in the first election, and in case of equal numbers the election shall be decided by lot. Sole § All these operations must be performed in one permanent session. LXXVI. To be President of the Republic, it is necessary to be in full enjoyment of civil and political rights; to be a Dominican by birth, and a landed proprietor; to be 30 years of age, and to have resided 4 consecutive years in the territory of the Republic. The constitutional period is 4 years; it is to be reckoned from the 1st of March following the election. No citizen who has held the first magistracy can be re-elected President unless the interval of a whole period has elapsed. LXXVII. There shall be a Vice-President, who shall have the same qualifications as are required by the foregoing Article. He shall be elected with the same formalities as the President, and shall exercise his functions for 4 years. The President and Vice-President shall be elected with a difference of two years between them, and the

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1062 1857-1858

DOMiNICA.

1063

Vice-President cannot be elected President for the following period if he has exercised the Executive Power during the half of the last constitutional period. LXXVIII. In case of death, resignation, deprivation, or temporary inability of the President of the Republic, the Vice-President shall administer the 'Executive Power; in the three first cases, he shall issue within 48 hours a decree, convoking the electoral colleges to assemble, and proceed to the election of a new President. The electoral colleges must assemble at the latest within 30 days from the date of the decree. Both these magistrates shall only discharge the duties for the time that was wanting to their predecessors to complete their respective periods. LXXIX. The same formalities are required to replace the VicePresident, in case of death, resignation, or deprivation. The Decree of convocation shall be issued by the President of the Congress, in the absence, at the same time, of President and Vice-President of the Republic. The Council of Ministers of State shall hold the Executive Power, 'and shall issue the Decree of convocation with the same formalities as are required by Article LXXVIII. LXXX. In the extraordinary elections of President and VicePresident, they must commence the discharge of their duties at the latest within 30 days after their appointment has been officially communicated to them; and whatever may be the time when they enter upon their respective offices, the constitutional period shall continue for them its legal course without interruption, expiring when the predecessor would have terminated his period. LXXXI. The President and Vice-President of the Republic, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, shall take, in the presence of the National Congress, the following oath: "I swear before God, and upon the Holy Evangelists, to observe and to cause others to observe the Constitution, aid the laws of the Dominican people, to respect their rights, and to maintain the national independence." LXXX1I. The President and Vice-President shall receive for their services the salaries which the law assigns to them, which can never be increased or diminished during their period.
SECTIoN

3.-Of the Functions,Duties, and Prerogative8 of the SPresident of the .Republic.

LXXXIII. The President is the head of the Administration of the Republic, and as such it is his duty to preserve order and internal tranquillity against every external attack. LXXXIV. The attributes of the Executive Power are: 1. To approve the laws and decrees of the Congress, and to issue all the regulations and orders necessary for their execution.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1063 1857-1858

3064

D)OMINICA.

2. To watch over the strict observance of the Constitution, and
to make all public functionaries discharge their duties fully. 3. To convoke the Legislative body, when public interests require it, stating the reasons in the Decree of convocation. 4. To direct the land and sea forces, and to dispose them for the safety of the State, but never to command them personally. 5. To dispose the National Guards, for the internal security of the provinces and out of them during war. 6. To declare war after the Decree of Congress. 7. To appoint and remove freely the Secretaries of State. 8. To appoint, with the previous consent of the Senate, the superior officers of the army, from lieutentant-colonel inclusive, upwards to the highest rank. 9. To appoint, according to law, the other officers of the army. 10. To appoint the Ministers Plenipotentiary, Envoys, and other Diplomatic Agents and Consuls-General. 11. To conduct diplomatic negotiations. 12. To conclude public Treaties and Conventions, and to ratify them after the consent and approbation of the Congress. 13. To appoint judges by commission to fill the vacancies that occur in the tribunals during the recess of the Chambers, who shall discharge their duties only until the next meeting of the Senate, to whom the election belongs. 14. To appoint the Attorney-General, and all the other public officers whose appointment is not conferred by the Constitution or any law on any other authority. 15. To request the prorogation of the ordinary sessions of the Legislative body for 30 days. 16. To appoint the Departmental Governors and the political chiefs of the provinces, selecting them from the candidates presented by the Departmental Courts. 17. To grant retirements and leave to the officers, and to accept or refuse the resignations of all officers from ensign to the highest rank, as is established by law. 18. To grant navigation papers. 19. To receive foreign public Ministers. 20. To promote the extension of public instruction, instituting naval schools, as well as those for agriculture, mineralogy, arts and

sciences.
21. To watch over the exact and faithful collection of public revenues, and their legal application. 22. To see that justice is administered quickly and fully, and that sentences are executed. 23. To grant letters of naturalization. 24. To administer the patronage of the Rcpublic.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1064 1857-1858

DOMINICA.

1065

25. To grant the pass or to detain the Conciliar decrees and Pontifical bulls, submitting them to whom they may concern, if they contain general regulations, or if they relate to private or Government affairs or questions in dispute. 26. To commute the punishment of death for another less severe, on an appeal made for mercy, which will suspend the execution. 27. To attend the opening of Congress at each ordinary legislative session, to present to it a written message of the administration of the past year and of the internal and external state of the country in all its branches. In the ordinary elections this message shall be presented at the time the newly-elected President takes the Constitutional oath. 28. To make every observation he may consider opportune or necessary with respect to the laws sanctioned by the Chambers, returning the project within two days in cases of urgency, and within 8 in all other cases; if his observations are not accepted, he must promulgate the laws and cause them to be executed. 29. To seal the laws and decrees of the Legislative body, and, when he has no observations to make, to promulgate them within 3 days with the following formula: "Let it be executed, communicated by the Secretary of State, and published in all the territory of the Republic for its fulfilment." LXXXV. All the administrative resolutions of the Executive Power must be discussed in the Council of Ministers. LXXXVI. No act, decree, regulation, order, or resolution of the Executive Power, except the decree of appointment and removal of the Secretaries of State, shall be effective unless it is countersigned by the corresponding Minister. LXXXVII. The person in charge of the Executive Power has no more authority nor faculties than those which are expressly conferred upon him by the Constitution and laws, and he cannot exercise the Executive Power out of the capital, except in the sole case of a commotion in it by armed force. LXXXVIII. If, when the constitutional period terminates, the Congress be not assembled, the functions of the President shall cease, and be transferred by him to the Vice-President.
SEcTIoN"4.-Of the Secretariesof State.

LXXXIX. For the despatch of all the affairs of the public administration there shall be 3 Secretaries of State, viz.: 1. Of government, justice, and public instruction; 2. Of finance and commerce; 3. Of war and marine. § The person in charge of the Executive Power shall entrust the

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1065 1857-1858

1066

DOMIXICA.

despatch of Foreign Affairs to that Minister whom he may consider most fitting. The resignation of a Secretary of State being accepted, the Executive Power shall proceed at once to replace him. The arrangement and organization of the Secretaries of State shall be regulated by a special law. XC. The attributes of the Secretaries of State are: 1. To assemble in Council of State with the person in charge of the Executive Power, and, as his immediate organs, to communicate his orders in their respective departments. No order issued otherwise, no decree, resolution, or regulation whatever, which is not authorized by the respective secretary, shall be executed by any public functionary or private person. 2. To present the projects of law necessary for the proper direction of the public administration. 3. To assist and take part in the discussion when they are officially summoned to the sittings of the Chambers, or when the affairs of their respective departments require it, but without any deliberative vote. 4. To answer the questions put to them in the Chambers relative to their departments of the administration. XCI. The Secretaries of State are responsible for the acts of the Executive Power which they countersign, and jointly for the resolutions of the Council of Ministers. XCII. To be Secretary of State the same qualifications are required as for a Representative.
CHAPTER

VI.-Of the Judicial Power.
SECTION 1.

XCIII. Justice is administered by a Supreme Court of Justice, with its seat in the capital, and by the other tribunals and courts established by law. SEcTION 2. XCIV. The power of administering the laws in civil correctional and criminal cases belongs exclusively to the tribunals; a law shall establish trial by jury in criminal cases. XCV. In no trial can there be more than two decisions.
SECTION 3. XCVI. The first judicial magistracy of the State is invested in the Supreme Court of Justice, which shall be composed of a president and four judges, elected by the Senate, and of an attorneygeneral appointed by the Executive Power. XCVII. In order to be a judge of the Supreme Court of Justice

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1066 1857-1858

DOMINICA.

1067

the same qualifications are required as for a Senator, and his functions shall continue for 4 years. XCVIII. The attributes of the Supreme Court of Justice are: 1. To hear the causes brought against the President and VicePresident of the Republic for ordinary offences. 2. To hear the causes brought against the members of the Senate and House of Representatives for State offences. 3. To hear the causes against its own members for ordinary offences. 4. To hear the litigated causes of the foreign Plenipotentiaries and public Ministers accredited to the Government of the Republic. 5. To hear the actions for responsibility brought against the Secretaries of State, Diplomatic Agents of the Republic, and Governors for the improper discharge of their duties. 6. To hear the disputes which may result from the contracts and negotiations of the Executive Power, entered into by itself or by means of its agents. 7. To hear the appeals of complaint against the courts of appeal for abuses of authority, excess of power, omission, denegation, or culpable delay in the administration of justice, and the actions for responsibility against the judges of those courts. 8. To hear the appeals of force. 9. To hear all cases of prizes. 10. To hear and decide the questions that may arise between two or more departments, provinces, or communes. 11. To hear all civil and criminal causes submitted to it in appeal, and to decide in a sovereign and definitive manner on the infraction of formalities or violation of the law. 12. To hear as a military court the appeals of nullity against the sentences pronounced by the courts-martial. 13. To hear the doubts of other courts, to consult the Congress upon them through the Executive Power, and to communicate to the Executive Power whatever may be fitting for the better administration of justice. 14. In order to render jurisprudence uniform, to amend by letter the sentences of the other tribunals or courts which have already become authority, where the matter decided may contain any false or erroneous principle, or may suffer from any radical fault; but the amendment is neither to benefit nor prejudice the parties. XCIX. The members of the Supreme Court of Justice are responsible and are liable to be tried before the Senate: 1. For State offences. 2. For infraction of the Constitution. 3. For bribery, misconduct, or improper discharge of their duties.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1067 1857-1858

1068
SECTION 4.-Of

DOMINICA.

the Courts of Appeal and other Courts.

C. For the better administration of justice, the territory of the Republic shall be divided into judicial districts, in which shall be established courts of appeal, of first instance, of commerce, and judges of instruction; the territory shall also be divided into circuits for the administration of justice in criminal matters. CI. To be a judge of these tribunals it is necessary to be 25 years of age, to have the requisite fitness, and the same qualifications as for a Representative. CII. A law shall organize the courts-martial, the inferior courts, and shall appoint their jurisdiction, attributes, and emoluments.

C(HAPTIER VII.-Of the Interior Regulation, of the 1?epublie.
SECTION¢ 1.-Of the Political Government of the Departments. CIII. The superior government of each department is held by a magistrate with the title of Governor, dependent on the Executive Power, of whom he is the immediate constitutional agent, and with whom he will communicate through the secretary of the respective
office.

CIV. In everything regarding the order and security of the department, and its political and economical government, all the public functionaries of every class and denomination resident within the department are subordinate to the Governor. CV. To be Governor the same qualifications are necessary as. for a Senator. CVI. The Governors hold their offices 4 years, and may be reelected. CVII. The provinces which are not principal places of departments shall be ruled by political officers subordinate to the Governor; their period of office and attributes shall be determined by law. CVIII. The attributes of the Governors are: 1. To convene on extraordinary occasions the Departmental Juntas when it may be necessary in conformity with the Constitution. 2. To submit to them, at the commencement of the ordinary sessions, a statement in writing of the interior state of the department, with those observations which may be of public utility, and may contribute to the progress and welfare of the department. 3. To exercise the other attributes which the law may give to him. CIX. A law shall fix the annual amount which the persons employed in this branch shall receive for their services.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1068 1857-1858

DOMINICA.

1069

SECTION 2.-Of the -Departmental Juntas. CX. There shall be in each capital of a department a Depart mental Junta, composed of a Deputy for each commune, who shall be elected by direct voting. CXI. The Departmental Junta shall meet regularly on the 15th December of each year in the capital of the department, or extraordinarily whenever it may be convoked by the Governor. 1. Their ordinary sessions shall last 30 days, and they may, if necessary, be prorogued for 10 days more. 2. The extraordinary sessions shall last the time fixed in the convocation, which must not exceed 15 days. CXII. The decrees or resolutions of the Departmental Juntas shall be sent to the Governor for execution. He shall have the right to make objections within 3 days. The objections shall be considered by the Departmental Juntas; if they are not admitted, the decree or resolution must be carried into due effect. CXIII. After their sessions the Departmental Juntas shall send copies of their resolutions to the Chamber of Representatives, which also can disapprove those that may be opposed to the Constitution or laws. CXIV. The Departmental Juntas can only exercise those attributes which the Constitution and laws give them. CXV. The Departmental Juntas may call the Governors before them in order to consult them upon all that relates to the welfare and good administration of the department. CXVI. The office of Departmental Deputy is not incompatible with other public offices, except those of President and VicePresident of the Republic, Secretaries of State, Governors, Political Chiefs, and commandants of arms. The Deputies shall have, during their sessions, that remuneration which their respective bodies shall assign to them, and they have the same immunities for the opinions they express in the discharge of their duties as the Representatives of the people. CXVII. The Departmental Juntas shall be presided over by one of their members, to be elected by themselves for the time fixed in their interior regulations. CXVIII. The attributes of the Departmental Juntas are: 1. To make known to the Executive Power, or to the Chamber of Representatives, with the necessary details, the abuses of power or misconduct of the Governor and other public officers of the department. 2. To present annually to the Chamber of Representatives and to the Executive Power lists of those persons who may be fit in their respective departments for the offices of justice. 3. To present to the Executive Power lists for the appointment

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1069 1857-1858

107 0

DOMINIC..

of Governors and Political Chiefs, and to denounce them when they are wanting in their duties. 4. To solicit from the ecclesiastical prelate the removal of the curates whose conduct may be reprehensible and prejudicial to the morality of his parishioners, presenting the necessary proof. 5. To receive from corporations and citizens the reports, petitions, or representations which may be addressed to them, if of their competency, and if not so to refer them to whomsoever they may belong. 6. To distribute by themselves, and by means of the corporations, the contributions decreed by the Chamber of Representatives. 7. To frame the regulations that may be necessary for the proper town and country police, and to watch over their faithful execution. 8. To levy contributions for licences, taxes, and other necessary imposts, not contrary to the Constitution or laws, in order to provide the internal revenues of the department. 9. To fix annually the estimate of receipt and expenditure of their respective department, and to print and publish annually, a statement, and the application of their revenue. 10. To establish public schools of all classes, and to promote instruction in and out of the towns. 11. To promote, by all the means in their power, the prosperity, encouragement, and perfection of agriculture. 12. To direct and promote the construction, opening, and cleaning of public roads. 13. To compile, by themselves, or by means of the corporation, the census of the population and the general statistics of the department. 14. To encourage the projects for the immigration of industrious foreigners. 15. To approve the imposts of ways and means which the corporation may establish in virtue of the faculty which the Constitution and the law confer upon them. 16. To receive and print the estimate of receipts and expenditure of their respective corporations. 17. To grant all that they may consider convenient and necessary for the progress and welfare of their departments, and the happiness of its inhabitants, so long as they do not encroach upon the attributes of the Chambers of the Congress, of the Executive and judicial powers, and are not in contradiction to the Constitution and the laws. 18. To apply to the Congress, or to the Executive Power, for whatever they may consider necessary for the prosperity, improvement, and advancement of their respective departments.

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1070 1857-1858

DOMINICA.

1071

CXIX. In order to be Deputy of a Department the same qualiflcations are necessary as for a Representative. The Deputies shall continue in office two years.
SECTIoN 3.-Of the Corporations.

CXX. For the political government of the communes there shall be a corporation in each of those fixed by law, their members shall be elected by the electoral colleges, the sessions of the corporation shall be presided over by one of the members, who shall be called corregidor. CXXI. As the first civil authority in the communes where there is no Governor or Political Chief, the corregidor represents the last. CXXII. The corporation shall also name one or two of 'its members to hold the offices of constitutional alcaldes. The attributes of the alcaldes, as magistrates, shall be defined by law. §. The corporations shall continue for two years. Their attributes and organization shall be determined by law. VIII.-Of Elections and Electoral Colleges. CXXIII. Direct voting and universal suffrage are established. The electoral colleges shall assemble on the first Monday of November of each year, when they have to discharge the attributes which the Constitution and the laws designate. §. In extraordinary cases they shall assemble within 30 days after the date of the decree of convocation. CXXIV. The attributes of the electoral colleges are: 1. To elect the President and Vice-President of the Republic. 2. To elect the Deputies for the Chamber of Representatives. 3. To elect Deputies for the Departmental Juntas. 4. To elect presidents and members for their respective courts, and where there are none, the alcalde and syndic of the place. 5. To replace all those functionaries whose election belongs to it, in the cases and according to the rules established by the Constitution and the laws. CXXV. The elections mentioned in the foregoing Article shall be made by secret scrutiny, by an absolute majority of votes, one after another, in permanent session. CXXVI. The ordinary meeting of the electoral 2olleges shall be effected the year before the expiration of the Constitutional periods, except in the cases when they may be specially and extraordinarily convened to exercise one or more of the attributes which the Constitution confers upon them. CXXVII. In the elections for President and Vice-President of the Republic the electoral colleges must, immediately after their
CHAPTER

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1071 1857-1858

1072

DOM INICA.

labours are over, send copies of the proceedings to the Senate, and to the Home Minister, and in other elections as the law may determine. CXXVIII. The electoral colleges cannot exercise other attri. butes than those conferred upon it by the Constitution and the laws, and must dissolve themselves immediately after the election has been made. CXXIX. In order to be an elector it is necessary to be in the full enjoyment of civil and political rights, to reside and be domiciled in the commune where the voting is held, and to have one of the following qualifications: 1. To be owner of landed property, or renter of a rural establishment in actual cultivation. 2. To be a public employ 6 , or officer, in the army or navy. 3. To practice any profession, or liberal art, or to have any business or trade, subject to the tax of patents. CXXX. A law shall arrange and determine the formalities to be observed at the elections. IX.-Of the Armed Force. CXXXI. The armed force is essentially obedient; it has no power to deliberate. CXXXII. The object of the armed force is to defend the independence and liberty of the State, to maintain public order, and to enforce the strict observance of the Constitution and the laws. §. There shall be no other permanent armed force than that which is indispensably necessary. CXXXIII. Military command shall never affect the territory, but only the purely military persons in actual service. CXXXIV. The laws shall not create other military officers than those indispensably necessary, and no rank shall be given except to fill a place created by them. CXXXV. A law shall establish the regulations for recruiting and promotion in the armed force, which shall be divided into army, navy, and national guard. §. In no case can any privileged corps be created. CXXXVI. The Executive Power shall name commandants of arms in those towns and places where it may consider them necessary, their attributes shall be purely military, and the functions of this office can never be discharged by a departmental governor nor by a political chief. CXXXVII. The National Guard of each department shall be under the immediate orders of the Governor of the department, or whoever shall represent him; it cannot be embodied except in the cases prescribed by law, and all ranks in it shall be elective and temporary.
CHAPTER

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1072 1857-1858

DOMINICA.

1073

CXXXVIII. The persons belonging to the army and navy shall be tried by courts-martial for the offences they may commit when these are included in the cases established by the Military Penal Code; in all other cases, or when one or more persons of the civil class are accused with them, they shall be tried by the ordinary tribunals. CHAPTER X.-General Provisions. CXXXIX. No general impost shall be established except by virtue of a special law, nor can any local contribution be imposed without the sanction of the respective corporations. The laws which impose direct contributions shall be passed annually. CXL. Every contribution in the form of paper money is for ever prohibited. CXLI. No sum shall be taken out of the public treasury for any other uses than those established by law, and in conformity with the estimates approved by the Congress, which must be published every year; neither can the funds of the nation be deposited elsewhere than in the public coffers. CXLII. The estimates of each Secretary of State shall be divided into chapters. No sums can be transferred from one branch to another, nor can they be taken away from their special object without the sanction of law. CXLIII. There shall be a permanent board of accounts, composed of citizens named by the Executive Power, to examine, approve, or disapprove the general and particular accounts of the Republic. In the month of February in each year, those of the previous year must be arranged, printed, and published under the responsibility of the Secretary for Finance. CXLIV. No law, decree, or regulation of administration or police shall be binding until it has been published in the manner prescribed by law. CXLV. The foundation of any perpetual annuity, tribute, foundation, right of primogeniture, and all kinds of entail, is prohibited. CXLVI. No town, or part of the territory of the Republic, can be declared in a state of siege, except in cases of foreign invasion effected, or imminent, or of internal commotion. In the first case, the declaration must emanate from the Executive Power, and in the second, from the Congress; but if it should not be assembled, the Executive Power shall make the declaration convoking the Congress immediately, to render an account of it. The capital can in no case be declared in a state of siege except by a special law. CXLVII. No Dominican shall bear any insignia, decoration, or distinction, which shall not be expressly designated by law, nor shall he claim titles or denominations which it has not established. [1857-58. XLVIII.] 3 Z

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1073 1857-1858

1074

DOMINICA.

CXLVIII, The persons who hold any office of trust or honour in the Republic shall not accept any title, decoration, present, or emolument from any king, prince, or foreign nation, without the consent of Congress. CXLIX. In no case can the execution of any part or of the whole of the Constitution be suspended. Its observance and strict fulfilment is confided to the zeal of the powers which it establishes, and to the valour and patriotism of all Dominicans. CL. Two national holidays only shall be celebrated annually with the greatest solemnity throughout the Republic, these are the 27th of February, the anniversary of Independence, and the 7th of July, the anniversary of Liberty. CLI. The national merchant flag is composed of blue and red in opposite angles, divided in the centre by a white cross of half the width of one of tile other colours, which it touches at the four extremes. The war flag shall have besides, the arms of the Republic. CLII. The arms of the Republic are a cross, at the foot of which is the book of the Evangelists open; both rising from a trophy of arms in which is seen the symbol of liberty, bound with a ribbon, on which is the motto "God, Our country, Liberty." CLIII. In every case in which in conformity with this Constitution or the law candidates are to be presented for nomination as officers or public employ6s, it is understood that the name of each shall be placed on a separate sheet with a statement of his merits, services and fitness. CLIV. No public, civil, political, ecclesiastical, or military functionary or employ6 shall enter upon the duties of his office without previously taking the oath to support and defend the Constitution, and to discharge well and exactly the duties of his office. CLV. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take the oath in the manner prescribed in Article LXXXI, the Presidents of the Chambers of the Congress in presence of their respective Chambers, the members thereof before their President, the other functionaries and officers before the person in charge of the Executive Power, or the persons to whom he may delegate the duty of receiving oaths in the order above stated.
CHAPTER

XI.-Of the -Revision of the Constitution.

CLVI. The present Constitution cannot be revised except when the proposition shall be made by the Chamber of Representatives and admitted by two-thirds of its members in three consecutive annual sessions. CLVII. The Congress may, in virtue of the proposition made by the Chamber of Representatives and admitted by two-thirds of its members, order the revision of the Constitution, designating and

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1074 1857-1858

DOM[INICA.

1075

publishing the Articles and provisions to be reviscd with the reasons of utility, necessity, or public convenience. CLXVIII. In the ordinary and extraordinary legislative session, subsequent to that in which the decree of revision has been made, the Congress shall proceed with it, two-thirds of its members at least being present. CLIX. The Congress shall designate in the decree of revision the time and place it may consider convenient for meeting.
CHAPTER XII.-Temporary Prvision.

CLX. The Sovereign Constituent Congress shall, for this time, elect the President and Vice-President of the Republic, shall receive their oaths, and shall instal them in their respective offices. The former shall continue in his functions until the 1st March, 1862, and the latter until the 1st March, 1860. CLXI. All the laws, regulations, dispositions and decrees which are not contrary to the present Constitution, are declared in force and vigour. The Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, of the Courts of First Instance and of the other courts, shall continue to exercise their functions and to-try cases in the same manner and form, and with the same attributes as heretofore, until they are legally replaced, or that the tribunals are organized in the manner appointed in this Constitution. CLXII. The Executive Power is authorised to appoint temporarily the governors of departments and the political chiefs of provinces until they are definitively selected from the candidates which the Departmental Juntas shall present in conformity with this Constitution. CLXIII. The corporations and all the public officers shall continue to discharge their duties until the fresh orgniazation, unless they are opposed to this Constitution. CLXIV. The Sovereign Constituent Congress shall decree even after the promulgation of this Constitution, the laws it may consider most necessary for the establishment of the Constitution, and for the arrangement of any other important matters. CLXV. During the first days of the first national Congress, each Chamber shall decide by lot the Senators and Representatives who have to go out in order that the half may be renewed, or that lesser number approximate to it, according to this Constitution. CLXVI. The Provisional Government shall render an account of its acts and of the administration of the public funds, by the organ of the Executive Power, to the first national Congress, which alone can relieve it of its responsibility. 3 Z2

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1075 1857-1858

1076

GREAT BRITAIN

AND SPAIN.

Given in the Sessions Hall of the Sovereign Constituent Congress, in the town of Moca, the 19th day of February, 1858, 14th of the country, and 1st of Liberty. BENIGNO F. DE ROJAS, President. TORIBIO L. VILLANUEVA, Vice-President. (Signed also by all the Members of the Congress.)

CORRESPONDENCE of Great Britain, relative to the Slave Trade, 1857, 1858; viz.:
Page
CLASS A.-CORnEsPODE NCE WITH THE BRITISH COMMIS- 1076 SIONERS - 1101 CLASS B.-CORRESPONDECE WITH FOREIGN PowEn s-

(CLASS A.)-LIST OF PAPERS.
SIERRA LEONE. Date.

No.

1857 18. H.M.'s Acting Judge (Mr. Skelton) Oct. 17 Claim of ActingSpanish

SUBJECT.

Page

to the Earl of Clarendon.

Vice-Consul to sit as Spanish Judge in the
case of the Conchita. . 1077

21. The Earl of Clarendon to H.M.'s Dec. 21 Receipt of despatch respecting claim of Acting Judge.

Spanish Acting ViceConsul to sit as Spanish Judge in the case of the Conchita............ 1081

HAV'ANA.
1857 81. H.M.'s Commissioners to the Earl Mfar. 4 As to class of vessels to be employed around of Clarendon. Cuba in suppression of 1081 Slave Trade ................ April 11 Don J. Larrinaga has ,, 83. been appointed Spanish Arbitrator ............ 1082 .... July 13 Copy ofGeneral Concha's circular to the Governors of Cuba on the suppression of the RuSlave Trade. moured landing of slaves at Sierra Mo1082 rena ............................ .... Sep. 29 Receipt of despatch of August 17. Observations on the Marquis de Pidal's note respectSlave Cuban ing Trade ........................ 1085

HeinOnline -- 48 British & Foreign State Papers 1076 1857-1858

