Title: Date Adopted: Date Amended: Date Promulgated: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

The Constitution of the Dominican Republic: 28 November 1966, as Amended to 20 July 2002 11/28/1966 07/20/2002 07/20/2002 Dominican Republic Oceana Publications, Inc. Proprietary Reka Koerner

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, 1966 (as Amended to 2002) Table of Contents TITLE I Section I The Nation, its Sovereignty and its Government Section II The Territory Section III Frontier Economic and Social System TITLE II Section I Individual and Social Rights Section II Duties TITLE III Political Rights Section I Nationality Section II Citizenship TITLE IV Section I Legislative Power Section II The Senate Section III The Chamber of Deputies Section IV Provisions Common to Both Chambers

Section V The Congress Section VI Formation and Effect of the Laws TITLE V Section I The Executive Power Section II The Secretaries of State TITLE VI Section I The Judicial Power Section II The Supreme Court of Justice Section III Courts of Appeal Section IV Lands Court Section V Courts (Juzgados) of First Instance Section VI Justices (Juzgados) of the Peace TITLE VII The Chamber of Accounts TITLE VIII The National District and the Municipalities TITLE IX Administration of the Provinces TITLE X Electoral Assemblies TITLE XI The Armed Forces TITLE XII General Provisions TITLE XIII Constitutional Reforms TITLE XIV Transitory Provisions

The National Assembly In the Name of the Republic Constituted in Revisory Assembly of the Constitution Declares in force the following text of the

CONSTITUTION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC TITLE I Section I The Nation, its Sovereignty and its Government Article 1 The Dominican people constitute a Nation organized as a free and independent State, bearing the name of Dominican Republic. Article 2 The national sovereignty rests with the people, from whom emanate all the powers of the State, which are exercised by representation. Article 3 The sovereignty of the Dominican Nation as a free and independent State is inviolable. The Republic is and shall always be free and independent of any foreign power. Consequently, none of the public powers organized by the present Constitution may perform or permit the performance of acts which constitute a direct or indirect intervention in the internal or external affairs of the Dominican Republic or an interference which is against the personality and integrity of the State and of the functions recognized and consecrated in this Constitution. The principle of nonintervention constitutes an invariable norm of Dominican international policy. The Dominican Republic recognizes and applies the norms of general and American international law to the extent that its public powers have adopted them and declares itself in favor of the economic solidarity of the countries of America and will support any initiative proposed to protect its basic products and raw materials. Article 4 The government of the Nation is essentially civil, republican, democratic, and representative. It is divided into the Legislative Power, the Executive Power, and the Judicial Power. These three powers are independent in the exercise of their respective functions. They are entrusted with these powers and are responsible for them and may not delegate their powers, which are solely those specified by this Constitution and the laws. Section II The Territory

Article 5 The territory of the Dominican Republic is and shall be inalienable. It consists of the eastern part of the island of Santo Domingo and its adjacent islands. Its permanent and immutable land boundaries are fixed by the Boundary Treaty of 1929 and its Protocol of Revision of 1936. It is divided politically into one district known as the National District, which includes the Capital of the Republic, and into such provinces as are determined by law. The provinces in turn are divided into municipalities. The corresponding territorial sea and the submarine surface and subsoil, as well as the air space above them, are also parts of the national territory. The extent of the territorial sea, of the air space, and of the contiguous zone and its defense, as well as of the submarine surface and subsoil and the utilization thereof, shall be established and regulated by law. The law shall specify the number of provinces, determine the names and the boundaries of these and of the National District, as well as of the municipalities into which they are divided, and it may also create new political divisions of the territory, under other names. Article 6 The city of Santo Domingo de Guzmán is the capital of the Republic and the seat of the national government. Section III Frontier Economic and Social System Article 7 The economic and social development of the territory of the Republic along the frontier, as well as the dissemination there of culture and the religious tradition of the Dominican people, are of supreme and permanent national interest. The agricultural and industrial utilization of frontier rivers shall continue to be regulated by the principles affirmed in Article 6 of the 1936 Protocol revising the Boundary Treaty of 1929 and in Article 10 of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Arbitration of 1929. TITLE II Section I Individual and Social Rights Article 8 The effective protection of the rights of the human person and the maintenance of the means which permit him to improve himself progressively within a system (orden) of

individual liberty and social justice, compatible with public order, the general well-being and the rights of all, are recognized as the principal aim (finalidad principal) of the State. In order to guarantee the realization of these aims the following norms are set: 1. The inviolability of life. Therefore, neither the death penalty, torture, nor any other punishment or oppressive procedure or penalty that implies loss or diminution of the physical integrity or health of the individual may be established, pronounced or applied. 2. Individual security. Therefore: a. Imprisonment shall not be established for debts that do not arise from infractions of the penal laws. b. No one may be sent to prison or restrained in his freedom without an order written and defined by a competent judicial official, except in case of flagrante delicto. c. Any person deprived of his freedom without cause or without legal formalities, or in cases not covered by law, shall be placed at liberty immediately upon his own demand or that of any person. d. Any person deprived of his freedom shall be submitted to the competent judicial authority or freed within forty-eight hours after his arrest. e. Every arrest shall be void or shall become imprisonment within forty-eight hours after the arrested person has been submitted to the competent judicial authority, and the interested party must be notified within the same period of the ruling in the case. f. It is strictly prohibited to transfer any person being held in custody from a prison establishment to some other place without written order and reason therefor from a competent judicial authority. g. Every person holding an arrested person in his custody must present him as soon as requested to do so by competent authority. The law of habeas corpus shall determine the manner of proceeding summarily in complying with the provisions of sections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g), and shall establish the penalties to the imposed. h. No one may be tried twice for the same offense. i. No one may be required to testify against himself. j. No one may be sentenced without a hearing or due summons, or without observance of the procedures established by law to ensure impartial judgment and the exercise of the right of defense. Hearings shall be public, unless excepted by law in cases where publicity might be prejudicial to the public order or to good customs.

3. The inviolability of the home. No entry of a home may be made except in those cases specified by law and according to formalities prescribed therein. 4. Freedom of transit, except for restrictions resulting from penalties imposed by a court, or by police, immigration, and health laws. 5. No one shall be obligated to do what the law does not demand nor be prevented from doing what the law does not prohibit; the law is equal for all; it may not order more than what is just and useful for the community nor may it prohibit more than would be prejudicial to it. 6. Everyone may, without prior censorship, freely express his thought in writing or by any other means of expression, graphic or oral. Whenever the thought expressed threatens the dignity and morals of persons, the public order, or the good customs of society, penalties prescribed by law shall be imposed. All subversive propaganda is prohibited, whether anonymous or by any other means of expression, for the purpose of inciting disobedience of the law, but this shall not limit the right of analysis or criticism of legal principles. 7. Freedom of association and of assembly without arms, for political, economic, social, cultural, or any other purpose, provided that by its nature it is not contrary or threatening to the public order, national security or good customs. 8. Freedom of conscience and of worship, subject to respect for public order and good customs. 9. The inviolability of correspondence and all other private documents, which may not be seized or inspected, except through legal procedures as evidence in judicial proceedings. The secrecy of communication by telegraph, telephone, and cable is also inviolable. 10. All information media have free access to official and private news sources, provided they do not go against public order or jeopardize national security. 11. Freedom of work. The law may, as required by the general interest, establish the maximum working day, days of rest and vacations, minimum wages and salaries and their forms of payment, social security, the participation of nationals in all work, and in general all provisions for State protection and assistance for workers that may be considered necessary, whether the work is manual or intellectual. a. Union organization of labor is unrestricted, provided the trade unions, craft unions, or other similar associations adopt in their bylaws and in their conduct a democratic organization compatible with the principles affirmed in this Constitution and strictly for labor and peaceful ends.

b. The State shall use such means as are available to it to make it possible for workers to acquire the tools and instruments indispensable for their labor. c. The form and extent of the participation of permanent workers in the profits of every agricultural, industrial, commercial, or mining enterprise may be fixed by law in accordance with the nature of the enterprise, and respecting the legitimate interest of both the proprietor and the worker. d. The right of workers to strike and of employers to a lockout, in private enterprise, is acknowledged, provided it is exercised in accordance with the law and to settle strictly labor disputes. Any interruption, obstruction, or stoppage of activities or intentional reduction in the output of labor in private or State enterprise is prohibited. Any strike, lockout, interruption, obstruction, or intentional reduction of output affecting the administration, public services, or public utilities, is unlawful. The law shall enact the measures necessary to guarantee the enforcement of these rules. 12. Freedom of enterprise, commerce, and industry. Monopolies may be established only in favor of the State or State institutions. The creation and organization of these monopolies shall be done by law. 13. The right to own property. Consequently, no one may be deprived of it except for a justified reason of public benefit or social interest, after payment of its fair value determined by the judgment of a competent tribunal. In case of public disaster, compensation need not be paid in advance. The penalty of general confiscation of property may not be imposed for reasons of a political nature. a. The dedication of land to useful purposes and the gradual elimination of large holdings (latifundio) is declared to be of social interest. Lands belonging to the State or which the State acquires by degrees or by expropriation, in the manner prescribed by this Constitution, and which the State does not devote or will not devote to other purposes of general interest, are to be used in plans of agrarian reform. Encouragement and cooperation in an effective integration of the rural population into the national life, through an improvement in methods of farm production and the cultural and technical training of rural men, is likewise declared to be a main objective of the social policy of the State. b. The State may convert its enterprises into properties of cooperation or cooperative economy. 14. Exclusive ownership, for the time and in the manner determined by law, of inventions and discoveries, as well as of scientific, artistic, and literary productions. 15. With the aim of strengthening its stability and well-being, its moral, religious, and cultural life, the family shall receive the broadest possible protection from the State.

a. Maternity, regardless of the condition or status of the mother, shall have the protection of the public powers and shall be entitled to public assistance in case of desertion. The State shall adopt measures of hygiene and other steps designed to prevent infant mortality insofar as possible and to attain a healthy development of children. The establishment of the family homestead (bien de familia) is also declared to be of high social interest. The State shall encourage family savings and the establishment of credit, producer, distribution, and consumer cooperatives and any others that may be useful. b. The establishment of every Dominican home on land or with improvements belonging to the occupant is declared to be of high social interest. To this end, the State shall encourage the development of public credit on advantageous terms, intended to make it possible for all Dominicans to possess a comfortable and sanitary home. c. Marriage is recognized as the legal basis of the family. d. The married woman shall enjoy full civil capacity. The law shall enact the necessary measures to protect the property rights of a married woman, under any system. 16. Freedom of education. Elementary education shall be compulsory. It is a duty of the State to furnish a basic education to all inhabitants of the national territory and to take the necessary steps to eliminate illiteracy. Both elementary and secondary education, as well as that offered in agricultural, vocational, art, commercial, manual arts, and home economics schools, shall be free. The State shall strive for the widest possible dissemination of science and culture, thus adequately providing for all persons to benefit from the results of scientific and moral progress. 17. The State shall encourage the progressive development of social security so that every person shall be able to enjoy adequate protection against unemployment, sickness, disability, and old age. The State shall offer its protection and assistance to old people, in a manner determined by law, in order that their health shall be preserved and their well-being ensured. The State shall also offer social assistance to the poor. This assistance shall consist of food, clothing, and insofar as possible, adequate housing. The State shall strive for improvement in nourishment, sanitary services, and hygienic conditions; it shall seek means of preventing and treating diseases, epidemic, endemic and others, as well as providing free medical and hospital attention to those who require it owing to their meager economic resources. The State shall combat the social vices by adequate measures and with the help of international conventions and organizations. Specialized centers and organs shall be established for the correction and eradication of these vices.

Section II Duties Article 9 Considering that the prerogatives recognized and guaranteed in the preceding article of this Constitution presume the existence of a correlative juridical and moral responsibility that is binding on the conduct of man in society, the following are declared to be fundamental duties: a. To respect and comply with the Constitution and the laws; to respect and obey the authorities established by them. b. Every able-bodied Dominican has the duty to perform the civilian and military services his country may require for its defense and preservation. c. The inhabitants of the Republic must refrain from any act prejudicial to its stability, independence, or sovereignty and, in the event of public disaster, they have the duty of rendering any services of which they are capable. d. Every Dominican citizen has the duty to vote, provided he has the legal capacity to do so. e. To contribute to the public expenditures in proportion to his taxable capacity. f. Every person has the obligation to engage in work of his own choice in order to provide fittingly for the maintenance of himself and his family, to achieve the broadest possible improvement of his personality, and to contribute to the well-being and progress of society. g. It is a duty of all persons who inhabit the territory of the Dominican Republic to attend the educational institutions of the Nation in order to acquire, at least, an elementary education. h. Every person has the duty to cooperate with the State with respect to assistance and social security, in accordance with his possibilities. i. Every foreigner has the duty to refrain from participating in political activities within the Dominican territory. Article 10 The enumeration contained in Articles 8 and 9 is not restrictive and hence does not exclude the existence of other rights and duties of the same nature.

TITLE III Political Rights Section I Nationality Article 11 The Dominicans are: 1. All persons born in the territory of the Republic, with the exception of the legitimate children of foreigners resident in the country as diplomatic representatives or in transit through the country. 2. Persons who at present enjoy that status by virtue of former constitutions and laws. 3. All persons born abroad of a Dominican father or mother provided that they have not acquired foreign nationality in accordance with the laws of their country of birth, or in the event that they have acquired it, that after attaining eighteen years of age, they make a statement, sworn to before a public official and transmitted to the Executive Power, declaring their intention of choosing Dominican nationality. 4. Persons naturalized. The law shall provide the conditions and formalities required for naturalization. Paragraph I. The right of a Dominican to acquire a foreign nationality is recognized. Paragraph II. A Dominican woman married to a foreigner may acquire the nationality of her husband. Paragraph III. A foreign woman who marries a Dominican shall have the status of her husband unless the laws of her country permit her to retain her nationality, in which case she shall have the right to state, in the marriage act, that she declines Dominican nationality. Paragraph IV. Acquisition of another nationality does not imply loss of Dominican nationality. Nevertheless, Dominicans who acquire another nationality cannot become candidates for the Presidency or Vice Presidency of the Republic. Section II Citizenship Article 12 All Dominicans of either sex over eighteen years of age, and those who are or who have been married, although under that age, are citizens.

Article 13 The rights of citizenship are: 1. [The right] to vote, according to law, for the election of the officials referred to in Article 90 of the Constitution. 2. [The right] to be eligible for election to the offices referred to in the preceding paragraph. Article 14 The rights of citizenship are lost by an irrevocable conviction for treason, espionage, or conspiracy against the Republic, or for taking up arms or lending aid or participating in any attack against it. Article 15 The rights of citizenship are suspended in case of: a. Irrevocable sentence to criminal punishment, until rehabilitation. b. Legally declared judicial interdiction, while it is in effect. c. Accepting while in Dominican territory, an office or employment from a foreign government, without prior authorization from the Executive Power. TITLE IV Section I Legislative Power Article 16 The legislative power is exercised by a Congress of the Republic, composed of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. Article 17 The election of Senators and Deputies is by direct vote. Article 18 The offices of Senator and of Deputy are incompatible with any other office or position in the public administration.

Article 19 If vacancies of Senators or Deputies occur, the corresponding Chamber shall select a replacement from the list of three candidates (terna) to be presented by the principal organization (el organismo superior) of the Party that held that seat. Article 20 The terna should be submitted to the Chamber in which the vacancy occurred, within thirty days thereafter, if Congress is in session, and if it is not, within thirty days after it meets. If the period indicated expires before the competent party organization has submitted the terna, the corresponding Chamber shall hold the election freely. Section II The Senate Article 21 The Senate shall be composed of members elected in the proportion of one for each province and one for the National District, and their term of office shall be four years. Article 22 To be a Senator a person must be a Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights, have attained twenty-five years of age, and be a native of the territorial district that elects him, or have resided therein for at least five consecutive years. Paragraph. Naturalized persons may not be elected as Senator until ten years after acquiring nationality, and only if they have resided in the jurisdiction that elects them for five years preceding the election. Article 23 The following are powers of the Senate: 1. To elect the President and other members of the Central Electoral Board and their alternates. 2. To elect the members of the Chamber of Accounts (Cámara de Cuentas). 3. To approve or to reject diplomatic appointments submitted by the Executive Power. 4. To try accusations presented by the Chamber of Deputies against public officials elected for a predetermined period for bad conduct or serious faults in the exercise of their functions. In response to accusations the Senate cannot impose penalties beyond

removal from office The person removed, however, shall remain subject, when appropriate, to indictment and trial according to the law. The Senate cannot remove an official from office unless approved by a vote of at least three-fourths of its full membership. Section III The Chamber of Deputies Article 24 The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of members elected every four years by the people of the provinces and the National District in the proportion of one for every fifty thousand inhabitants or fraction thereof greater than twenty-five thousand, but in no case shall a province have less than two Deputies. Article 25 To be a Deputy the same conditions must be met as for a Senator. Paragraph. Naturalized persons may only be elected Deputies ten years after acquiring nationality, and provided they have resided in the jurisdiction that elects them during the five years preceding the election. Article 26 It is an exclusive function (atribución) of the Chamber of Deputies to refer impeachments (derecho de acusar) of public officials before the Senate in the cases specified in Article 23(5).[1] The impeachment (acusación) may not be ordered except by a vote of threefourths of the total membership of the Chamber. Section IV Provisions Common to Both Chambers Article 27 The Chambers shall meet together as a National Assembly in the cases indicated in the Constitution, and there must be present for this purpose more than one-half of the members of each Chamber. Decisions shall be taken by absolute majority vote. Article 28 Each Chamber shall regulate its internal proceedings and the conduct of its own business, being authorized under the rules of discipline to impose appropriate sanctions.

Article 29 The Senate and Chamber of Deputies shall hold their sessions separately, except when they meet in National Assembly. Paragraph. They may also meet jointly to receive the message of the President of the Republic and the reports of the Secretaries of State referred to in Article 55(22), to celebrate commemorative acts, and to perform other acts not related to the legislative functions of each Chamber nor those indicated in this Constitution as exclusive to either one of them. Article 30 In each Chamber the presence of more than half of its members shall be necessary for the validity of its deliberations. Decisions shall be taken by absolute majority vote, except in matters previously declared urgent, which shall be decided by a two-thirds vote, at the second discussion. Article 31 The members of both Chambers shall enjoy the fullest penal immunity for the opinions they express in sessions. Article 32 No Senator or Deputy may be deprived of his freedom during the legislative session without the authorization of the Chamber to which he belongs, except in the case of his being apprehended in the moment of committing a crime. In all cases the Senate or Chamber of Deputies, or, if they are not in session or there is no quorum, any member, may demand that a member who has been detained, arrested, imprisoned, or in any other way deprived of his liberty, be set free for the duration of the legislative session or any portion thereof. To this end, the President of the Senate or of the Chamber of Deputies, or the Senator or Deputy, as the case may be, shall make such request to the Attorney General (Procurador General) of the Republic; and if necessary, shall give the order for liberation directly, for which he may request the assistance of the public force, which must be given to him by every depositary thereof. Article 33 The Chambers shall meet regularly on February 27 and August 16 of each year, and each legislative session shall last ninety days, which may be extended for sixty days more. Paragraph. Extraordinary sessions shall be at the convocation of the Executive Power. Article 34

On August 16 of each year the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall elect their respective directive officials (Bufetes Directivos) , consisting of a President, a Vice President, and two Secretaries. Paragraph I. Each Chamber shall choose its auxiliary employees. Paragraph II. The President of the Senate and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall have disciplinary powers during the sessions, and they shall represent their respective Chamber in all legal acts. Article 35 Whenever the Chambers meet in National Assembly or in joint session, the Presidency shall be assumed by the President of the Senate; the Vice Presidency shall be held by the person who at the time presides over the Chamber of Deputies, and the Secretariat by the persons who at the time are the Secretaries of each Chamber. Paragraph I. In the event of the temporary or permanent default of the President of the Senate, and until a new President of that Chamber is elected, the National Assembly or joint session shall be presided over by the President of the Chamber of Deputies. Paragraph II. In the event of the temporary or permanent default of the President of the Senate and of the President of the Chamber of Deputies, an Assembly or joint session shall be presided over by the Vice President of the Senate or in his default by the Vice President of the Chamber of Deputies. Article 36 It is the function of the National Assembly to examine the act of election of the President and Vice President of the Republic, to proclaim them elected, and when called upon, to administer their oaths of office, to accept or reject their resignations, and to exercise the powers (facultades) conferred by this Constitution. Section V The Congress Article 37 The following are powers (atribuciones) of the Congress: 1. To levy taxes or general contributions and to determine the legal method of their collection and expenditure. 2. To approve or reject, on the basis of the report of the Chamber of Accounts (Cámara de Cuentas), the statement of collections and expenditures of revenues that the Executive Power must submit it to.

3. To take cognizance of observations that the Executive Power may make concerning the laws. 4. To provide for the conservation and increase of national property, and for the alienation of property in the private domain of the Nation, except as specified in Article 55(10) and 110 of this Constitution. 5. To determine all matters relating to the preservation of monuments and ancient objects and the acquisition of the latter. 6. To create or abolish provinces, municipalities or other political divisions of the territory and to determine all matters relating to their boundaries and organization, on the basis of a study to determine the social, political, and economic advantages justifying the change. 7. To declare a state of siege, in the event of disturbance of the public peace or public disaster, and to suspend, wherever the foregoing exist, and for their duration, the human rights proclaimed in Article 8, paragraphs 2(b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) and 3, 4, 6, 7, and 9. 8. In the event that national sovereignty is exposed to serious and imminent danger, Congress may declare a state of national emergency, suspending the exercise of individual rights, with the exception of the inviolability of life as affirmed in Article 8(1) of this Constitution. If Congress is not in session, the President of the Republic may take the same measure, and shall convoke Congress to inform it of the state of emergency and the measures he has taken. 9. To adopt all measures pertaining to immigration. 10. To increase or reduce the number of Courts of Appeal, and to create or abolish regular (ordinarios) or exceptional (excepción) courts. 11. To create or abolish courts for hearing and deciding contentious-administrative matters and to provide for their organization and competence. 12. To adopt the Budget of Revenues and the Law of Public Expenditures and approve or reject extraordinary public expenditures for which the Executive Power asks an appropriation. 13. To authorize loans on the credit of the Republic through the Executive Power. 14. To approve or reject international treaties and conventions concluded by the Executive Power. 15. To legislate on all matters concerning the public debt.

16. To declare by law the necessity of Constitutional reform. 17. To grant authorization to the President of the Republic to leave the country, if the absence is to be for more than fifteen days. 18. To examine annually all acts of the Executive Power, and to approve them if they conform to the Constitution and the laws. 19. To approve or reject contracts submitted by the President of the Republic in conformity with Articles 55(10) and 110. 20. To decree the transfer of the Legislative Chambers from the capital of the Republic, if justified by reasons of force majeure, or by a call by the President of the Republic. 21. To grant amnesty on political grounds. 22. To interpellate the Secretaries of State and the Directors or Administrators of autonomous organs of the State, on matters within their competence, when agreed upon by two-thirds of the members present in the Chamber requesting it, upon demand of one or more of its members. 23. To legislate on all matters that are not within the competence of another Power of the State or contrary to the Constitution. Section VI Formation and Effect of the Laws Article 38 The following have the right of initiative in the formation of laws: a. Senators and Deputies; b. The President of the Republic; c. The Supreme Court of Justice in judicial matters; and d. The Central Electoral Board in election matters. Paragraph. Whoever exercises this right may defend his motion in the other Chamber, in the case of item (a) of this Article, and in both Chambers through a representative, in the other three cases. Article 39

Every bill introduced in one of the Chambers must (se someterá) be submitted to two separate discussions, with an interval of at least one day between them; if a bill has previously been declared urgent, it must (deberá) be discussed in two consecutive sessions. Article 40 If a bill has been approved by either Chamber, it shall be sent to the other for discussion in due course, observing the same constitutional procedure. If the latter Chamber makes amendments, it shall return the bill, with objections, to the Chamber in which it was introduced, and if these amendments are accepted, it shall send the bill to the Executive Power; but if they are rejected, the bill shall be sent back to the other Chamber with objections, and if this body approves them, it shall in turn send the bill to the Executive Power; if the objections are rejected, the bill shall be considered rejected. Article 41 Every bill approved by both Chambers shall be forwarded to the Executive Power. If the President has no objections, he shall promulgate it within eight days after receipt and cause it to be published within fifteen days after promulgation; if he has objections, he shall return it to the Chamber from which it came within eight days from the date on which it was sent to him, unless the matter has been declared urgent, in which case he shall return it within three days. The Chamber that has received his objections shall place them on the agenda of its next session and again discuss the bill. If, after this discussion, two-thirds of the total membership of this Chamber again approve it, it shall be forwarded to the other Chamber, and if this Chamber approves it by a like majority, it shall definitively be considered a law. The President of the Republic shall be required to promulgate and publish the law within the periods indicated. Paragraph I. Bills that remain pending in either of the two Chambers at the close of a legislative session must follow constitutional procedure until converted into law or definitively rejected in the subsequent legislative session. If this is not done, the bill shall be considered as not initiated. Paragraph II. Every bill received in one Chamber, after being approved in the other, shall be placed on the agenda. Article 42 Whenever a bill is sent to the President of the Republic for promulgation and the time remaining before termination of the legislative session is less than that specified in the preceding Article for objection, the legislature shall remain in session to take cognizance of the objections until the expiration of the period and procedure established in Article 41.

The laws are binding after their publication on all the inhabitants of the Republic, if the legal time for them to become known has elapsed. Article 43 Bills rejected in one Chamber cannot be introduced in the other, or reintroduced in either Chamber, until the following legislative term. Article 44 All laws shall begin thus: “The National Congress; In the Name of the Republic.” Article 45 The laws, after their promulgation, shall be published in the manner determined by law, and they shall be binding upon expiration of the periods indicated by law for their being considered as known in all parts of the national territory. Article 46 Any law, decree, resolution, regulation, or act contrary to this Constitution is null and void. Article 47 A law only provides for and is applicable to the future. It has no retroactive effect except when it is favorable to persons subject to it or serving a sentence. In no case may a law or any public power affect or alter the juridical security deriving from situations established in conformity with previous legislation. Article 48 Laws relating to the public order, the police, security, and good customs, are binding on all inhabitants of the territory and cannot be derogated by particular conventions. TITLE V Section I The Executive Power Article 49 The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic, who shall be elected every four years by direct vote. The President of the Republic may seek another single consecutive constitutional term, without being able ever to seek the same office or the vice presidency of the Republic.

Article 50 To be President of the Republic a person is required: 1. To be Dominican by birth or origin; 2. To have attained thirty years of age; 3. To be in full exercise of civil and political rights; and 4. Not to have been in active military or police service for at least the year preceding the election. Article 51 There shall be a Vice President of the Republic, who shall be elected in the same manner and for the same term as the President and jointly with him. To be Vice President the same conditions are required as to be President. Article 52 The President and Vice President of the Republic elected in the general elections shall take their oath of office on August 16 following their election, the date on which the term of those leaving office shall end. Whenever the President-elect of the Republic cannot do so because of being outside the country or of illness or for any other reason of force majeure, the Vice President-elect of the Republic shall perform the functions of President of the Republic temporarily, and in default of the latter (a falta de éste), the President of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 53 If the President-elect of the Republic defaults definitively without having taken the oath of office, the Vice President-elect of the Republic shall replace him, and in default of the latter the procedure indicated in Article 60 shall be followed. Article 54 The President and Vice President of the Republic, before taking office, shall take the following oath before the National Assembly or before any public official: “I swear by God, by my country, and by my honor, to comply with and enforce the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, to uphold and defend its independence, to respect its rights, and to faithfully fulfill the duties of my office.” Article 55

The President of the Republic is the head of the Public Administration and the supreme commander of all the armed forces of the Republic and of the police corps. It belongs to (corresponde) the powers and duties of the President of the Republic: 1. To appoint the Secretaries and Undersecretaries of State and other public officials and employees whose appointment is not vested in any other power or autonomous organ recognized by this Constitution or by the laws, to accept their resignations, and to remove them. 2. To promulgate and order publication of the laws and resolutions of the National Congress and to see to their faithful execution. To issue regulations, decrees, and instructions whenever necessary. 3. To see to the proper collection and faithful expenditure of the national revenues. 4. To appoint, with the approval of the Senate, the members of the Diplomatic Corps, to accept their resignations, and to remove them. 5. To receive foreign Heads of State and their representatives. 6. To preside over all official acts of the Nation, to direct diplomatic negotiations and to conclude treaties with foreign nations or international organizations, which must be submitted to the approval of the Congress, without which they shall have no validity and shall not bind the Republic. 7. In the event of a disturbance of the public peace if the National Congress is not in session, to declare a state of siege wherever the foregoing exists, and suspend the exercise of the rights which pursuant to Article 37(7) of this Constitution, Congress is permitted to suspend. He may also, in the event that the national sovereignty is in serious or imminent danger, declare a state of national emergency, with the effects and requisites indicated in paragraph (8) of that Article. In case of public disaster, he may also declare as disaster areas those in which damage has occurred, due to storms, earthquakes, floods, or any other phenomenon of nature, or as a consequence of epidemics. 8. In the case of a violation of the provisions (disposiciones) contained in items (a) and (d) of paragraph 10 of Article 8 of this Constitution that disturb or threaten to disturb the public order or the security of the State or the regular operation of public services or public utilities or that hinders the progress of economic activities, the President of the Republic shall adopt the provisional police and security measures necessary to combat the emergency and he must report to Congress on the emergency and the measures adopted. 9. To fill vacancies that occur among the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Courts of Appeal, the Lands Court, the Courts of First Instance, and among the Judges of Instruction, Justices of the Peace, and the President and other members of the Central

Electoral Board as well as among members of the Chamber of Accounts, when the Congress is in recess, with the obligation of informing the Senate of such appointments at the next legislative session so that it may make permanent appointments. 10. To make contracts, submitting them to the approval of the National Congress whenever they contain provisions relating to the disposal of the national revenues to the alienation of real property valued at more than twenty thousand pesos gold, or to borrowing money, or when they stipulate exemptions from taxes in general, in accordance with Article 110, and without such approval in other cases. 11. Whenever vacancies occur among Municipal Councilmen, Municipal Mayors or Mayor of the National District, and the number of elected alternates has been exhausted, the Executive Power shall select a replacement from a terna to be submitted by the Party to which the Councilman or Mayor who caused the vacancy belonged. The terna must be submitted to the Executive Power within fifteen days after the vacancy occurred; if such a list is not submitted within the period indicated, the Executive Power shall make the appropriate appointment. 12. To issue or refuse navigation licenses. 13. To regulate all matters relating to the Customs service. 14. To provide for, at all times, whatever concerns the Armed Forces of the Republic, to command them in person or through the person or persons he may designate to do so, but always remaining as their supreme commander; to fix the number of these forces and to deploy them for purposes of the public service. 15. To take the measures necessary to provide for the legitimate defense of the Nation in case of actual or imminent armed attack by a foreign nation, informing Congress of the measures adopted. 16. To cause the arrest or expulsion of aliens whose activities, in his judgment, are or could be prejudicial to the public order or to good customs. 17. To appoint or remove the Members of the Councils of War of the Armed Forces and of the National Police. 18. To take all measures relating to air, maritime, river, and military zones. 19. To regulate all matters relating to the opening (habilitación) of ports and the seacoasts. 20. To prohibit, when he deems it advisable in the national interest, the entry of aliens into the national territory. 21. To change the place of his official residence whenever he deems it necessary.

22. To present to the National Congress, at the opening of the first regular legislative session on February 27 of each year, a message accompanied by the reports of the Secretaries of State, giving an account of his administration for the previous year. 23. To submit to Congress during the second regular legislative session the draft of the Budget of Revenues and Law of Public Expenditures for the following year. 24. To grant or refuse authorization to Dominican citizens to hold offices or positions of a foreign government or international organizations within Dominican territory and for them to accept and use decorations and titles granted by foreign governments. 25. To reject by a decree, with reasons, the local taxes established by municipal governments. 26. To grant or refuse authorization to municipal governments to alienate real property, and to approve or reject contracts made by them when guaranteed by municipal real property or revenues. 27. To grant full or partial pardons, absolute or conditional, on February 27, August 16, and December 23 each year, in accordance with the law. Article 56 The President of the Republic may not leave the country for more than fifteen days without the authorization of Congress. Article 57 The President and the Vice President of the Republic may not resign except before the National Assembly. Article 58 In the event of a temporary incapacity (falta) of the President of the Republic, after taking the oath of office, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the Vice President during the incapacity, and in default of the latter, by the President of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 59 In the event of a permanent incapacity of the President of the Republic, after taking the oath of office, the presidency shall be held by the Vice President of the Republic for the time remaining until the end of the term. Article 60

In the event that the Vice President of the Republic shall be definitively incapacitated (falta definitiva), the Executive Power shall be assumed temporarily by the President of the Supreme Court of Justice who, within fifteen days after assuming office, shall convoke the National Assembly to meet within the fifteen days following to elect a permanent replacement at a meeting which may not adjourn or declare a recess until it has accomplished the election. In the event that for any reason such a convocation cannot be made, the National Assembly shall meet immediately in its own right to conduct the election in the manner specified above. Section II The Secretaries of State Article 61 To conduct the business of the Public Administration there are the Secretaries of State created by law. The law may also create such Undersecretaries of State as are deemed necessary and they shall act subordinate to and under the direction of the corresponding Secretary of State. To be a Secretary or an Undersecretary of State it is required that a person be a Dominican in the full exercise of civil and political rights and have attained 25 years of age. Paragraph. Naturalized persons cannot be Secretaries of State or Undersecretaries of State until ten years after acquiring nationality. Article 62 The law shall determine the powers of the Secretaries of State. TITLE VI Section I The Judicial Power Article 63 The Judicial Power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice and all other courts of a judicial nature created by this Constitution and the laws. This power shall enjoy administrative and budgetary autonomy. Paragraph I. The law regulates the legal profession and the rules governing retirements and pensions of judges, officials and employees of the judicial order. Paragraph II. Officials of the judicial order will not be able to occupy another post or public employment, except for what is provided in Article 108.

Paragraph III. Judges are irremovable, without prejudice of that provided in paragraph 5 of Article 67. Paragraph IV. Once the period for which a judge was elected has expired, he will remain in his post until his substitute is designated. Section II The Supreme Court of Justice Article 64 The Supreme Court of Justice shall consist of at least eleven judges; but it may sit, deliberate, and render judgments validly with a quorum determined by the law that regulates its organization. Paragraph I. The judges of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be designated by the National Council of the Magistrature, which shall be presided by the President of the Republic, and in his absence, by the Vice President of the Republic, and in the absence of both, by the Attorney General (Procurador General) of the Republic. The other members shall be: 1. The President of the Senate and one Senator selected by the Senate that belongs to a party different than the party of the President of the Senate. 2. The President of the Chamber of Deputies and one Deputy selected by the Chamber of Deputies who belongs to a party different than the party of the President of the Chamber of Deputies. 3. The President of the Supreme Court of Justice. 4. A Magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice chosen by this same body, who shall act as Secretary. Paragraph II. In electing the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the National Council of the Magistrature shall determine which of them should occupy the presidency and shall designate a first and second substitute to replace the President in the event of his absence or incapacity (impedimento). Paragraph III. In the event of the termination (cesación) of service of a Judge who has been designated for one of the above-mentioned positions, the National Council of the Magistrature shall select a new Judge with the same position or shall attribute this position to another of the judges. Article 65 To be a Judge of the Supreme Court of Justice it is required:

1. To be a Dominican by birth or origin and to have attained more than thirty-five years of age. 2. To be in full exercise of civil and political rights. 3. To be a licentiate or Doctor of Law. 4. To have practiced the legal profession for at least twelve years; or for the same period, to have held a position as Judge of a Court of Appeal, Judge of First Instance or Judge of the Lands Court, or representative of the Public Ministry before such courts. The periods of law practice and of holding judicial offices may be added together. Article 66 The Public Ministry shall be represented before the Supreme Court of Justice by the Attorney General (Procurador General) of the Republic, personally or through such substitutes as may be created by law. He shall have the same rank as the President of the Court, with the powers (atribuciones) conferred on him by law. To be Attorney General of the Republic, a person must have the same qualifications as are required to be a Judge of the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 67 The Supreme Court of Justice, without prejudice to other powers (atribuciones) conferred exclusively to it by law: 1. To take cognizance in sole instance of criminal actions against the President and Vice President of the Republic, Senators, Deputies, Secretaries of State, Undersecretaries, Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General of the Republic, Judges and General Procurators of the Courts of Appeal, Advocate of the State before the Lands Court, Judges of the Superior Lands Court, members of the Diplomatic Corps, the Central Electoral Board, the Commission of Accounts and Judges of the Contentious Tributary Court; and the constitutionality of the laws, instances of the Executive Power, one of the Presidents of the Chambers of the National Congress or concerned party. 2. To hear appeals of cassation in conformity with law. 3. To hear in last instance cases in which the jurisdiction in first instance pertains to the Courts of Appeal. 4. To elect the Judges of the Courts of Appeal, Lands Court, Judges of First Instance, Judges of Instruction, Judges of Peace and their substitutes, Judges of the Contentious Tributary Court and the Judges of any other court of the judicial order created by law in conformity with that established in the law of the legal career.

5. To exercise the highest disciplinary authority over all members of the Judicial Power, to the extent of imposing suspension or dismissal, in the manner determined by law. 6. To transfer provisionally or permanently from one jurisdiction to another, whenever it deems this advisable, Judges of the Courts of Appeal, Judges of First Instance, Judges of Original Jurisdiction of the Lands Court, Judges of Instruction, Judges of Peace and any other judges of courts that were to be created by law. 7. To create the necessary administrative positions so that the Judicial Power can fully comply with the powers (atribuciones) conferred to it by this Constitution and the laws. 8. To name all of the officials and employees that depend on the Judicial Power. 9. To set the salaries and other remunerations of Judges and the administrative personnel that belong to the Judicial Power. Section III Courts of Appeal Article 68 There shall be at least nine Courts of Appeal throughout the Republic. The number of Judges to compose the courts, as well as the Judicial Districts corresponding to each Court, shall be determined by law. Paragraph I. In electing the Judges of the Courts of Appeal, the Supreme Court of Justice shall specify which of them should occupy the presidency and shall designate a first and second substitute to replace the President in the event of default or impediment (falta o impedimento). Paragraph II. In the event of the termination of service of a judge holding one of the positions indicated above, the Supreme Court of Justice shall elect a new Judge with the same qualifications or name one of the other Judges thereto. Article 69 To be a Judge of a Court of Appeals it is required: 1. To be a Dominican. 2. To be in full exercise of civil and political rights. 3. To be a licentiate or Doctor of Law. 4. To have practiced the legal profession for four years; or for the same period, to have a held a position as Judge of First Instance or representative of the Public Ministry before

the courts or as Judge of Original Jurisdiction of the Lands Court. The periods of law practice and of holding judicial office may be added together. Article 70 In each Court of Appeal, the Public Ministry is represented by an Attorney General (Procurador General), or by such substitutes as the law may create, all of whom must meet the same requirements as judges of these Courts. Article 71 The Courts of Appeal have the following powers (atribuciones): 1. To hear appeals (apelaciones) from decisions (sentencias dictadas) issued by Courts (Juzgados) of First Instance. 2. To hear in first instance criminal (penales) cases instituted against Judges of First Instance, Judges of Original Jurisdiction of the Lands Court, Judges of Instruction, Government Attorneys (Procuradores Fiscales) and provincial Governors. 3. To hear any other matters determined by law. Section IV Lands Court Article 72 The competence (atribuciones) of the Lands Court shall be determined by the law. Paragraph. To be a President or Judge of the Superior Lands Court, the same qualifications are required as to be Judge of a Court of Appeal, and to be a Judge of Original Jurisdiction, the same qualifications as to be a Judge of First Instance. Section V Courts (Juzgados) of First Instance Article 73 In each judicial district there shall be a Court of First Instance, with such powers as may be conferred on it by law. Paragraph. The law shall determine the number of judicial districts, the number of Judges to compose Courts of First Instance, and the number of chambers into which they may be divided. Article 74

To be a Judge of First Instance [a person] must be a Dominican, be in full exercise of civil and political rights, be a licentiate or Doctor of Law, and have practiced the profession of lawyer for two years or have held the position of Judge (Juez) of Peace or Government Attorney (Fiscalizador) for the same period. Article 75 To be a Government Attorney (Procurador Fiscal) or Judge of Instruction the same qualifications are required as to be a Judge of First Instance. Section VI Justices (Juzgados) of the Peace Article 76 In the National District and in each municipality there shall be such Justices of the Peace as are necessary, according to law. Article 77 To be a Judge of the Peace or Government Attorney, or an alternate of either, a person must be a Dominican, a lawyer, and in full exercise of civil and political rights. They shall have such powers (atribuciones) as are determined by law. The status of law shall not be necessary in order to hold the above-mentioned positions in those municipalities where it is not possible to elect or appoint lawyers thereto, except in the National District and in municipalities that are the capital cities of provinces where such positions must be held by lawyers. TITLE VII The Chamber of Accounts Article 78 There shall be a permanent Chamber of Accounts, composed of at least five members, elected by the Senate from lists of three candidates (ternas) submitted by the Executive Power. Paragraph. The Chamber of Accounts shall be principally technical in character. Article 79 Its powers (atribuciones) shall be, in addition to those conferred by law: 1. To examine the general and special accounts of the Republic.

2. To submit to Congress in the first ordinary legislative session a report on the accounts of the previous year. Article 80 The members of the Chamber of Accounts shall hold office for four years. Article 81 To be a member of the Chamber of Accounts a person must be a Dominican in full exercise of his civil and political rights, have attained twenty-five years of age, and be a licentiate or Doctor of Law, a licentiate of Finances, or a certified public accountant (Contador Público Autorizado). The law shall determine any other requirements for being a member of this organism. TITLE VIII The National District and the Municipalities Article 82 The government of the National District, and that of the municipalities shall each be entrusted to a Municipal Council, whose Councilors (regidores) and alternates, the number of which shall be determined by law in proportion to the population and in no case less than five, shall, like the mayor of the National District and the municipal mayors and their alternates, be elected by the people of the National District and the municipalities, respectively, every four years in the form established by the Constitution and the laws, from among candidates who may be proposed by the political parties or by regional, provincial, or municipal political groups. Article 83 The Municipal Councils, as well as the Mayors, are independent in the exercise of their powers (funciones), except for those restrictions and limitations established in the Constitution and the laws, which shall determine their functions (atribuciones), powers (facultades), and duties. Article 84 The law shall determine the qualifications necessary for holding the offices indicated in Articles 82 and 83. Adult aliens of legal age may hold these offices, under the conditions prescribed by law, provided they have resided more than ten years in the corresponding jurisdiction. Article 85

In the preparation and in the carrying out of their budgets, Municipal Councils are required to maintain the appropriations and expenditures assigned to each class of business (atenciones) and services. With the approval required by law, Municipal Councils may impose local taxes, provided these do not conflict with national taxes, inter-municipal trade, or exportation, nor with the Constitution or the laws. TITLE IX Administration of the Provinces Article 86 There shall be in each province a Civil Governor appointed by the Executive Power. Paragraph. To be a Governor it is required to be Dominican, have attained twenty-five years of age, and be in full exercise of civil and political rights. Article 87 The organization and administration of the provinces, as well as the powers (atribuciones) and duties of the Civil Governors, shall be determined by the law. TITLE X Electoral Assemblies Article 88 It is obligatory for all citizens to exercise the voting right. The vote shall be personal, free and secret. The following may not vote: 1. Those who have lost their rights of citizenship and those for whom these rights have been suspended, by virtue of Articles 14 and 15 of this Constitution. 2. Members of the armed forces and the police (cuerpos de policia). Article 89 The Electoral Assemblies shall meet in their own right on May 16 every four years to elect the President and the Vice President of the Republic; likewise to elect the rest of the elected officials, leaving two years between both elections. In cases of extraordinary summons they shall meet at the most sixty days after the publication of the law of convocation. Article 90

The Electoral Assemblies shall elect the President and Vice President of the Republic, the Senators and Deputies and their alternates, the Councillors of the Municipal Councils and their alternates, the Mayor of the National District and the Municipal Mayors and their alternates, and any other official specified by law. Paragraph. When no candidate obtains an absolute majority of the valid votes cast in elections held to elect the President and Vice President of the Republic, a second election shall be carried out forty-five days after the first was held. Only the two candidates who obtained the largest number of votes in the first election participate in this final election. Article 91 Elections shall be held by direct and secret vote, and with representation of minorities when two or more candidates are to be elected, in accordance with rules fixed by law. Article 92 The elections shall be conducted by a Central Electoral Board and Boards subordinate to it, which shall have the competence (facultad) to judge and regulate according to law. Paragraph. For the purposes of this article, the Central Electoral Board shall assume control of and command the public force in localities where voting takes place. TITLE XI The Armed Forces Article 93 The Armed Forces are essentially obedient and apolitical (apolíticas) and in no case have the right to deliberate. The purpose (objeto) of their creation is to defend the independence and integrity of the Republic, to maintain public order, and uphold the Constitution and the laws. They may intervene (intervenir), when so requested by the Executive Power, in programs of civic action and in plans intended to promote the social and economic development of the country. Article 94 The conditions under which a citizen may become a member of the Armed Forces are contained in the law of its establishment. TITLE XII General Provisions Article 95

The national flag consists of the colors ultramarine blue and vermillion red in alternate quarters, placed in such a way that the blue is toward the upper part of the staff, separated by a white cross half as wide as the height of one quarter, and bearing in the center the coat of arms of the Republic. The merchant flag is the same as the national flag without the coat of arms. Article 96 The coat of arms of the Republic shall have the same colors as the national flag, placed in the same manner; in the center it shall bear the book of the Gospels, open, with a cross above it, both issuing out of a trophy consisting of two lances and four national flags without coat of arms, two on either side; it shall bear a laurel branch of the left side and a palm branch on the right; it shall be crowned with an ultramarine blue ribbon bearing the legend: “Dios, Patria, Libertad,” and at the base another ribbon, vermillion red in color, with these words: “República Dominicana.” The national coat of arms shall be oblong in shape, with the upper angles salient and the lower angles rounded, the center of the base of which terminates in a point, and so placed that if a horizontal line is drawn uniting the two verticals of the oblongs from where the lower angles begin, a perfect square results. Paragraph. The law regulates the use and dimensions of the national flag and coat of arms. Article 97 The national anthem is the musical composition identified (consegrada) by Law No. 700 of May 30, 1934, and it is invariable, unique and eternal. Article 98 February 27, the anniversary of Independence, and August 16, the anniversary of the Restoration, are National Holidays. Article 99 All usurped authority is without effect and its acts are null. Any decision reached by means of the intervention of (requisición) the Armed Forces is null. Article 100 The Republic proscribes (condena) any privileges and any situation intended to overcome (quebrantar) the equality of all Dominicans, among whom no differences shall be recognized other than those resulting from talents or virtues and, consequently, no entity of the Republic may grant titles of nobility or hereditary distinctions. Article 101

All historic and artistic riches of the country, regardless of their owner, form a part of the cultural heritage of the Nation and shall be safeguarded by the State. The law shall establish whatever may be appropriate (oportuno) for their preservation and protection. Article 102 Any person who retains public funds for his personal gain or who obtains economic gain by taking advantage of his position within an organism of the State, its offices or autonomous institutions, shall be punished by the penalties specified by law. Persons who procured benefits for their associates, family members, relatives, friends, or acquaintances shall be equally punished. No one may be held criminally responsible for the act of another person in such cases or in any others. Article 103 Mining deposits belong to the State and may be exploited by private persons only by virtue of a concession or a contract granted in accordance with conditions established by law. Article 104 The organization of political parties and associations is free according to law, provided that their tenets (tendencias) conform to the principles set forth in this Constitution. Article 105 Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 23(5)[2] of this Constitution, the President and the Vice President of the Republic, elected or in office, may not be deprived of their freedom before or during their term of office. Article 106 The person appointed to hold public office must take an oath to respect the Constitution and the laws, and to perform his duties faithfully. This oath may be taken before any functionary or public official. Article 107 The term of office of all elected officials, regardless of the date of their election, shall terminate uniformly on August 16 every four years, the date on which the constitutional term begins. Paragraph I. Whenever any elected official ceases to hold office due to death, resignation, removal, disqualification (inhabilitación) or other cause, the person who replaces him shall remain in office until the completion of the term.

Paragraph II. At the expiration of the term of appointment of members of the Chamber of Accounts, and the President and other members of the Central Electoral Board, the incumbents shall remain in office until the Senate makes new appointments for the term that is beginning. Article 108 No public office or position referred to in this Constitution or the laws shall be incompatible with honorary or teaching positions, without prejudice to Article 18. Article 109 Justice is administered without charge throughout the territory of the Republic. Article 110 No exemption shall be recognized, and no exoneration, reduction, or limitation on taxes, assessments or fiscal or municipal fees, to the benefit of individuals, shall be granted except by law. However, individuals may acquire, by concessions authorized by law or by contracts approved by the National Congress, the irrevocable right to benefit from, for the time stipulated in a concession or contract and after fulfilling the obligations imposed by either of these exemptions, exonerations, reductions, or limitations on taxes, assessments, or fiscal or municipal fees imposed on specified public works or undertakings, or on specified works or undertakings when such benefits are intended to attract the investment of new capital for the development of the national economy or any other objective of social interest. Article 111 The national unit of currency is the gold peso. Paragraph I. Only banknotes issued by a sole, autonomous issuing entity, whose capital is the property of the State, shall be legal tender and have lawful circulation, provided they are fully backed by gold reserves and by other real and effective securities, in the proportions and under the conditions specified by law and with the unlimited guarantee of the State. Paragraph II. Metallic coins shall be issued in the name of the State by the same issuing entity and they shall be placed in circulation solely to replace an equivalent amount in banknotes. The legal tender force of metallic coins now in use and those issued in the future shall be determined by law. Paragraph III. The regulation of the currency and banking system of the Nation is entrusted (corresponderá) to the issuing entity, the superior organ of which shall be a Monetary Board, composed of members who shall be appointed and removed only

according to law and they shall be responsible for the faithful fulfillment of their duties in accordance with the norms established in that law. Paragraph IV. The issuance or circulation of paper money, or of any other currency device (signo monetario) not authorized by this Constitution is prohibited, whether by the State or by any other person or public or private entity. Article 112 Any modification in the system of the currency or in the banking system shall require the approval of two-thirds of the full membership of both Chambers, unless it has been initiated by the Executive Power at the proposal of the Monetary Board or by its favorable vote. Article 113 No expenditure of public funds shall be valid unless it is authorized by law and ordered by a competent official. Article 114 Annually in the month of April, the general accounts of the revenues and expenditures of the Republic for the preceding year shall be published. Article 115 The Law of Public Expenditures shall be divided into chapters corresponding to the different branches of the administration, and funds may not be transferred from one chapter to another, nor from one budget item to another, except by a law. This law, if it is not initiated by the Executive Power, must have the vote of two-thirds of the full membership of each Chamber. Paragraph I. No law that orders or authorizes payment or that creates a pecuniary obligation on the part of the State shall have effect or validity unless the law itself creates special funds for its execution or provides for payment to be made from estimated receipts for the year and there remains available, at the time the law is published, a sufficient proportion of these receipts to do so. Paragraph II. The Congress cannot legally vote any expenditure unless it is included in the bill of law on Public Expenditures submitted by the Executive Power under Article 55 of this Constitution, or unless it is requested by the Executive Power after submitting that bill, except in the event that the law ordering such expenditure is approved by two-thirds of the full membership of each Chamber; without any derogation to the general rule established in the first paragraph of this Article.

Paragraph III. Congress may not alter the items included in bills of law for expenditures of funds or in the law of Public Expenditures submitted by the Executive Power except by a vote of two-thirds of the full membership of each Chamber; and in accordance with the provisions contained in the first paragraph of this Article. Congress may, however, alter such an item by an ordinary majority, if initiated by the Executive Power. Paragraph IV. When for any reason Congress closes its term without having voted the Budget of Revenues and the law of Public Expenditures, the law of Public Expenditures of the preceding year shall continue in effect. Paragraph V. When Congress is in recess, the Executive Power may issue a decree providing for transfers or readjustments of amounts in the law of Public Expenditures that are required by urgent needs of the administrative service, as well as the creation or elimination of administrative posts or public services that are subject to that law, with the obligation of submitting (someterio) these changes to Congress at the next legislative session, for its approval. He may also, in the case provided for in this paragraph and in the same manner, expend funds necessary to meet expenses of the Public Administration, reporting thereon to Congress when it meets. TITLE XIII Constitutional Reforms Article 116 This Constitution may be amended if the proposal of amendment is presented in the National Congress with the support of one-third of the members of either Chamber, or if it is submitted by the Executive Power. Article 117 The need for amendment shall be declared through a law. This law, which may not be opposed (observada) by the Executive Power, shall order a meeting of the National Assembly, shall specify the purpose of the amendment, and shall indicate the articles of the Constitution that it will affect. Article 118 To act on the proposed amendments, the National Assembly shall meet within fifteen days following publication of the law declaring the need for amendments, with the presence of more than half of the members of each of the Chambers. Once the National Assembly has voted and proclaimed the amendments, the Constitution shall be published in its entirety, incorporating the amended texts. As an exception to the provisions of Article 27, decisions shall be taken in this case by a two-thirds of the votes. Article 119

No amendment may be made of the form of government, which shall always be civil, republican, democratic, and representative. Article 120 The Constitution may be amended only in the manner indicated therein, and it may never be suspended or annulled by any power or authority or by popular acclamation. TITLE XIV Transitory Provisions Article 121 The presidential term that begins on August 16, 1994 shall end, as an exception on August 16, 1996. Article 122 The next presidential elections shall be held (celebradas) on May 16, 1996 and the elected President and Vice President of the Republic shall assume their functions on August 16, 1996. The next congressional and municipal elections shall take place on May 16, 1998 and the functionaries who are elected shall assume their posts on August 16, 1998. DONE AND PROCLAIMED in the City of Santo Domingo de Guzmán, capital of the Dominican Republic, in the Palace of the National Congress, located in the Center of the Heroes of Costanza, Maimón and Estero Hondo, this day of August 14, 1994, 151st year of Independence and 131st of the Restoration.

NOTES [1] Editor’s Note: there is technically no enumerated Article 23(5); however, there is a fifth paragraph to Article 23. [2] See supra note 1.

