+(,121/,1(
Citation: 137 British & Foreign State Papers 421 1934 Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline (http://heinonline.org) Sun Jun 13 21:52:17 2010 -- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license agreement available at http://heinonline.org/HOL/License -- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

DOMINICAN

REPUBLIC

421 to me is

The text which reproduced below:

you have communicated

[As in No. 1.] I am glad to assure you that the foregoing text is what has been accepted by my Government in the course of the negotiations and is approved by it. In accordance with your suggestion it is understood that the arrangement will come into force on the 16th April, 1934. I avail, &c. P. MUNCH.

CONSTITUTION of the Dominican Republic.-Santo Domingo, June 9, 1934.(')
[ONLY the portions which differ from the constitution of 1929(2) are reproduced below.] (Translation.) ART. 4. The territory of the Republic is divided into provinces, which in their turn are divided into communes. The law will determine the number and the boundaries of the provinces, and those of the communes into which they are divided, and it may also create under another name political divisions of the territory. 6.-(2) The freedom of labour. In consequence, the establishment of monopolies for the benefit of private individuals is prohibited. 33.-(8) To create or abolish provinces, communes or other political divisions of the territory, and determine everything concerning their limits and organisation. (12) To increase or reduce the number of courts of appeal, and to create or abolish ordinary or special tribunals. (24) To approve or otherwise contracts submitted to it by the President of the Republic in accordance with article 49 (10). (27) To order the transfer of the Legislative Chambers to a place other than the capital of the Republic on account of justified force majeure, or when convoked by the President of the Republic. (28) To legislate regarding all matters which are not within the competency of another State power or contrary to the constitution. [End of article.]

(1) Original Spanish text in Gaceta Oficial, June 12, 1934. (2) Vol. CXXX, page 552.

HeinOnline -- 137 British & Foreign State Papers 421 1934

DOMINICAN

REPUBLIC

49.-(10) To conclude contracts and submit them for
the approval of the National Congress when they contain provisions relative to the encumbrance of national revenues, the alienation of real property or the raising of loans; and without such approval in other cases. (17) To change his place of official residence whenever he may deem it necessary. (18) To lay before Congress, at the beginning of the ordinary legislative period on the 27th February of each year, a message, accompanied by the reports of the Secretaries of State, in which he shall render account of his administration during the previous year. (19) To submit to Congress, during the legislative period beginning on the 16th August, the estimate of receipts and the draft law of public expenditure for the following year. (20) To grant authorisation to Dominican citizens to hold foreign public positions. (21) To approve or otherwise the excise taxes created by the municipalities. (22) To grant total or partial amnesty on the 27th February, 16th August and 23rd December, to prisoners undergoing sentence in the gaols of the Republic. 56. The law will determine the powers of the Secretaries of State. 57. The Judicial Power is vested in the Supreme Court of Justice, the courts of appeal, the tribunals or courts of first instance, mayors' offices and the other tribunals of a judicial order created by the laws. 89. Since no institution of the State is empowered to grant exemption from taxes, fiscal or municipal contributions or rates, for the benefit of private parties, such exemption cannot be made a subject of contract. 100. The period of office of all elected officials, whatever the date of their election, shall terminate uniformly on the 16th August every 4 years, on which date the new constitutional term commences, and in consequence they must necessarily be re-elected in order validly to discharge their duties. When any official ceases to discharge his office by reason of death, resignation, dismissal, incapacity or other cause, his substitute will remain in office until the period is completed. Transitory Provision.-In order to be a judge of the land courts, the same conditions are required as from judges of the courts of appeal.

HeinOnline -- 137 British & Foreign State Papers 422 1934

