Constitution of the
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 195

General Secretariat, Organization of American States

PAN AMERICAN UNION

Washington, D.C. • 1958

TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Title I Section I The Nation and its Section III Economic and Social Regime of the Frontier... Title II Title III Title Human Rights The Concordat Rights ...... .......
•

1 1 2 2 5

IVPolitical

Nationality .............. . Section I Section II Citizenship Title V Title VI Sovereignty

........ . 00 .....

_

5 5 6 7 7 7 8 8 10 11 13 17

Section I The Legislative Power Section II The Senate Section III The Chamber of Deputies Section IV Provisions Common to Both Chambers Title VII The Congress •

Title VIII The Enactment of Laws Title IX Section I The Executive Power Section II The Secretaries of State Title X Section I The Judicial Power Section II The Supreme Court of Justice Section III The Courts of Appeal Section IV The Land Courts Section V Courts of First Instance .... Section VI Justices of the Peace Title. XI Title XII Title XIII Title XIV Title XV Title XVI Accounting Commission The National District and the Municipalities Administration of the Provinces The Electoral Assemblies The Armed Force General Provisions . •••••

••••

17 17 19 19 19 20 20 20 21 21 22 22 26

Title XVII Constitutional Amendments Transitory Provisions
iii

— ..... .........

27

III

THE REVISORY ASSEMBLY IN THE NAME OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC After having incorporated appropriate amendments to the articles included in the convocation, declares in effect the following text of the CONSTITUTION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Title I Section I The Nation and its Government Art. 1. The people of Santo Domingo form a nation organized into a free and independent State, under the name of Dominican Republic. Art. 2. Its government is essentially civil, republican, democratic and representative. It is divided into Legislative, Executive, and Judicial Powers. These three powers are independent in the exercise of their respective functions. Those entrusted with these powers are responsible and cannot delegate their attributes, which are solely those determined by this Constitution and the laws. Art. 3. The sovereignty of the Dominican Nation as a free and independent State is inviolable. Consequently, none of the public powers organized by the present Constitution may perform or permit or accept the performance of acts which constitute a direct or indirect intervention in the internal or external affairs of the Dominican Republic or an interference threatening the personality and integrity of the State and of the attributes that are recognized and affirmed in this Constitution. The principle of non-intervention, affirmed in the present article, constitutes a standard of Dominican international policy. Art. 4. Because of its tendency to threaten the sovereignty of States and the attributes inherent in the human person, communism is declared incompatible with the fundamental principles recognized in this Constitution. Consequently, the law shall provide the measures necessary to punish persons or groups who maintain doctrines or programs affiliated with communism. Section II The Territory Art. 5. The territory of the Dominican Republic is and shall be inalienable. It consists of the eastern part of the island of Santo Domingo and its adjacent islands.

Its permanent and immutable land boundaries are fixed by the Boundary Treaty of 1929 and its Protocol of Revision of 1938. It is divided politically into one district known as the Distrito Nacional, which includes the Capital of the Republic, and into such provinces as are determined by law. The provinces in turn are divided into municipalities. The corresponding territorial sea and submarine shelf are also parts of the national territory. The extent of the territorial sea and of the submarine shelf shall be defined by law. Paragraph: The law shall fix the number of provinces and their boundaries and those of the Distrito Nacional, as well as those of the municipalities into which they are divided, and it may also create, under other designations, new political divisions of the territory. Art. 6. Ciudad Trujillo is the Capital of the Republic and the seat of the national Government. Section III Economic and Social Regime of the Frontier Art. 7. The economic and social development of the territory of the Republic along the frontier, as well as the dissemination there of the culture and religious tradition of the Dominican people are declared to be of supreme and permanent national interest. The agricultural and industrial utilization of frontier rivers shall continue to be regulated by the principles affirmed in article 6 of theProtocol of Revision of 1936 of the Boundary Treaty of 1929, and in article 10 of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Arbitration of 1929. Title II Human Rights Art. 8. It is recognized that the principal aim of the State is the effective protection of the rights of the human person and the creation and maintenance of the means to permit him to improve himself progressively within a system of individual liberty and social justice, compatible with the public order, the general well-being, and the rights of all. To guarantee the accomplishment of these aims, the following standards are fixed: 1. Inviolability of life. Capital punishment shall not be imposed, nor any other penalty which implies the loss of the physical integrity of the individual. The law, however, may impose the penalty of death for those who, in the event of action in self-defense against a foreign State, are found guilty of crimes against the success of the national arms, or of treason or espionage in behalf of the enemy. 2. Individual security. Hence:

a) There shall be no physical restraint for debts not resulting from violation of the penal laws; b) No one shall be imprisoned nor his freedom restricted without a written order, stating reasons, issued by a competent judicial official, except in cases in flagrante delicto;

c) Any person deprived of his liberty without cause or without legal formalities, or on grounds not provided for by law, shall be immediately released on his own demand or that of any other person. The law of habeas corpus shall determine the summary proceedings to be followed in such cases; d) Any person deprived of his liberty shall be brought before a competent judicial authority within forty-eight hours after his arrest, or be set free; e) Every arrest shall be rescinded or changed to imprisonment within forty-eight hours after the arrested person has been brought before a competent judicial authority, and the interested party must be notified of the order issued, within the same period; f) No one shall be tried twice for the same offense;

g) No one may be compelled to testify against himself; h) No one may be sentenced without having been heard or duly summoned, nor without observance of the proceedings established by law to ensure an impartial trial and the exercise of the right of defense. Hearings shall be public, with such exceptions as are established by law in cases which would be prejudicial to the public order or to good morals. 3. Freedom of work. The law may, as the general interest may require, establish maximum working hours, days of rest and vacations, minimum wages and salaries and the manner of payment thereof, social security, the participation of nationals in all work, and in general all measures of protection and assistance that the State may deem necessary in behalf of workers. 4. Freedom of enterprise. Monopolies may be established only in favor of the State or of state institutions. The creation and organization of these enterprises shall be done by decree-law of the Executive Power. 5. Freedom of conscience and worship, subject to respect for public order and morality. 6. Freedom of education. Elementary education shall be compulsory both for minor school children and for all who for various reasons were previously unable to enjoy this right. It is hereby made a duty of the State to provide fundamental education for all inhabitants of the national territory and to take the necessary steps to eliminate or prevent illiteracy. Both elementary education and the education offered in vocational, art, commercial, manual training and domestic economy schools shall be free of charge. These duties of the State impose on all persons who inhabit the territory of the Republic the correlative obligation of attending the educational institutions of the nation in order to acquire at least an elementary education. The State shall endeavor to disseminate scientific knowledge and culture as widely as possible so that everyone may benefit from the results of scientific progress. 7. The right of expression without prior censorship. The law shall establish penalties applicable to those who attack the honor of persons, the social order, or the public peace. 8. Freedom of association and of assembly for peaceful ends.

9. The right to own property. However, for justifiable reasons of public benefit or social interest, property maybe taken after just compensation. In cases of public disaster such compensation need not be paid in advance. A general confiscation of property is prohibited, except as a punishment for persons guilty of treason or espionage in behalf of the enemy in the event of self-defense against a foreign State. 10. The inviolability of correspondence and other private documents, which may not be seized or examined except by legal process as evidence in matters before the courts. The secrecy of telegraphic, telephonic, and cabled communications is likewise inviolable. 11. The inviolability of the residence. No search of a residence may be made except in those cases provided by law, and under the formalities therein prescribed. 12. Freedom of transit, with the exception of restrictions resulting from the execution of judicially imposed punishments or of police, immigration or health laws. 13. Exclusive ownership, for such time and in such manner as may be determined by law, of inventions and discoveries and of scientific, artistic, and literary productions. 14. In order to strengthen its stability and well-being,and its moral, cultural, and religious life, the family shall receive the fullest possible protection of the State. The law shall provide the measures necessary to protect maternity, and mothers in particular, for a reasonable period before and after childbirth. There is hereby affirmed as one of the principal objectives of the social policy of the State, the constant reduction of infant mortality and a sound development of children. The institution of family property holdings (bien de familia) is hereby declared to be of the highest social interest. The State shall stimulate family savings and the establishment of cooperatives for credit, production, distribution, consumption, and any others that are beneficial. 15. The State shall continue the progressive development of social security, in such a way that everyone shall eventually enjoy adequate protection against unemployment, illness, disability, and old age. 16. The State shall give protection and assistance to old people, in the manner prescribed by law, in order to preserve their health and ensure their wellbeing. 17. The State shall provide social aid to the poor. This assistance shall include food, clothing, and where possible, adequate housing. 18. The State shall endeavor to improve the food supply, housing, sanitary services, and hygienic conditions of working establishments; it shall seek means to prevent and treat epidemic and endemic diseases and all other diseases, as well as to provide free medical and hospital services for those who because of scanty resources are in need of them. 19. Married couples may make marital agreements freely or choose any system recognized by law, which shall always include a system of separate property and a statement as to what system shall govern in the absence of special stipulations, it being understood that the following principles are inherent in a system

of separate property: a) that each spouse shall retain ownership, administration, enjoyment and free disposition of his or her property; b) that any renunciation by the wife of the right to recover the administration of property conferred on her husband is void; and c) that if after ten years of marriage under a separate property system one spouse dies, his or her creditors, heirs, legatees, or assigns may not under any pretext take action against the surviving spouse for the recovery or restitution of property. 20. Every person has the right to exclude from his estate, by a declaration of unworthiness, any of his descendants who have performed acts obviously prejudicial to his reputation or dignity, or who have committed acts contrary to public or private morals that might dishonor the good name of the family. Paragraph I. The law may add other grounds of unworthiness and must affirm that in all cases, the judgment rendered by the appropriate Court of First Instance may not be appealed but that the father may, by subsequent legal act or by provision in his will, annul the decision rendered. Paragraph II. The law shall regulate the procedure to be followed to obtain a declaration of exclusion from an estate on grounds of unworthiness. Art. 9. No one may be compelled to do what the law does not command nor prevented from doing what the law does not prohibit. Art. 10. The enumeration contained in article 8 is not restrictive and therefore does not exclude the existence of other rights of the same kind. Title III The Concordat Art. 11. The relationship between the Church and the State is regulated by the Concordat between the Holy See and the Dominican Republic, in conformity with the Law of God and the Catholic tradition of the Dominican Republic. Title IV Political Rights Section I Nationality Art. 12. The following are Dominicans: 1. Persons who at present enjoy that status by virtue of former Constitutions and laws. 2. All persons born in the territory of the Republic, with the exception of the legitimate children of foreigners resident in the Republic as diplomatic repre sentatives or in transit through the country.

3. All persons born abroad of a Dominican father or mother, provided that they have not acquired foreign nationality in accordance with the laws of their country of birth, or in the event that they have acquired it, that after attaining political age or at the latest within one year after attaining civil age, as determined by Dominican law, they shall, by a sworn statement before a public official commissioned by the Executive Power, declare their intention of retaining Dominican nationality.
4. Naturalized persons. The law shall provide the conditions and formalities required for naturalization, establishing privileged naturalization for those foreigners who merit the waiving of the requirements ordinarily necessary to obtain Dominican nationality. Paragraph: No Dominican can claim the status of foreigner by naturalization or on any other grounds. The law may apply sanctions for those who, being Dominicans, claim the possession of foreign nationality. Nevertheless, a Dominican woman married to a foreigner may acquire the nationality of her husband. Section II Citizenship Art. 13. All Dominicans of either sex over eighteen years of age and those who are or have been married, although under that age, are citizens. Art. 14. The rights of citizens are: 1) The right to vote; 2) The right to hold elective office, under the restrictions indicated in this Constitution. Art. 15. The rights of citizenship are lost: against it; 1) By bearing arms against the Republic or lending aid to any attack

2) By participating in acts or undertakings intended to overthrow the legally constituted government or attacking the person of the Chief of State or of officials who by law enjoy the same prerogatives; 3) By sentence to criminal punishment, until rehabilitation; 4) By judicial interdiction, while it is in effect; 5) By accepting, while in Dominican territory, a function or employment from any foreign government, without prior authorization by the Executive Power; 6) By having adopted another nationality. Paragraph. In the last two cases citizenship may so provides and in the manner indicated therein.

be reacquired if the law

Title V Sovereignty Art. 16. Sovereignty resides inherently in the people and is exercised through the intermediary of the powers recognized by the present Constitution. Title VI Section I The Legislative Power Art. 17. All the legislative powers conferred by the present Constitutionare entrusted to a Congress of the Republic consisting of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. Art. 18. The election of both Senators and Deputies shall be by direct vote. Art. 19. The office of Senator and that of Deputy are incompatible with any other public office or employment. Art. 20. When vacancies occur in the Senate or Chamber of Deputies they shall be filled by the corresponding Chamber, which shall choose the substitute from a list of three names submitted by the appropriate organ of the political party to which the Senator or Deputy whose seat is vacant belonged. Art. 21. The list of three names must be submitted to the corresponding Chamber within thirty days after the vacancy occurs, if Congress is in session; and in the event that it is not, within thirty days after it convenes. If the thirty days shall have elapsed and the corresponding party organ has not submitted a list, the corresponding. Chamber shall make the designation without restriction. Section II The Senate Art. 22. The Senate shall be composed of members elected at the rate of one for each Province and the National District and their term of office shall be five years. Art. 23. To be a Senator one must be a Dominican in full possession of civil and political rights and be at least twenty-five years of age. Paragraph: Naturalized persons may not be elected Senators until five, years after they have acquired nationality and provided they have resided in the country for the two years preceding their election. Art. 24. The exclusive powers of the Senate are: 1. To elect the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Courts of Appeal, the Land Tribunals, the Courts of First Instance, the Judges of Instruction, the Justices of Peace, and their Alternates, and judges of any other courts of a judicial nature created by law.

2. To elect the members of the Accounting Commission (Camara de Cuentas). 3. To approve or not the diplomatic appointments submitted by the Executive Power. 4. To try impeachments preferred by the Chamber of Deputies against public officials elected for a specific term, on grounds of bad conduct or offenses in the exercise of their functions. In impeachment cases, the Senate cannot impose other penalties than those of removal from office or of disqualification from all offices of trust, honor or remuneration in the Republic. The convicted person, however, shall remain subject to indictment and trial according to law. The Senate cannot pronounce condemnatory sentence unless approved by a vote of at least three fourths of its entire membership. The provisions contained in this article do not exclude, with respect to members of the Judicial Power, the disciplinary authority of the Supreme Court of Justice. Section III The Chamber of Deputies Art. 25. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of members elected every five years by the people of the Provinces and the National District at the rate of one for every sixty thousand inhabitants or fraction greater than thirty thousand. Paragraph: No Province shall have less than two Deputies. Art. 26. To be a Deputy one must be a Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights and have attained twenty-five years of age. Paragraph: Naturalized persons may not be elected Deputies until five years after acquiring nationality and provided they have resided in the country for two years preceding their election. Art. 27. The Chamber of Deputies has exclusive power to exercise the right to impeach public officials before the Senate in the cases specified in section 4 of article 24. The impeachment cannot be made without the vote of three-fourths of the total membership of the Chamber. Section IV Provisions Common to Both Chambers Art. 28. The Chambers shall meet together as a National Assembly in the cases indicated in the Constitution, and there must be present for this purpose more than one half of the members of each Chamber. Decisions shall be taken by absolute majority vote.

Art. 29. Each Chamber shall regulate its internal proceedings and the conduct of its own business; being authorized under the rules of discipline to impose punishments on its members in proportion to the offense committed. Art. 30. The Senate and Chamber of Deputies shall hold their sessions separately, except when they meet in National Assembly. Paragraph: They may also meet jointly to receive the message of the President of the Republic and the reports of the Secretaries of State, to which article 54 refers, and to celebrate commemorative acts and others not related to the legislative powers of each Chamber nor those indicated in this Constitution as exclusive to either one of them. Art. 31. In each Chamber the presence of at least more than half of its members shall be necessary for the validity of its deliberations. Decisions shall be taken by an absolute majority of votes except in matters previously declared of urgency, which shall be decided by a two-thirds vote. Art. 32. The members of both Chambers shall enjoy the fullest penal immunity for the opinions they express in sessions. Art. 33. No Senator or Deputy may be deprived of his liberty during the legislative term without the authorization of the Chamber to which he belongs, except in the case of his being apprehended at the moment of committing a crime. In all cases the Senate or Chamber of Deputies, or, if they are not in session or there is no quorum, any member thereof may demand that a member who has been detained, arrested, imprisoned, or in any other way deprived of his liberty, shall be set free during the legislative period or any portion thereof. To this end a requisition shall be made by the President of the Senate or of the Chamber, or by the Senator or Deputy, as the case may be, to the Attorney General of the Republic; and if it becomes necessary, the liberating order shall be given directly, in which case assistance may be requested and must be rendered by every depositary of the public force. Art. 34. The Chambers shall meet regularly on February 27 and August 16 of each year, and each legislative session shall continue ninety days, which maybe extended for sixty days more. Paragraph: Extraordinary sessions shall be at, the call of the Executive Power. Art. 35. On August 16 of each year each Chamber shall name from its membership a President, a Vice President, and two Secretaries for the term of one year. Paragraph I. Each Chamber shall designate its auxiliary employees, who shall remain in their positions as long as they are not expressly removed. Paragraph II. The President of the Senate and of the Chamber of Deputies shall have disciplinary powers during the sessions; and they shall represent their. respective Chamber in all legal acts. Art. 36. Whenever the Chambers meet in National Assembly or in joint session, the presidency shall be assumed by the President of the Senate; the

vice-presidency shall be held by the person who at the time presides over the Chamber of Deputies, and the secretariat by the persons who at the time are the Secretaries of the two Chambers. Paragraph I. In the event of a temporary or permanent lack of a President of the Senate, the National Assembly or joint session shall be presided over by the President of the Chamber of Deputies until a new President is elected for the Senate. Paragraph II. In the event of a temporary or permanent lack of the President of the Senate and of the President of the Chamber of Deputies, an Assembly or joint session shall be presided over by the Vice President of the Senate or in his default, by the Vice President of the Chamber of Deputies. Art. 37. It is the duty of the National Assembly to examine the election returns for President and. Vice President of the Republic, to announce the results, and when called upon, to administer their oaths of office, accept of reject their resignations, and to exercise the powers conferred by articles 52 and 59. Title VII The Congress Art. 38. The following are the powers of the Congress: 1. To levy taxes or general contributions and to determine the legal method of their collection and disbursement. 2. To approve or disapprove, on the basis of the report of the Accounting Commission, the statement of collections and expenditures of the revenues that the Executive Power must submit to. 3. To take cognizance of observations that the Executive Power may make concerning the laws. 4. To determine suitable measures for the conservation and increase of the national property, and for the alienation of property in the private domain of the nation, except as provided in item 9 of article 54 and article 94, 5. To determine all matters relating to the preservation of ancient monuments and to the acquisition of all kinds of prehistoric and historical objects that constitute the national archeology. 6. To create or abolish Provinces, Municipalities, or other political divisions of the territory, and to determine all matters relating to their boundaries and organization. 7. To declare a state of siege, in the event of disturbance of the public peace or public disaster, and to suspend, where either of these exist, and for their duration, the human rights proclaimed in article 8, items 2, letters (b), (c), (d), and (e), 7, 8, 9, and 12. 8.. In the event the national sovereignty is exposed to serious or imminent danger, the Congress may declare that a state of national emergency exists,

suspending the human rights, with the exception of the inviolability of life as affirmed in item 1 of article 8, of this Constitution. If the Congress is not in session, the President of the Republic may take the same measure, and shall convoke Congress to inform it of the state of emergency and the measures he has taken. 9. To make all laws pertaining to immigration.

10. To increase or reduce the number of Courts of Appeal, and to create or abolish regular or special courts. 11. To create or abolish courts for hearing and deciding contentious administrative matters and to provide for their organization and jurisdiction. 12. To vote extraordinary public expenditures for which the Executive Power asks an appropriation. 13. To raise loans on the credit of the Republic through the medium of the Executive Power. 14. To approve or disapprove international treaties and conventions negotiated by the Executive Power. 15. To legislate on all matters concerning the public debt. 16. To declare by law the necessity of amending the Constitution. 17. To grant authorization to the President of the Republic to leave the country, if the absence is to be more than thirty days. 18. To interpellate the Secretaries of State on matters within their competence, upon authorization by the Executive Power. 19. To examine annually all acts of the Executive Power, and to approve them if they conform to the Constitution and the laws. 20. To approve or reject contracts submitted by the President of the Republic in conformity with item 9 of article 54 and with article 94. 21. To decree the transfer of the legislative Chambers from the Capital of the Republic, if justified by reasons of force majeure, or by a call by the President of the Republic. 22. To legislate on all matters that are not within the competence of another State Power or contrary to the Constitution. Title VIII The Enactment of Laws Art. 39. In the enactment of laws the following have the right of initiative: a) Senators and Deputies. b) The President of the Republic. c) The Supreme Court of Justice, in judicial matters.

Art. 40. Every bill introduced in one of the Chambers shall be submitted to two separate discussions, with an interval of at least one day between them; if a bill has previously been declared urgent, it may be discussed in two consecutive sessions. Art. 41. If a bill has been approved by either Chamber, it is passed to the other for discussion in due course, according to the same legal formalities. If the latter Chamber makes amendments, it must return the bill, with observations, to the Chamber in which it was introduced, and if these amendments are accepted, the law will be sent to the Executive Power; but if they are rejected, the bill is sent to the other Chamber, with observations, and if this body approves them, it is likewise sent as a law to the Executive Power; if the observations are rejected, thebill is considered as rejected. Art. 42. Every law approved by both Chambers shall be forwarded to the Executive Power. If the latter has no objections, he shall promulgate it within eight days after receipt and cause it to be published within fifteen days after promulgation; if he has objections, he shall return it to the Chamber from which it came within exactly eight days from the date on which it was sent to him, unless the matter has been declared urgent, in which case he shall return it within three days. The Chamber that has received his objections shall place them on the agenda of its next session and again discuss the bill. If, after this discussion, two-thirds of the total membership of this Chamber again approve it, it shall be forwarded to the other Chamber, and if this Chamber approves it by a like majority, it shall definitively be considered a law. Paragraph I. The President of the Republic is required to promulgate and publish the law within the periods indicated. Paragraph II. Bills that remain pending in either of the two Chambers at the close of a legislative session must follow constitutional procedure until converted into law in the following legislative session. If this is not done, the bill shall be considered as not introduced. Paragraph III. Every bill received in one Chamber, after being approved in the other, shall be placed on the agenda. Art. 43. Whenever a law is sent to the President of the Republic for promulgation and the time remaining before termination of the legislative session is less than that specified in the preceding article for objection, the legislature shall remain in session to take cognizance of the objections until the expiration of the period and of the procedure established in article 42. Art. 44. After their publication laws are binding on all the inhabitants of the Republic, if the legal time has elapsed for them to become known. Art. 45. All laws, decrees, regulations, and acts contrary to the present Constitution are null ipso jure. Art. 46. Bills rejected in one Chamber cannot be introduced in the other, or reintroduced in either Chamber, except in the following legislative term. Art. 47. Laws do not have a retroactive effect, except when they are favorable to one who is sub judice or serving a sentence.

Art. 48. All laws shall begin thus: "The National Congress, in the name of the Republic". Title IX The Executive Power Art. 49. The Executive Power is exercised by the President of the Republic, who shall be elected every five years by direct vote. Art. 50. The following are requirements to be President of the Republic: 1) To be Dominican by birth and the son of a native-born Dominican father or mother; 2) To have attained twenty-five years of age; 3) To have resided in the country during the five years immediately preceding election; 4) To be in full possession of civil and political rights. Art. 51. There shall be a Vice President of the Republic, who shall be elected in the same manner and for the same term as the President and jointly with him. To be Vice President the same qualifications are required as to be President. Art. 52. The President and Vice President of the Republic, elected in regular elections, shall take their oaths of office on August 16 of the year of their election, the date on which the term of the outgoing incumbents must end. Whenever the President of the Republic, by reason of being outside the country or because of illness or any other reason of force majeure, cannot do so, the functions of President shall be exercised, temporarily, by the Vice President elect of the Republic. In the event of permanent default of the President elect of the Republic without his having taken the oath of office, the Vice President elect shall replace him and this replacement shall last until the National Assembly, consisting of the Senators and Deputies elected with the President, shall designate the definitive President of the Republic, at a session to be held on August 16 and which may notadjourn or declare a recess until the election has taken place. If the Vice President elect cannot take the oath of the Presidency, in the cases indicated relative to the temporary or permanent default of the President elect of the Republic, because he is outside the country or due to illness or other reason of force majeure, the Presidency of the Republic shall be exercised temporarily by the person elected by the Senate at its first meeting, which must take place on August 16, to exercise the functions of President of the Supreme Court of Justice. In the event of the definitive default of both the Presidentelect and Vice President elect of the Republic, prior to August 16, the National Assembly, consisting of the Senators and Deputies elected with the President, shall meet on August 16 to designate a new President of the Republic, at a meeting which may not adjourn or declare a recess until the election has taken place.

If the President elect and Vice President elect of the Republic are definitively in default without having taken the oath of office after August 16, the National Assembly shall meet within thirty days after the default occurred in order to designate a new President of the Republic in accordance with the requirements previously indicated. Until such designation is made, the Presidency of the Republic shall be exercised by the person elected by the Senate to assume the functions of President of the Supreme Court of Justice, and in default of the latter, by the person who occupied the Presidency of the Supreme Court of Justice at the close of the previous term. Art. 53. The President and Vice President of the Republic, before taking office, shall take the following oath before the National Assembly or before any pub lic official or employee: "I swear by God, by my country, and by my honor, to comply with and enforce the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, to support and defend its independence, to respect its rights, and to faithfully fulfill the duties of my office." Art. 54. The President of the Republic is the head of the public administration and the Supreme Commander of all armed forces of the Republic. The powers and duties of the President are: 1. Except as provided in the paragraph of article 58, to create or abolish the Secretariats and Under-Secretariats of State and to appoint the Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of State and other public officials and employees whose appointment is not vested in any other power or autonomous agency, to accept their •resignations and to remove them. 2. To promulgate and order publication of the laws and regulations and see to their faithful execution. To issue regulations, decrees, and instructions whenever necessary. 3. al revenues. To see to the proper collection and faithful expenditure of the nation-

4. To appoint, with the approval of the Senate, the members of the diplomatic corps, to accept their resignations and to remove them. 5. To receive foreign heads of State and their representatives. 6. To preside over all official acts of the Nation, to direct diplomatic negotiations, and to make treaties with foreign nations, which must be submitted to the approval of Congress, without which they have no validity and do not bind the Republic. 7. In the event of a disturbance of the public peace or of a public disaster, and if Congress is not in session, to declare a state of siege wherever the foregoing exist, and suspend the human rights , which pursuant to article 38, item 7, of this Constitution, Congress is permitted to suspend; and in the event that the national sovereignty is in serious and imminent danger, to declare a state of national emergency, with the effects and requirements indicated in item 8 of the same article.

8. To fill vacancies temporarily that occur among Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Courts of Appeal, the Land Tribunals, the Courts of First Instance, and among the Judges of Instruction, Justices of Peace, and in any other courts created by law, as well as among members of the Accounting Commission, when Congress is adjourned, with the obligation of informing the Senate of such appointments at the next legislative session, so that the latter may make them permanent. 9. To make contracts, submitting them to the approval of the National Congress whenever they contain provisions relating to the disposal of the national revenues, to the alienation of real property valued at more than ten thousand pesos gold, or to the raising of loans, or when they stipulate exemptions from taxes in general in accordance with article 94; and without such approval in all other cases. 10. To appoint the President and other members of the Administrative Council of the National District, and the Sindicos, Regidores, and alternates in municipal Ayuntamientos. 11. To issue or refuse navigation licenses. 12. To regulate the customs service, to the extent deemed appropriate. 13. To regulate, at all times, all matters concerning the armed forces of the Republic, to command them personally or through the person or persons he may designate to do so, to fix the number of these forces and to dispose of them for purposes of public service. 14. To take the necessary measures to provide for the legitimate defense of the Nation in case of actual or imminent armed attack on the part of a foreign nation, informing Congress of the measures adopted. 15. In the event of the foregoing 'circumstances, to cause the , arrest or expulsion of foreigners whose activities, in his judgment, are or could be harmful to the national interest. 16. To approve or disapprove the appointment and revocation of members of the Council of War, which by law are done by the Secretary of State for the Armed Forces. zones. coasts. 17. To regulate all matters relating to maritime, river, and military 18. To regulate all matters relating to the opening of ports and the sea-

19. To prohibit, when he deems it appropriate, the entry of foreigners into the national territory and to expel them whenever this is deemed appropriate to the public interest. 20. To change the place of his official residence whenever he deems it necessary. 21. To place before the National Congress, at the beginning of the regular legislative session on February 27 of each year, a Message, accompanied by

the reports of the Secretaries of State, in which he shall give an account of his administration during the preceding year. 22. To submit to the Congress, during the legislative session that begins August 16, the draft of the budget of revenues and law of public expenditures for the following year. 23. To grant or refuse authorization to Dominican citizens to hold foreign public offices and to accept and use decorations and titles granted by foreign governments. 24. To reject by a decree, with reasons,, the excise taxes (arbitrios) established by the Administrative Council of the National District or by the municipal governments (ayuntamientos). 25. To grant or refuse authorization to municipal governments to alienate real property, and to approve or disapprove contracts made by them when guaranteed by municipal real property or revenues. 26. To grant full or partial pardon, pure and simple or conditional, on February 27, August 16, September 24, and December 23. In special cases,he may exercise this power on dates others than those indicated in this section. Art. 55. The President of the Republic may not leave the country for more than thirty days without the authorization of the Congress. Art. 56. The President and the Vice President of the Republic cannot resign except before the National Assembly. Art. 57. In the event of a temporary or permanent default of the President of the Republic, he will be replaced by the Vice President. If the default is permanent, the replacement will last until the end of the presidential term. Paragraph: In like manner, by virtue of a presidential decree, the Vice President may temporarily exercise the Executive Power. Art. 58. In the event of a temporary default of the President and Vice Presi dent of the Republic, after having taken the oath of office, the Executive Power may be exercised during such default by the Secretary of State for the Armed Forces; in default of the latter, by the Secretary of State for the Interior, and in default of both of these, by the Secretary of State for the Presidency. In the event of a permanent default of the President and Vice President of the Republic, the Presidency shall be occupied for the time remaining until the end of the term, by the Secretary of State for the Armed Forces; in default of the latter, by the Secretary of State for the Interior, and in default of both of these, by the Secretary of State for the Presidency. Paragraph: These Secretariats of State are hereby established by the present Constitution and to perform the functions thereof the same qualifications shall be required as for President of the Republic. Art. 59. In the event of the default of all substitutes for President of the Republic as provided for in articles 57 and 58, the Executive Power shall be temporarily

assumed by the President of the Supreme Court of Justice who, within thirty days after assuming these functions, shall convoke the National Assembly to meet within the following fifteen days to elect a permanent substitute at a session which may not adjourn or recess until such election has taken place. In case the convocation is, not made within the aforesaid thirty days, the National Assembly shall meet ipso jure to conduct the election provided for above. Section II

The Secretaries of State
Art, 60. To conduct the business of the public administration there shall be the Secretariats of State established by the present Constitution and those that may be created by the President of the Republic. To be Secretary or Under-Secretary of State a person must be a Dominican in full exercise of his civil and political rights and must have attained twenty-five years of age, except as providedin the paragraph of article 58. Paragraph: Naturalized persons may not be Secretaries or Under-Secretaries of State until five years after they have acquired nationality. State. Art, 61. The Executive Power shall specify the powers of the Secretaries of

Title X Section I The Judicial Power Art. 62. The Judicial Power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice and by all other courts of a judicial nature created by this Constitution and the laws. Paragraph: Judicial officials may not hold any other public office or employment, except as provided in article 104. Section

II

The Supreme Court of Justice
Art. 63. The Supreme Court of Justice shall consist of at least seven Judges; but it may sit, deliberate, and render judgments validly with a quorum determined by the law that shall regulate its organization. Paragraph I. In electing the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice the Senate shall determine which of them is to occupy the Presidency and shall designate a first and second substitute to replace the President in the event of his default or impediment.

Paragraph IL In the event of the termination of service of a Judge who has been designated for one of the above-mentioned positions, the Senate shall elect a new Judge for , the same position or assign the rank to another Judge. Art. 64. In order to be a Judge of the Supreme Court of Justice it is necessary: 1. 2. 3. To be a Dominican by birth; To be in full possession of civil and political rights; To be a member of the bar (licenciado) or doctor of law;

4. To have practiced the legal profession for eight years; or for the same period, to have held a position as Judge of a Court of Appeal, Judge of First Instance or Judge of a Land Court, or a representative of the Public Ministry before such courts. The periods of law practice and of holding judicial offices are cumulative. Art. 65. The Public Ministry shall be represented before the Supreme Court by the Attorney General (Procurador General) of the Republic, personally or through such substitutes as may be created by law, and he shall have the same rank as the President of the Court, with the powers conferred by law. The Attorney General of the Republic must be a Dominican and must have the same qualifications as are required to be a Judge of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 66. The Supreme Court of Justice, without prejudice to other powers conferred by law, has exclusive power: 1. To take cognizance in first and last instance of actions against the President and Vice President of the Republic, Senators, Deputies, Secretaries of State, Under-Secretaries of State, Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General of the Republic, Judges and Attorneys General of the Courts of Appeal, State Attorney before the Land Courts, Judges of the Superior Land Court, and members of the Diplomatic Corps. 2. To hear appeals of cassation, in conformity with the law.

3. To hear in last instance cases in which the jurisdiction in first instance pertains to the Courts of Appeal. 4. To exercise the highest disciplinary authority over all members of the Judicial Power, even to the extent of imposing suspension or dismissal, in the manner prescribed by law. 5. To transfer from one jurisdiction to another, provisionally or permanently, whenever deemed appropriate, Judges of First Instance, Judges of Original Jurisdiction of the Land Courts, Judges of Instruction, and Justices of Peace. 6. To declare the cancellation, or suspension of exequatur for the practice of professions, in conformity with the law.

Section HE The Courts of Appeal Art. 67. There shall be at least three Courts of Appeal throughout the Republic; the number of judges to compose these courts, as well as the judicial districts corresponding to each court, shall be determined by law. Art. 68. To be a Judge of a Court of Appeal it is required: 1. 2. 3. To be a Dominican; To be in full possession of civil and political rights; To be a member of the bar (licenciado) or a doctor of law;

4. To have practiced the profession of law for four years or to have held, for the same period, the position of Judge of First Instance or Judge of Original Jurisdiction in a Land Court, or representative of the Public Ministry before Courts of First Instance. The periods of practicing law and holding judicial positions are cumulative. Art. 69. In each Court of Appeal the Public Ministry is represented by an Attorney General or by such substitutes as the law may create, all of whom must meet the same requirements as Judges of these Courts. Art. 70. The Courts of Appeal have the following powers: 1. To hear appeals from decisions handed down by Courts of First Instance. 2. To hear in first instance cases instituted against Judges of First Intance, Judges of Original Jurisdiction of the Land Courts, Judges of Instruction, Fiscal Attorneys, and Governors of Provinces. 3. To hear any other matters that may be determined by law. Section N The Land Courts Art. 71. The powers of the Land Courts shall be determined by law. Paragraph: To be President or Judge of the Superior Land Court, the same qualifications are required as to be a Judge of a Court of Appeal, and to be a Judge of Original Jurisdiction, the same qualification as to be a Judge of First Instance. Section V Courts of First Instance Art. 72. In each judicial district there shall be a Court of First Instance, with such powers as may be conferred on them by law.

Paragraph: The law shall determine the number of judicial districts, the number of judges to compose the Courts of First Instance, and the number of sections (cámaras) into which they shall be divided. Art. 73. To be a Judge of First Instance one must be a Dominican, be in full possession of civil and political rights, and be a member of the bar or doctor of law. Art, 74. To be a Fiscal Attorney or Judge of Instruction the same qualifications are required as those of a Judge of First Instance.

Section VI Justices of the Peace Art. 75. In the National District and in each Municipality there shall be such Justices of the Peace as are necessary, according to law. Art. 76, To be a Justice of the Peace or Alternate one must be a Dominican in full possession of civil and political rights. They shall have such powers as are specified by law and shall be subject to the qualifications prescribed therein.

Title XI Accounting Commission Art. 77. There shall be a permanent Accounting Commission, composed of at least five members, elected by the Senate from lists submitted by the Executive Power. Art. 78. Its powers shall be, in addition to those conferred by law: 1. To examine the general and special accounts of the Republic.

2. To submit to Congress in the first regular legislative term a report concerning the accounts of the previous year. Art. 79. The, members of the Accounting Commission shall hold office for five years. Art. 80. To be a member of the Accounting Commission one must be a Dominican in full possession of civil and political rights and have attained twenty-five years of- age.

Title XII The National District and the Municipalities Art. 81. The government of the. National District shall be vested in an organ known as the Administrative Council of the National District, with the powers, functions, and duties indicated by law. The President and the members of the Council shall be appointed and removed by the Executive Power.

Art. 82. The government of the Municipalities shall be entrusted to municipal councils (Ayuntamientos), whose Sindicos, Regidores and their alternates shall be appointed and removed by the Executive Power. Paragraph: The municipal councils are independent in the exercise of their powers, save for those restrictions and limitations established in the Constitution and the laws. They may impose excise taxes with the approval required by law. Art. 83. The law shall determine the conditions necessary for holding the offices indicated in articles 81 and 82. Adult foreigners may hold these offices, under conditions prescribed by law, provided they have resided more than one year in the corresponding jurisdiction. Title XIII Administration of the Provinces Art. 84. There shall be in each Province a Civil Governor appointed by and removable by the Executive Power. Paragraph: A Governor must be a Dominican, over twenty-five years of age, and in full possession of civil and political rights; Art. 85. The organization and administration of the Provinces, as well as the powers and duties of the Civil Governors, shall be determined by law.

Title XIV The Electoral Assemblies Art. 86. All citizens have the right to vote with the following exceptions: 1. Those who have lost their rights as citizens in accordance witharticle 15 of this Constitution. 2. Members of the armed forces and of the police.

Art. 87. The Electoral Assemblies shall meet ipso jure three months before the expiration of the constitutional term and shall proceed to exercise the functions prescribed by the Constitution and by law. In cases of extraordinary convocation they shall meet not more than sixty days after the date of the law of convocation. Art. 88. The Electoral Assemblies shall elect the President and Vice President of the Republic, the Senators and Deputies, and any other official specified by law. Art. 89. Elections shall be held by direct vote and with representation of minorities when more than one candidate is to be elected, in accordance with rules fixed by law.

Art. 90. Elections shall be conducted , by a Central Electoral Board and by boards subordinate thereto, which shall have the power of judging and regulating in accordance with the law. Paragraph: The Central Electoral Board shall assume the direction and command of the public forces in those places where the balloting takes place.

Title XV The Armed Force Art. 91. The Armed Force is essentially obedient and in no case has the right to deliberate. The purpose for which it was established is to defend the independence and integrity of the Republic, and to maintain public order, the Constitution, and the laws. Art. 92. The conditions under which a citizen may be a member of the Armed Forces are set forth in the law creating them.

Title XVI General Provisions Art. 93. All usurped authority is without effect and its acts are null andvoid. Any decision made through the requisition of the armed forces is null and void. Art. 94. No exemption shall be recognized, and no exoneration from, reduction in, or limitation on fiscal or municipal duties, taxes, or charges shall be granted to private persons, except by virtue of a law. However, private persons may acquire, through concessions that the law authorizes, or through contracts approved by the National Congress, the irrevocable right to benefit, for such time as the concession or contract stipulates, and by fulfilling the obligations that either may impose upon them, from exemptions, exonerations, reductions, or limitations of fiscal or municipal duties, taxes or charges incidental to specific works or enterprises of public benefit to which it is considered advisable to attract the investment of new capital for the development of the national economy or for any other object of social interest. Art. 95. No expenditure of public funds shall be valid if not authorized by law or ordered by a competent official. Art. 96. A general accounting of the receipts and expenditures of the Republic during the previous year shall be published annually in the month of April. Art. 97. The national monetary unit is the gold peso. Paragraph I. Only notes issued by a single, autonomous issuing entity shall have free and legal circulation and effect; its capital shall be the property of the State, provided that such notes are completely backed by reserves in gold and by other real and effective securities, in the proportions and under the conditions prescribed

by law, and under the unlimited guarantee of the State. Nevertheless, the law may maintain in force the provisions that now regulate the circulation of foreign notes, and it may restrict, suspend, or reestablish the terms of these provisions. Paragraph II. Metallic coins shall be issued in the name of the State through the medium of the same issuing agency and they will be placed in circulation only to replace an equivalent value in notes. The legal tender value of metallic Loins now in circulation and those that may be issued in the future shall be determined by law. Paragraph III. Regulation of the monetary and banking system of the country shall be the function of the issuing agency, the superior organ of which shall be a Monetary Board, composed of members who shall be appointed and who may be removed solely according to law, and who shall be responsible for the faithful fulfilment of their duties in conformity with rules established by law. Paragraph IV. The issuance or circulation of paper money or of any other monetary unit not authorized by this Constitution is prohibited, whether by the State or by any other public or private person or entity. Art. 98. Any modification in the legal monetary or banking system shall require the approval of two thirds of the whole membership of each Chamber unless it has been initiated by the Executive Power, at the proposal of the Monetary Board or with its approval. Art. 99. Mineral deposits belong to the State and may be exploited by private persons only through concessions or contracts that are granted under such conditions as the law may specify. The State may transfer or assign the ownership of specific deposits. Art. 100. The national holidays are February 27, the anniversary of Independence; August 16, the anniversary of the Restoration; and September 24, the anniversary of the Financial Restoration of the Republic. Art. 101. The national flag is composed of ultramarine blue and vermillion red, in alternating quarters, placed in such a way that the blue is toward the upper part of the staff, separated by a white cross half the height of one quarter in width, and bearing in the center the coat of arms of the Republic. The merchant flag is the same as the national flag, but without the coat of arms. Art. 102. The coat of arms of the Republic has the same colors as the national flag, placed in the same manner; in the center it bears the book of the Gospels, open, with a cross thereon, both issuing out of a trophy consisting of two lances and four national flags without coat of arms, on either side; it bears a laurel branch on the left tide and a palm branch on the right; it is crowned with an ultramarine blue ribbon bearing the legend: Dios, Patria, y Libertad, and at the base another ribbon, vermillion red in color with these words: Republica Dominicana. The arms shall be oblong in shape, with the upper angles salient and the lower angles rounded, the center of the base of which terminates in a point, and so placed that if a horizontal line is drawn uniting the two verticals of the oblongs from where the lower angles begin, a perfect square results. Paragraph: The law shall regulate the use and dimensions of the national flag and arms.

Art. 103. A person appointed to public office must take an oath to respect the Constitution and the laws, and to discharge his commission faithfully. This oath may be given before any public official or functionary. Art. 104. No public office or employment shall be incompatible with honorary or teaching positions. Art. 105. The term of all elected officials, whatever the date of their election, ends uniformly on August 16 every five years, the date on which the constitutional term begins; and consequently, they must have been reelected in order to hold office validly. Paragraph: Whenever an elected official ceases to hold office because of death, resignation, dismissal, disqualification, or other cause, the person who replaces him shall remain in office until the completion of the term. Art. 106. The organization of political parties and associations is unrestricted, in accordance with the law providing their aims conform with the principles affirmed in article 2 of this Constitution. Paragraph: It is recognized that the Dominican Party, organized originally from elements coming from former political parties and associations that disintegrated because of a lack of any constructive patriotic orientation, has been and is a civilizing agent of the Dominican people, that in the social sphere it has evolved toward the formation of a definite labor consciousness, toward the incorporation of the rights of women into the civil and political life of the Republic, and toward other great civic triumphs. Art. 107. Without prejudice to the provisions of article 24, item 4, of this Constitution, the President or Vice President of the Republic elect or in office cannot be deprived of their liberty during their term. The patrimony of any persons who have held or who are holding the office of President or Vice President of the Republic, and their widows and heirs, shall have the fullest protection of the State, and therefore, may never be subject to prosecution, attachment, seizure, expropriation, or dispossession, in whole or in part, by action of either public authorities or private persons. Any action of any kind in violation of this provision shall be utterly null and void and shall in no way impair the patrimony of the persons mentioned above. Art. 108. The law on public expenditures shall be divided into chapters that correspond to the different branches of the administration, and funds may not be transferred from one chapter to another, or from one budget item to another, except by a law. This law, if not initiated by the Executive Power, must have the vote of two thirds of the full membership of each Chamber. Paragraph I. No law that orders or authorizes payment or that creates a pecuniary obligation against the State, shall have effect or validity, unless the law itself creates special funds for its execution or provides for payment to be made from estimated receipts for the year and there remains available a sufficient proportion of these receipts to do so at the time the law is published. Paragraph II. Congress cannot legally vote any expenditure unless it is included in the law on public expenditures submitted by the Executive Power, under.

article 54 of this Constitution, or unless it is requested by the Executive Power after submitting such a bill, except in the event that the law ordering such expenditure is approved by two thirds of the total membership of each Chamber; and the foregoing provisions are still governed by the general rule set forth in the first paragraph of this article. Paragraph III. Congress may not change items in appropriation bills or in the law on public expenditures submitted by the Executive Power, except by a twothirds vote of the full membership of each Chamber; and in accordance with the provisions contained in the first paragraph of this article. Paragraph IV. If for any reason Congress adjourns without voting the budget of receipts and the law on public expenditures, the law on public expenditures of the previous year shall continue in force. Paragraph V. When Congress is adjourned, the Executive Power may provide by decree-law for the transfer of funds within the law on public expenditures that are required for urgent needs of administration, as well as for the creation or elimination of administrative offices or public services concerned with that law, with the obligation of submitting these provisions to Congress for approval at the next legislative session. In the same manner, in the case provided for in this paragraph, he may also disburse funds necessary to meet expenses of the public administration, rendering an account thereof to Congress when it meets. Paragraph VI. The State guarantees, without limitation of any kind, all pecuniary engagements legally contracted by the public administration or by its autonomous agencies. Consequently, the shares, cedulas, bonds, and other obligations issued or contracted by State-owned banks shall enjoy the State's unlimited guarantee at all times and they cannot be cancelled without previous payment in full. Art. 109. Justice shall be administered without cost throughout the territory of the Republic. Art. 110. The development and beautification of the cities of the country are declared a task of high national interest. Consequently, the State shall allot cash funds and provide for works that are necessary and useful to the community. Art. 111. Titles that establish differences between citizens shall not be recognized in the Republic. But titles of honor that the National Congress bestows or has bestowed on citizens who render or who have rendered eminent services to the Republic to ensure its peace and well-being, or to ensure or restore its freedom and independence shall be valid and lifelong. Art. 112. It is hereby declared that the Era of Trujillo, beginning on May 16, 1930, constitutes in Dominican History the period in which nationalism has been consolidated and the Dominican people have realized their most legitimate aspirations of peace and economic and social well being, as a result of the governing task of Generalisimo Doctor Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina, to whom there is solemnly consecrated in this Constitution the title of honor of Padre de la Patria Nueva, bestowed on him by vote of the Congress of the Republic, in recognition of the eminent services rendered to the Fatherland. In like manner, there are hereby consecrated as national monuments, all statues, busts and monuments which the gratitude of the people has erected or may erect in the future to honor their Padre de la Patria Nueva or to commemorate the deeds that have achieved the grandeur of the Era of Trujillo.

Art. 113. There is hereby declared as a monument to the international tradition of the Republic the Trujillo-Hull Treaty of 1940, by virtue of which the Dominican Nation recovered the absolute exercise of its powers as a free and independent State. The negotiation of international financial conventions of any kind that directly or indirectly affect the national sovereignty are hereby proscribed.

Title XVI Constitutional Amendments Art. 114. The Constitution cannot be amended except when two thirds of the members of both Chambers so agree. Art. 115. Amendment of the Constitution shall be ordered by a law which cannot be vetoed by the Executive Power and which shall provide for a meeting of a Revisory Assembly to pass upon the amendment. The articles whose amendment is proposed shall be stated in the law of convocation. Art, 116. The election of representatives to the Revisory Assembly shall be by direct vote of the people of the National District and the Provinces, in the same proportion as for the election of Deputies. Paragraph I. The National District and every Province shall have at least two representatives. Paragraph II. The same qualifications are necessary to be elected a member of the Revisory. Assembly as for being a Deputy. Paragraph III. Representatives in the Assembly shall be entitled to the same immunities as members of the Legislative Chambers while exercising their functions. Paragraph N. In the Revisory Assembly the presence of at least more than half the representatives shall be necessary for the validity of its deliberations. Decisions shall be taken by an absolute majority of votes. Paragraph V. Vacancies in the Revisory Assembly shall be filled by the Assembly at its first session, if the vacancy occurred prior thereto; if afterwards, the election shall be held not later than the session following occurrence of the vacancy. The vacancy is to be filled from a list of three submitted by the appropriate organ of the political party to which the previous representative in the vacant position belonged. If the list is not submitted in due time, the Assembly shall make its selection freely. Art. 117. No amendment shall be made relative to the form of Government, which must always be civil, republican, democratic, and representative. Art. 118. The Constitution may be amended only in the manner indicated therein, and it may never be suspended or annulled by any power or authority nor by popular acclamation.

TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 1. The first Vice President of the Republic who is elected after the present constitutional revision takes effect will be the one chosen at the next regular elections. Until this election is held, the temporary or permanent presidential replacement or succession shall be governed by the provisions of article 58. 2. The present law governing the Secretariats of State shall remain in force until the Executive Power enacts new provisions governing the powers thereof. GIVEN and proclaimed in the Meritorious City of San Cristobal, Province of Trujillo, Dominican Republic, this day the first of December of the year nineteen hundred and fifty-five, YEAR OF THE BENEFACTOR OF THE FATHERLAND, the 112th year of Independence, the 93rd of the Restoration, and the 26th of the Era of Trujillo.

