CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

ECUADOR
by GISBERT H. FLANZ & CAROL SERPA

Issued April 1971

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

We wish to express our thanks and appreciation to the Pan American Union for allowing us to reproduce their excellent translation of this Constitution.

© Copyright 1971 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION OF ECUADOR

PREAMBLE

The people of Ecuador, faithful to the democratic and republican tradition that inspired its birth as a State, set forth in this Constitution the basic principles that protect its inhabitants and guarantee their free coexistence, under a system of fraternity and social justice. They therefore invoke the protection of God, proclaim their unyielding adherence to the cause of universal peace and culture, declare that the rights of the human person are inalienable, and condemn every form of individual or collective despotism.

TITLE I

Basic Precepts

The Ecuadorian nation, in order to fulfill its historic destiny, Article 1. constitutes a sovereign, democratic, and unitary state. Its government is republican and presidential, and therefore elective, representative, responsible, and alternating. Article 2. Sovereignty resides in the people, and is exercised by the organs of the public power. Every organ of the public power is responsible, and cannot Article 3. exercise functions other than those established by law. Article 4. Ecuadorians are equal before the law.

All inhabitants are subject to the legal order of the State, and Article 5. owe obedience to its authorities. The territory of the State is inalienable and irreducible. It Article 6. comprises that of the Royal Audiencia of Quito, as modified by treaties validly made, the adjacent islands, the Colón or Galapagos Archipelago, the territorial sea, the subsoil, and the respective airspace. Spanish is the official language of Ecuador; the flag, the coat of Article 7. arms, and the national anthem are those established by law.

1

Article 8.

The capital of Ecuador is the city of Quito.

The Ecuadorian State proclaims peace and cooperation as the Article 9. system of international coexistence and the juridical equality of states; it condemns the use or threat of force as a means of settling disputes, and repudiates the spoils of war as a source of law. It defends the solution of international conflicts by legal and peaceful methods, and declares that international law is the standard of conduct for states in their relations with one another. It further supports the international community and the stability and strengthening of its agencies, and within it, Ibero-American integration as an effective means to achieve the development of the community of peoples united by bonds of solidarity originating from their identity of origin and culture. Ecuador may form associations with one or more states for the promotion and defense of national and community interests. Article 10. It is a primary function of the State to establish social conditions in which the members of the community may enjoy the means necessary to the fulfillment of their purposes.
TITLE II Nationality

Article 11. Ecuadorians are such by birth or by naturalization. Article 12. Those born in the territory of Ecuador are Ecuadorians by birth. Article 13. The following persons born in foreign territory also are considered Ecuadorians by birth: 1. Children of Ecuadorian parents, or of an Ecuadorian father or mother, when one or both are in the service of Ecuador. 2. Children of parents or of a father or mother Ecuadorian by birth, temporarily absent from the country or in the service of an international organization of which Ecuador is a member. 3. Children of parents or of a father or mother Ecuadorian by birth, domiciled in foreign territory, unless they expressly renounce Ecuadorian nationality after reaching their majority. 4. Children of parents or of a father or mother Ecuadorian by naturalization, if, having been born in foreign territory, they indicate, between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one, their intention to be Ecuadorians. The rights of Ecuadorians referred to in this article are equal to those of
Ecuadorians born in the national territory. Article 14. The following are Ecuadorians by naturalization:

2

Those who have obtained Ecuadorian nationality from Congress for 1. outstanding services to the country. 2. Those who have obtained a certificate of naturalization.

Minors born abroad of foreign parents who later become naturalized 3. in Ecuador. When they attain the age of eighteen years they shall retain Ecuadorian nationality unless they expressly renounce it. Foreigners adopted by Ecuadorians, as long as they are minors. They 4. shall retain Ecuadorian nationality if they indicate, between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one, their intention to be Ecuadorians. Article 15. Neither marriage nor its dissolution alters nationality. The law shall provide for naturalization of the foreign spouse of a person having Ecuadorian nationality. Article 16. Those who have had Ecuadorian nationality prior to the issuance of the present Constitution shall continue to enjoy it. Those who have not acquired Ecuadorian nationality in accordance with previous constitutional provisions, but who could have acquired it in accordance with the provisions of Article 13 of the present Constitution, shall be considered Ecuadorians by birth. Article 17. Without the loss of their nationality of origin, and under a system of reciprocity, Ibero-Americans and Spaniards by birth shall be considered Ecuadorians by naturalization if they are domiciled in Ecuador and indicate their intention to be considered as such. Reciprocally, Ecuadorians shall not lose their nationality when they acquire another under the principle of dual nationality. Article 18. Juridical persons legally authorized for such purposes as the law may determine are considered Ecuadorian. Article 19. Ecuadorian nationality is lost: 1. 2. 3. 4. By treason to the country, judicially pronounced. By renunciation as provided in Article 13.3. By naturalization in another state, except as provided in Article 17. By cancellation of the certificate of naturalization as provided by law.

Article 20. Nationality may be recovered in accordance with the law.

TITLE

III

Citizenship

Article 21. Ecuadorian citizens are those over eighteen years of age who know how to read and write and therefore are in exercise of the political rights set forth in this Constitution. Article 22. The rights of citizenship are suspended:

3

1.

By conviction for offenses against freedom of suffrage.

By conviction, in the case of a magistrate, public official or employee, 2. for violation of a constitutional provision. By conviction for fraud in the handling of public funds, for the time 3. that the sentence runs. By failure to pay deficits shown in the accounts of public funds, for 4. duration of the delay. 5. By judicial interdiction.

By penal sentence imposed, for the time that the sentence runs, 6. except in the case of a misdemeanor. 7. 8. By insolvency declared to be fraudulent. In all other cases determined by the Constitution and the laws.

TITLE IV

Rights, Duties, and Guarantees

Chapter I

General Provisions Article 23. The State recognizes, guarantees, and fosters the rights of man, as an individual and as a member of the family and of other groups that promote the development of his personality. The law shall protect the freedom and rights of the individual against abuses by the public power and by private persons. Article 24. The State guarantees free access to culture and to social and economic advancement to all of its inhabitants; to Ecuadorian citizens, it guarantees effective participation in political activity. The law shall eliminate obstacles that hinder or limit certain sectors of the national population from the exercise of these rights. Article 25. There shall be no discrimination based on such distinctions as race, sex, filiation, language, religion, political opinion, or economic or social position. No prerogative shall be granted nor shall any obligation be imposed if it places some persons in a better or worse position than others. There are no hereditary honors or positions of employment, or personal privileges or rights. Honesty, ability, and other merits shall be the sole criteria for determining personal worth. Article 26. Any law, administrative regulation, or other provision that hinders the exercise of the rights guaranteed by this Constitution shall be null and void.

4

Article 27. The State, all other institutions of public law, and semipublic entities are obliged to indemnify private persons for injuries to their rights and property as a result of the operation of public services or of the acts of public officials and employees in the exercise of their functions. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the State and the other public entities mentioned therein shall enforce the responsibility of their officials and employees who, through malice or negligence, have injured the State or private persons. The penal responsibility of such officials and employees shall be determined by the competent judges.

Chapter II

Personal Rights Article 28. Without prejudice to the other rights deriving from the nature of the individual, the State guarantees: 1. 2. The right to life and to the means necessary for a decent existence. The inviolability of life; there is no death penalty.

3. Personal integrity; there is no torture, nor may drugs or other means that enervate the faculties of the person be employed, except for therapeutic purposes. 4. The right to honor and to personal and family privacy.

5. Freedom of opinion and of expression by any means of collective communication, provided that the law, morals, and personal honor are respected. This right shall be exercised taking into account that the primary objective of collective communications media is the defense of the national interests and the dissemination of culture, and that they should constitute a social service deserving of the respect of the State. No authority or official may suspend, close, seize, or impound publications, presses, or other means of collective communication. Neither shall their directors, editors, and other workers and assistants be prosecuted or imprisoned for crimes committed by such means, except by judicial sentence. Anonymous publications shall be subject to legal regulation. Every natural or juridical person has the right, as provided by law, to free redress for false or calumnious allegations or accusations made by collective communications media. 6. Free participation in the cultural life of the community and in scientific research.

5

7. The right to information and to free access to its sources, with no limitations other than the international security of the State and the private life of persons. 8. Freedom of religious belief and of individual or collective worship, in public or in private. 9. The inviolability of the home; no one may enter the home of another without his consent or without an order signed by a competent authority; without such an order, only in such cases as may be expressly determined by law. 10. The inviolability of correspondence and secrecy of telegraphic and telephone communications. It is forbidden to open or register papers, business records, letters, and other private documents, except in the cases and in the manner determined by law. Privacy shall be respected regarding matters outside the subject of registration or examination. Documents obtained in violation of this guarantee shall not be used as evidence. 11. Freedom of movement and residence in the national territory, as well as exit and return, for which no passport shall be required of Ecuadorians. 12. The right of petition; the magistrate, official, or authority receiving a petition is obligated to reply to it within thirty days, unless the law determines a special period. This right may be exercised individually or collectively, but never in the name of the people; so-called lockouts are forbidden and are declared punishable, as are strikes of public employees in violation of the law and those carried out by cities or regions as a means of petitioning the authorities. 13. The right of Ecuadorians and foreigners to their literary, artistic, and scientific works; the law shall regulate the exercise of this right, reconciling it with the social function inherent in cultural endeavor. 14. The exercise of occupations and professions, of agriculture, commerce, and industry, as provided by law. 15. The right to demand judicial protection against any violation of constitutional guarantees, without prejudice to the duty of the public power to see to the observance of the Constitution and the laws. 16. The privacy of the citizen with respect to his political and religious convictions; no authority may obligate him to testify concerning them, nor to molest him, except in the cases provided in the Constitution and the laws. 17. Freedom of assembly and association, without arms, for purposes not prohibited by law. 18. Personal freedom and security. Consequently:

a. Any order that subjects one person to another, absolutely or for an indefinite period, is null and void.

6

b.

Except in cases of compulsory support, there is no imprisonment for debts, costs, fees, taxes, fines, or other obligations of a civil nature. No one may be restrained for any act not expressly declared to be a violation by the law, nor suffer a penalty not established in the law. The violation, as well as the penalty, must be declared prior to the act. In case of conflict of two penal laws, the less severe one shall be imposed, even if it takes effect subsequent to the violation. No one may be punished without prior judgment, nor deprived of the right of defense at any stage of the proceedings, nor of the right to be the last heard. No one may be withdrawn from his regular judges nor judged by special commissions. No one shall be compelled to testify against himself under oath or duress in any matter in which he may incur penal responsibility, nor be obligated to testify in criminal proceedings against his spouse or relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. No one shall be deprived of liberty except in the manner and for the period that the law establishes, nor held incommunicado for more than twenty-four hours. Except in case of flagrante delicto, every deprivation of liberty shall be effected by an order signed by a competent authority, setting forth the legal cause. In cases of flagrante delicto, the judge or other authority ordering the arrest shall, within twenty-four hours, issue a signed order setting forth the legal reasons for the arrest. Anyone who considers his imprisonment or detention to be unconstitutional or illegal may demand a writ of habeas corpus. This right shall be exercised by himself or by another—without need for a written order—before the mayor or the president of the council having jurisdiction in that place, or before the person acting in place thereof. This authority shall order that the petitioner be brought before him immediately and that the order depriving him of liberty be exhibited, and the person in charge of the jail or place of detention shall obey this order. If the detained person is not brought before him or if the order is not exhibited or does not meet the requirements prescribed above, or if there is an error in the proceedings, or if, in the opinion of the mayor or president of the council, the petition for redress is justified, he shall order the immediate release of the petitioner. Anyone who disobeys such order shall, without further proceedings, be immediately dismissed from his office or position by the mayor or president of the council, who shall communicate the dismissal to the office of the comptroller general and to the authority that must see to his replacement.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

h.

7

The discharged employee may appeal the dismissal to the president of the superior court of the corresponding district, within twenty-four hours after notification of the discharge, but only after having placed the detained person at liberty. If the petition is not justified, it shall be dismissed. i. Punishments shall not violate human dignity, but should be directed at the rehabilitation of the convicted person. Humiliating treatment shall not be employed in the investigation of a violation. Innocence is presumed as long as there is no declaration of guilt according to law. The State shall endeavor to restore the honor of anyone accused, tried, or sentenced by judicial error or for other reasons.

j.

Chapter III The Family

Article 29. The State recognizes the family as the basic unit of society, and protects it equally with marriage and motherhood. Marriage is based on the free consent of the parties and on the essential equality of the spouses. The State shall support parents in the exercise of their paternal authority, and shall see to fulfillment of the mutual obligations of parents and children. Children, whether born in or out of wedlock, have the same rights with respect to name, upbringing, education, and inheritance. The law shall regulate matters pertaining to filiation, and shall facilitate investigation as to paternity. In registering births, no statement shall be required concerning the status of filiation. Article 30. The State shall protect the child from the moment of conception, and shall also protect the mother, regardless of their antecedents; it shall protect the minor while he is in a disadvantageous position, so that he may develop normally and with assurances of his moral integrity. It shall grant special consideration to large families, and shall provide for tax reductions and exemptions according to the number of children. Article 31. The State shall ensure the family moral, cultural, and economic conditions that favor the attainment of its purposes and permit it to enjoy a decent life.

8

Inalienable and unattachable family property rights (patrimonio familiar) are established, the amount and conditions of which shall be regulated by law. Article 32. The State shall see to the physical, mental, and moral health of minors and to their right to education and to home life. Minors shall be subject to special legislation, which shall be protective and nonpunitive.

Chapter IV

Education

Article 33. The State guarantees the right to an education that enables the person to live decently, to support himself, and to be useful to the community. The right to education includes the right to equal opportunity to develop one's natural talents in a profession, art, or trade, to the degree or level providing the best guarantee of his own welfare, for that of his dependents, and for the service of others. Article 34. The State shall provide and regulate education. It is the right and duty of parents to educate their children, and they therefore may choose the kind of education that shall be given to them. The State shall establish the laws, regulations, and programs to which public, municipal, and private education shall conform, seeking the coherent unity of the educational process. Article 35. The State guarantees freedom of education within moral limits and those of democratic and republican institutions. Public education is secular, meaning that the State, as such, neither teaches nor opposes any religion. Article 36. The object of education shall be the full development of the personality and shall teach respect for fundamental rights and liberties; it shall favor comprehension and tolerance between social and religious groups, and the maintenance of peace. On all levels of education special attention shall be paid to the moral and civic training of the students. Article 37. Elementary and basic education are compulsory; when public, they shall also be free. Article 38. In education, special attention shall be given to the rural dweller. Teachers and officials dealing with such persons should know Quechua and other vernacular languages.

9

In schools established in areas of predominantly indigenous populations, Quechua or the respective indigenous language shall be used, if necessary, in addition to Spanish, so that the student will gain a knowledge of national culture in his own language, and afterwards practice Spanish. Article 39. The State shall foster, establish, and maintain technical schools and special institutions for instruction in arts, trades, commerce, agriculture, and other remunerative occupations, according to the requirements of the regions and of the economic development and social progress of Ecuador. The State, in collaboration with private entities and at mutual expense, may found technical schools and other special establishments, and may entrust their operation to such entities. Article 40. The State shall devote its attention to the urgent elimination of illiteracy; the budget of the State shall be required to include items for this purpose. Article 41. In free institutions, whether public or private, supplies and social services shall be provided to those who need them. Article 42. Without prejudice to the appropriations provided in special laws to benefit private education, the legislature or, with its consent, the municipalities, whenever they deem such action appropriate, shall furnish aid to free private elementary and basic education. Article 43. Universities and technical schools are autonomous and are governed by law and by their own statutes; to make this autonomy effective, the law shall support the creation of university endowment funds. Their premises are inviolable, and forced entry may not be made except in the cases and under the conditions in which the dwelling of a person may be entered. The maintenance of their internal order and security are within the competence and responsibility of their authorities. The basic functions of the universities and technical schools are education, professional training, scientific research, the statement and study of the social, educational, and economic problems of the country, and contributing to national development. Article 44. Capable and deserving students have the right to attain the highest levels of study. The State shall make the exercise of this right possible through fellowships and other benefits to be awarded through competition. Article 45. All educational sectors of the country, public as well as private, shall be represented on national supervisory boards of education, as provided by law. Article 46. Stability and fair remuneration are guaranteed to teachers in all categories; the law shall regulate their appointment, promotion, transfer, and separation, in accordance with the characteristics of public and private education.

10

Chapter V

Property Article 47. The State recognizes and guarantees the right to private property, as long as it fulfills its natural social function. The law shall regulate its acquisition, use, enjoyment, and disposal, and shall facilitate the access of all to property. Article 48. The confiscation of property is prohibited; if this takes place, it shall cause no limitation or modification of the right of the injured party, and a summary action for damages shall originate against the authority that has ordered the confiscation and against the State. Fines, attachments, and penalties affecting the ownership of personal property shall be governed by law. Article 49. No one may be deprived of property rights nor of the possession of his property except by virtue of a judicial order or of expropriation, legally carried out, for reasons of public benefit or social interest. Only the State and other institutions of public law may order expropriation for reasons of public benefit or social interest, recognizing fair indemnification, except in cases in which the law does not provide such indemnification. Article 50. Only the authorities empowered by law may issue orders that obstruct or interfere with the freedom to contract for, transfer, or transmit property; any order in this respect that comes from any other authority shall have no effect and shall not be obeyed. Article 51. It is the duty of the State to correct the defects of the agrarian structure, in order to bring about the fair distribution of land, the most effective utilization of the soil, the expansion of the national economy, and the improvement of the standard of living of the rural dweller. To this end, it shall promote and carry out agrarian reform plans which shall be in harmony with the interests of social justice and of the economic and social development of the country, and shall eliminate precarious forms of land tenure. The owner of agrarian property is obligated to exploit it rationally and to assume responsibility for and personal supervision of its exploitation. The maximum and minimum areas of agrarian property shall be determined by law. Article 52. There shall be no real property that may be held inalienable or indivisible in perpetuity. Article 53. The right to make a will and the right to inherit are guaranteed, within the limits of the law.

11

Article 54. No private person may enrich himself with contributions from public investments. The owners of rural or urban property shall repay the value of the economic benefits obtained by virtue of such investments, as provided by law. Article 55. Lands having no owner shall be the property of the State, as well as agrarian lands, that, while they have an owner, are abandoned for more than eight consecutive years without legal cause. This ownership shall be imprescriptible, but the lands shall be awarded to private persons for purposes of agrarian reform and colonization. The following also belong to the State: the submarine base and the continental shelf, and the minerals or other substances forming deposits or concentrations of different composition from that of the soil. This ownership is also inalienable and imprescriptible; however, concessions may be granted for the reasonable exploration and exploitation of such minerals or substances, as provided by law. Article 56. The exploitation of natural resources, whoever may be their owners, shall be regulated in accordance with the needs of the national economy. Article 57. Property rights are guaranteed with respect to patents, trademarks, models, and commercial, agricultural, and industrial emblems or names, as provided by law. All national products shall bear labels noting their Ecuadorian origin. Article 58. The artistic and archeological wealth, together with the fundamental historical documents of the country, whoever may be their owners, constitute the cultural heritage of the nation and are under the control of the State, which may prohibit or regulate their disposal or exportation and may order such expropriation as it deems appropriate for their protection, as provided by law. Article 59. The State reserves the right to operate in certain economic activities to substitute for, foster, and supplement private initiative, without detriment to legitimate private interests. Enterprises operating public services that tend to become monopolies shall be nationalized as provided by law. Article 60. The State shall determine the territorial areas over which foreigners may not exercise ownership or carry out acts of possession.

Chapter VI

Labor and Social Security Article 61. The State guarantees to the inhabitants of Ecuador the right to work and to remuneration that permits them to live decently. It shall prevent unemployment in order to ensure this right.

12

No one shall be required to perform work, with or without remuneration, except as provided by law. In general, all work must be remunerated. Article 62. Work, which has a social function, is compulsory for all members of the community, consideration being given to conditions of age, sex, and health, and with freedom of choice. Article 63. The State guarantees the enterprise with respect to the community of labor, in that elements of an instrumental nature are subordinate to those pertaining to the human category, and all are subordinate to the common good. The social organization of the enterprise shall be fostered, without prejudice to the authority or the unity of management. Article 64. The State shall see that justice is observed in relations between employers and workers, that the dignity of workers is respected, and their responsibility fostered. The law shall regulate matters pertaining to employment, in accordance with the following standards: 1. No one shall be required to work except under contract, save only in cases expressly stipulated in the law. 2. The rights of the worker may not be renounced; any stipulation to the contrary shall be void, and actions to claim these rights shall be taken within the period established by law, beginning from the termination of the employeremployee relationship. 3. In case of doubt regarding the scope of the legal provisions, judges shall apply them in the manner most favorable to the workers. Equal remuneration shall be received for equal work, without 4. distinction as to race, sex, age, nationality, or religion; for purposes of remuneration, specialization and experience in the performance of work shall be taken into account. 5. There shall be a basic wage and a family allowance; wages shall include sufficient remuneration for the fundamental necessities of food, clothing, housing, and culture, for the worker as well as those in his care. Remuneration shall correspond to the capacity, efforts, and needs of the worker. To the extent and in a manner compatible with the common good, the law shall establish minimum and family wages. 6. Wages for work shall not be attachable except for the payment of debts for support, and must be paid with legal tender, and not with promissory notes, tokens, and other similar means. They shall not be paid for periods exceeding one month, nor may they be decreased or deducted from except as provided by law. 7. Whatever an employer owes to a worker for wages, salary, indemnity compensation, and retirement pay is a first-class privileged credit with preference even over mortgage liens, in the amounts and under the conditions provided by law.

13

8. All workers shall share in the net profits of the respective enterprises, in the percentage established by law, which may not be less than ten percent; the law shall regulate the distribution thereof. 9. The law shall establish the maximum workday, the weekly rest period, and holidays and annual vacations; the rest period and vacations shall be remunerated, and the worker shall enjoy them freely. 10. The right to form unions is guaranteed to employers and workers, in accordance with legal rules and without need for prior authorization. 11. Collective bargaining shall have special protection. 12. The right of workers to strike and of employers to lockout is recognized, under regulations as to the exercise thereof. 13. For the solution of collective labor disputes of all kinds, conciliation and arbitration tribunals shall be constituted, composed of representatives of employers and workers and presided over by a public official. 14. Individual labor disputes shall be resolved in oral proceedings, in the manner prescribed by law. 15. Employers are obligated to ensure their employees working conditions that do not endanger their lives or health, and to indemnify them for risks that occur during or as a result of their work. The law shall regulate the conditions in which the rehabilitated worker, after an occupational accident or illness, shall again be permitted to work. 16. The working mother shall be the object of particular attention. A pregnant woman shall not be required to work during the period fixed by law prior to and subsequent to childbirth, during which time she is entitled to full remuneration. Moreover, a mother shall be entitled to time off during her working day for nursing her child. 17. Labor of persons under fourteen years of age is prohibited save for the exceptions established by law, and labor by persons under eighteen years of age shall be regulated. 18. The law shall extend special protection to agricultural labor and to the security of the rural worker, and shall regulate matters pertaining to the protection and promotion of artisan labor, as well as other special kinds of work. 19. No law may be issued which weakens the rights and guarantees recognized for workers under present legislation. Article 65. All inhabitants have the right to the protection of the State against risks of unemployment, disability, illness, old age, and death, as well as in case of maternity and other circumstances depriving them of the means of subsistence. The State shall progressively introduce or extend a system of social security that protects all inhabitants against such risks; furthermore, it shall guarantee and protect private enterprises that directly carry out this purpose.

19

Article 66. The adoption of social security shall be effected through autonomous institutions with their own juridical personality; the State, employers, and the insured shall be represented on their boards of directors. Social security funds or reserves, which are its own and are separate from those of the Treasury, shall not be used for any purpose other than that of their establishment; they shall be invested under conditions of safety, return, and liquidity. Social security benefits may not be assigned, attached, or withheld, save in cases of support payments due according to law or of obligations contracted in favor of the National Social Security Fund. The said benefits are exempt from national and municipal taxes. Any provision depriving the insured of such benefits shall be null and void. Article 67. The State shall contribute to the advancement of all sectors of the population, particularly rural dwellers, in the moral, intellectual, economic, and social sphere; it shall foster housing programs; it shall strive to eliminate alcoholism and drug addiction, and shall stimulate the improvement of health. Article 68. The State shall provide means of subsistence to those who lack such means and are not in a position to acquire them by their work, when there is no person or entity required by law to provide for them. Social welfare shall ensure the recipient a life compatible with human dignity and conducive to giving him the capacity to help himself.

Chapter VII

Political Rights

Article 69. The State guarantees to Ecuadorian citizens the right to participate actively in political life: election of officials, preparation of laws, supervision of the public power, and the holding of public office. Article 70. The system of direct and indirect periodic elections is established.

It is the duty and right of citizens to vote; therefore, voting is compulsory for men
and women. Article 71. Freedom and secrecy of the ballot are guaranteed. Proportional representation of minorities is also guaranteed when more than one person is elected. Article 72. The plebiscite is established for direct consultation of the opinion of the citizenry, in cases stipulated by the Constitution. The decision of the plebiscite shall be incontestable. Article 73. To take part in public elections it is necessary to be an Ecuadorian citizen and to be in exercise of political rights. Members of the public forces on active service shall not make use of this right, being guarantors of honesty in the exercise of suffrage. 15

Article 74. The State guarantees to Ecuadorian citizens the right to participate in political parties, except for members of the public forces, and the religious, clergy, and ministers of any faith. The law shall provide special guarantees for the functioning of political parties and shall support their strengthening, so that they may be a means for the exercise of civic action. Only political parties recognized by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal may present lists of candidates for elections of more than one person. The law shall also establish requirements to be met by parties for recognition by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, which shall make no distinctions on ideological grounds. The national and provincial leaders of political parties recognized by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall enjoy superior court privileges. Article 75. The law guarantees to political parties the means of collective communication for dissemination of their programs; likewise, it shall establish control of electoral expenditures in order to prevent the hegemony of economic groups. Article 76. The administrative career is instituted to ensure stability in public service and efficiency in administration, on the basis of ability, merit, and honesty, and competitive examinations shall be instituted as the means of selection and promotion. The administrative career does not include public servants subject to special laws, nor those expressly excepted in the respective law. Public office must be exercised on the basis of service to society and defense of the interests of the nation and the people. Public employees may form associations for the protection of their legitimate interests, and may resort to the strike only in the cases and under the conditions authorized by law, in order to preclude the total paralyzation of public services. Article 77. No one may hold two or more public offices at the same time. This incompatibility also applies to officials and employees of the National Social Security Fund, the Central Bank of Ecuador, the National Development Bank, and, in general, entities financed in whole or in part by national or municipal taxes, charges, or subsidies. This prohibition shall not apply to professors of universities, technical and secondary schools; such persons may hold one additional position, provided it is compatible with the discharge of their teaching duties. Also excepted are telegraph operators, radio operators, and those classified as technicians by law; they may hold one additional position, if it is compatible with their working schedule. For purposes of this prohibition, offices held by virtue of popular election shall not be considered public offices.

16

Ministers of state and those who discharge functions in one or more agencies by virtue of their position shall receive no remuneration other than that for their principal position. No public official or employee, or employee of a semipublic entity, may receive compensation exceeding that paid to the president of the republic. Nepotism is prohibited in the public administration, the judiciary and semipublic institutions, under the terms established by law. Without the corresponding appointment or certificate of election, no Ecuadorian may carry out public functions of a permanent nature, nor occupy a public position on a contractual basis. In order to provide services to the State, to municipalities, and to other institutions of public law, foreigners must enter into the respective contract. Article 78. At the time of taking and leaving office, public officials and employees shall make a sworn declaration of their assets. Unlawful enrichment during the exercise of public functions shall be suppressed. Article 79. In the application of Articles 27 and 78, the penalties imposed upon the violator may not be remitted, reduced, or commuted during the constitutional period in which the violation was committed. Only after the said period shall the statute of limitations begin to run for such offenses, as well as the penalty imposed upon those responsible therefor. Civil responsibility is independent of penal responsibility. Article 80. The State, in accordance with the law and with international agreements, guarantees Ecuadorians the right to seek asylum in case of prosecution for other than common crimes. Extradition of an Ecuadorian shall never be granted; his trial shall be subject to the laws of Ecuador.

Chapter VIII

The Status of Foreigners

Article 81. Under the terms established by law, foreigners shall enjoy the same rights as Ecuadorians, except for the constitutional guarantees and political rights established exclusively for Ecuadorians. Article 82. Contracts concluded between a foreign, natural, or juridical person and the Government of Ecuador or an Ecuadorian natural or juridical person include an express or tacit waiver of any diplomatic claim. Article 83. For purposes of economic development and social progress, the State shall foster and facilitate immigration; however, it shall control the

17

qualifications of immigrants and shall require that they be engaged in the activities to which they have committed themselves. Article 84. In accordance with the law and with international agreements, the State guarantees to foreigners the right of asylum in case of prosecution for other than common crimes.

TITLE V

The Economy

Chapter I General Provisions

Article 85. The fundamental objective of the national wealth is the attainment by the inhabitants of Ecuador of their individual and social objectives. Consequently, the State shall establish a socioeconomic order in which the members of the community can live with dignity and enjoy the fruits of progress. Article 86. Private activity shall receive the support of the State for the establishment of new enterprises, for expansion, and for the reinvestment of return in profitable activities. The State shall prevent such enterprises from developing without regard for the common good or with prejudice to individual security, freedom, or dignity. The State shall extend special protection to private investment in infrastructure works. Article 87. Without prejudice to individual liberty or to the autonomy of cooperatives and enterprises, the State shall foster their establishment and development for the improvement of the national economy. The law shall regulate the supply of the necessary technical, administrative, and economic elements. Article 88. The State protects and fosters savings in all its forms; it shall regulate and coordinate credit, and shall eliminate usury. It shall foster the investment of savings, particularly for the acquisition of housing and agrarian property, and for direct or indirect interests in productive enterprises. Article 89. The law shall eliminate the abuse of economic power in any form whatsoever, including associations and groupings of companies that tend to dominate national markets, eliminate competition, or arbitrarily increase profits. Article 90. Foreign and Ecuadorian capital are equal as regards rights and obligations, but the State may reserve certain sectors of investment to Ecuadorian capital.

18

Article 91. In accordance with the needs of the nation, the Ecuadorian State may establish commercial relations with any other state. Article 92. Ecuador shall join its efforts with those of the other Latin American states in regional economic integration for the acceleration of common progress, and shall collaborate with them to improve the terms of trade in world commerce . Article 93. When the State or any semipublic entity administers a business or enterprise in competition with private enterprise, it shall do so taking into account all elements forming part of the determination of costs.

Chapter II

Planning

Article 94. The State is obligated to see to the efficient utilization of national resources and to promote the orderly and continuing development of the economy. Consequently, it shall carry out its action in accordance with a plan of several years that includes coherent measures to achieve, with the participation of all inhabitants, the specific purposes of economic development and social progress. Article 95. To comply with the provisions of the foregoing paragraph, the State shall seek to ensure equilibrium among the various economic factors: population, professions, employment, capital, and labor; it shall also attempt to obtain, through the improvement of methods, services, and credit, the best price and the highest wage compatible with a fair return to the other factors of production. Article 96. After approval of the plans referred to in this chapter, in the manner prescribed by the Constitution, they shall be compulsory for the public sector and shall guide and orient the private sector.

Chapter III

The Tax System

Article 97. The tax system is governed by the basic principles of equality and generality so that, by requiring more of those who have more, those in identical economic conditions shall pay equal taxes. Article 98. Only the legislative function, through law, may establish, modify, or abolish taxes. No tax law shall have retroactive effect.

19

Article 99. The law shall determine the taxable object, the type of tax, exemptions and deductions, and claims and appeals on behalf of the taxpayers. Furthermore, the law shall determine and severely punish those who violate the tax laws. Article 100. The tax laws shall tend to encourage investment, reinvestment of capital, and saving. Article 101. The State, the municipalities, and the provincial councils may use certain revenues as collateral for their obligations, but in no case shall they grant to the creditor the right to collect the revenues concerned. Article 102. The movement of commodities within the national territory is exempt from taxation. Article 103. Real estate appraisals effected as provided by law, with a uniform standard for the entire country, shall serve for all legal effects.

Chapter IV

The Monetary and Banking Systems

Article 104. It is the function of Congress to determine the value and the denomination of the national currency. Metal money shall be minted by the Central Bank of Ecuador, as provided by law, and without need for the authorization of the national Congress. Article 105. It is the duty of the Monetary Board to determine national monetary policy, and of the Central Bank of Ecuador to carry out that policy. The two institutions shall seek the creation and maintenance of the monetary, exchange, and credit conditions most favorable to economic development and social progress. Article 106. Only the Central Bank of Ecuador is authorized to issue metal money and bills that are legal tender and are freely redeemable.

TITLE VI

Suffrage and its Organs

Article 107. The organs of suffrage are: the Supreme Electoral Tribunal; the provincial electoral tribunals; the parish electoral boards; and for the granting of identity cards and preparation of the corresponding registries, the Department of Civil Registry, Identification, and Certification.

20

Article 108. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal, with headquarters in Quito and jurisdiction throughout the territory of Ecuador, is autonomous and is composed of seven members designated as follows: three by the national Congress, two by the president of the republic, and two by the Supreme Court of Justice; one member shall preside over the Tribunal. Twice as many alternates shall be designated at the same time and in the same manner as the members. Members shall hold office for four years and may be reelected indefinitely. The office shall be obligatory. Article 109. The provincial electoral tribunals, with headquarters in the capital city of each province and jurisdiction troughout the province, are composed of five members designated by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal; one member shall preside over each board. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall designate two alternates for each member of the provincial tribunals. Article 110. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall appoint the director general of Civil Registry, Identification, and Certification, and may remove him for good cause. Article 111. The parish electoral boards shall be organized as provided by law, which shall determine the requirements for membership thereon. Article 112. To be a member of an electoral tribunal it is necessary to be Ecuadorian by birth, at least twenty-five years of age, in exercise of political rights, and not excluded by any of the prohibitions set forth in Article 122 of this Constitution. Article 113. Violation of the preceding article shall not be cause for nullification in electoral matters, but shall be the personal responsibility of those who violate it. Article 114. The powers and duties of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal are: 1. To regulate and supervise the diverse acts of the public elections.

2. To give the instructions and prescribe the measures necessary for their proper holding. 3. To issue pertinent orders to the public forces to ensure the freedom and honesty of elections. 4. To resolve doubts concerning the interpretation and correct application of the Law of Elections, in each case that may be presented. 5. To resolve, in the second and final instance, complaints presented with respect to infractions in the voting, and to impose or order the corresponding sanctions.

21

6. To count the votes as required of it by the Law of Elections, and to issue the corresponding election certificates. 7. Such other powers and duties as the Constitution or the laws may confer upon it. Article 115. The powers and duties of the other organs of the suffrage are determined by law. Article 116. The administrative, military, and police authorities shall collaborate with the organs of suffrage in carrying out the functions assigned to them.

TITLE VII

The Legislative Function

Chapter I

General Provisions Article 117. The national Congress is composed of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. Article 118. The national Congress has its seat in the capital city of Ecuador, and may function in another place only in exceptional cases. Article 119. The Senate is composed of two senators for each province and one senator for the Colón Archipelago (Galapagos Islands), elected by direct popular vote, and fifteen functional senators: One for public education. One for private education. One for the collective communications media and for scientific and cultural academies and societies. Two for agriculture. Two for commerce. Two for industry. Four for workers. For purposes of election, workers shall be considered to be urban and rural employees, and laborers, as well as artisans. One for the armed forces.

22

One for the national civil police. When there are two functional senators, one shall represent the activities of the Sierra and the Oriente, and the other those of the Litoral and the Colón Archipelago; when there are four, two shall represent the activities of the Sierra and the Oriente, and two those of the Litoral and the Colón Archipelago. Article 120. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of two citizens elected by each province of the republic and by the Colón Archipelago, in proportion to their population. The provinces shall elect one deputy for each eighty thousand inhabitants, and another deputy if there is an excess of forty thousand or more. In no case shall a province have fewer than two deputies. The Colón Archipelago shall elect one. Article 121. In order to be a senator or deputy it is required: I. To be Ecuadorian by birth and to be in the exercise of political rights. Z. To be a native of the electing province or to have been domiciled there for three consecutive years immediately preceding the election. The functional senators must have been engaged in the activity they are elected to represent for at least three consecutive years, as provided in the preceding paragraph. 3. To be at least thirty-five years of age in the case of senators, and twenty-five years of age in the case of deputies. To be free of the disqualifications established in the Constitution and 4. the laws. Article 122. The following may not be candidates for the office of senator or deputy, nor may they exercise the legislative function: 1. The president of the republic, the vice president, ministers of state, the comptroller general, the attorney general, the superintendents of banks and companies, the presidents of the National Welfare Institute and of the National Planning and Coordination Board, and the general manager of the National Social Security Fund. In general, this disqualification applies to public officials and employees who may be freely appointed and removed by the executive, and are permanent salaried government employees, as well as to representatives of the executive in any State agency. Z. Ministers of the Supreme and Superior Courts of Justice and of contentious tribunals, ordinary and special judges, government attorneys, and secretaries of the courts and tribunals of the republic. This prohibition does not extend to officials employed on a temporary basis, or to associate justices of the courts, referees, or arbitrators. 3. Provincial prefects and counselors, for the province in which they hold office. Mayors and council chairmen and members, for the canton in which 4. they hold office.

23

5. 6.

Managers of State banks and of their agencies and branch offices. Ministers of any denomination and members of religious communities.

Members and clerks of the electoral tribunals, unless they have 7. relinquished the exercise of their duties at least ninety days before the elections. 8. Members of the public forces on active service.

Those who have contracts or concessions with the State for the 9. exploitation of the national wealth or the operation of public utilities, and the representatives or legal agents of such persons or of domestic or foreign companies of like nature. This disqualification does not apply to the legal representatives of institutions of public law that have obtained such concessions. In the cases stipulated in this article, except for those covered by paragraph 7, the disqualification applies for the six months immediately preceding the calling of elections; consequently, those who have exercised the functions indicated during this period may not be candidates for the office of senator or deputy. The disqualification relating to public officials and employees appointed and removed by the executive does not apply to teachers and professors employed by the State or the municipalities, unless they exercise administrative duties directly subordinate to the ministry of education or to the respective municipality. This disqualification does not apply to those elected to the office of functional senator for public education, the armed forces, or the national civil police. Nor may anyone be elected by a province if, within six months previous to the elections, he has had any civil, political, or military command of a permanent nature in that province. Article 123. Legislators are prohibited from accepting commissions or employment, whether or not remunerated, by the executive or by semipublic entities. Those elected legislators who subsequently incur any of the disqualifications set forth in the preceding article shall ceas.e to hold office. Article 124. The national Congress, without the need for convocation, meets annually in two regular sessions, each of sixty days, which may not be extended; the first is from the sixth of March to the fourth of May, and the second from the tenth of August to the ninth of October. The president of the republic may convoke extraordinary sessions of the national Congress, or of one chamber when the matter falls within its exclusive competence, whenever required by the national interest; the president of Congress shall have the same power, on petition by at least two thirds of the members of Congress. These sessions shall deal only with the matters specified in the convocation, which shall stipulate the duration of the session.

24

Article 125. Senators shall hold office for four years, and deputies for two years. Their duties are obligatory and they may not be excused except for reasons expressly provided by law. Article 126. A legislator shall not be responsible for the opinion he expresses in Congress, but shall be responsible for his vote in favor of resolutions contrary to the Constitution. The legislator is entitled to immunity during his term in office; he may not be sued, prosecuted, or deprived of his liberty without the authorization of the chamber to which he belongs, or, if Congress is not in session, of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees. Article 127. Legislators, as representatives of the nation, should act in the national interest. In the exercise of their functions, they are not subject to mandate. Article 128. The Organic Law of the Legislative Function shall regulate the activities of Congress and of its committees, the manner of work and the remuneration of legislators, the procedure for authorizing their judicial prosecution, the forms and requirements for the validity of legislative acts, and, in general, all matters relating to that function and not provided for in the Constitution.

Chapter II

Officers

Article 129. Each chamber elects a president and a vice president, who hold office for two years. Article 130. The president of the Senate is also president of the national Congress. If the office of president of the Senate is vacant, the presidency of Congress shall be exercised by the president of the Chamber of Deputies, the vice president of the Senate, or the vice president of the Chamber of Deputies, in that order.

Chapter III

Powers and Duties

Article 131. The following are powers of the Senate and of the Chamber of Deputies: 1. To pass upon the qualifications of the members of the respective chamber, to accept or reject their excuses, and to call their alternates. 2. To authorize the initiation or continuation of legal proceedings against members of the chamber and to authorize their arrest.

25

3. To judge the conduct of their members in the exercise of their functions and to suspend them from office for not more than one year. 4. To exercise the other powers conferred upon them by the Constitution and the laws. Article 132. The following are exclusive powers of the Senate: 1. To approve or disapprove public bilateral treaties not falling within the purview of Article 184. 3; to approve public multilateral treaties, with or without reservations, and to give permission, in the same manner, for the adherence authorized therein. The president of the republic or the Senate itself may submit the matter to Congress in joint session or to a plebiscite. 2. To restore the rights of nationality or of citizenship to those who have lost them, when such rehabilitation is not effected by the ministry of law. 3. To restore the honor or the memory of those unjustly condemned, provided that the respective judge or tribunal has established their innocence through the procedure of review authorized by law. 4. To grant or deny the president of the republic authorization to: a. b. Leave the country temporarily. Appoint each ambassador or minister plenipotentiary to permanent missions to states or to recognized international organizations. Enter into contracts for loans and guarantees that pledge the public credit.

c.

5. To regulate the administration of national property and to authorize the alienation or mortgaging of real estate.

6. To approve or deny, by secret ballot, promotions to general or rear admiral requested by the president of the republic in accordance with the law.
7. To fix, annually, the maximum of the public forces in time of peace. 8. To hear charges brought by the Chamber of Deputies against any of the officials referred to in Article 134, paragraphs 3 and 4.

9. To decide upon, in conformity with the law and with reference to the respective ruling, the legal and financial responsibility or lack of responsibility of the ministers of state.
10. To acknowledge the public debt and to determine the manner of effecting its conversion, amortization, consolidation, and cancellation. 11. To determine and make uniform, in accordance with Article 104, the value and denomination of the national currency. 12. To create provinces and cantons with an exact determination of their jurisdictional limits, or to abolish such territorial divisions.

26

13. To open and close ports. 14. To exercise the other powers conferred upon it by the Constitution and the laws. Article 133. When the Senate considers a charge relating only to official conduct, it may not impose any penalty other than that of suspension or removal from office, or disqualification from public office for the period that it deems appropriate. If the act that is the subject of the charge also renders the accused criminally liable, the Senate, after adjudging his official conduct, shall proceed as follows: When the matter is not one of official conduct, the Senate shall be limited to deciding whether or not there shall be a trial; if it decides in the affirmative, it shall place the accused at the disposition of the competent judge. Article 134. The following are exclusive powers of the Chamber of Deputies: 1. To grant or deny extraordinary powers to the President of the Republic, withdraw them, and examine the use that he has made of them. 2. To examine the charges that may be made, for their official conduct or for infractions of any kind, against the following public officials: the president of the republic or the official acting as such, the president of the national Congress, and the president of the Supreme Court of Justice. 3. To examine the charges that may be made, for their official conduct, against judges of the Supreme Court, members of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, members of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, and the other officials specified in the Constitution and the laws. 4. To examine the official conduct of ministers of state and to censure them for due cause. Censure shall require the affirmative vote of at least three fifths of the deputies present. 5. To oversee, either directly or through the corresponding agencies, the legal and proper investment of the national revenues, requiring the president of the republic and other authorities to enforce observance of the responsibility of public officials and employees. 6. To supervise the acts of the government.

To exercise the other powers conferred upon it by the Constitution 7. and the laws. The charges referring to official conduct made in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this article may be made only by Ecuadorian citizens, during the term within which the respective public functions are exercised by the accused and for one year thereafter. Article 135. The following powers are vested in Congress divided into chambers: 1. To prepare and interpret the laws, generally on an obligatory basis; likewise, to interpret the Constitution and accept the amendments proposed thereto in accordance with Title XIV of this Constitution.

27

To exercise the powers stipulated in the third paragraph of Article 2. 252, expressly stating in the law its decision or interpretation. 3. To establish, modify, or abolish taxes.

To grant general or particular amnesty or pardon for political crimes, 4. and general amnesty or pardon for common or special crimes, whenever some important reason so requires. Except for such cases, Congress may not obstruct the judicial process or the execution of judgments or other decrees of the judicial function. To issue agreements, resolutions, and other decrees that are part of 5. the legislative process and are not covered by this article. To exercise the other powers conferred upon it by the Constitution 6. and the laws. Article 136. The following powers are vested in Congress in joint session: 1. To approve or reject amendments to the Constitution, in accordance with the third paragraph of Article 253. To declare the president and vice president of the republic legally 2. elected, receive their oaths of office, accept or deny their excuse or resignation, and declare their physical or mental incompetence or their unfitness to discharge their duties. To make the appointments stipulated in the Constitution and the laws; 3. to receive the oaths of the persons elected, accept or deny their excuses or resignations, and remove them in accordance with the law. To receive, in different sessions, the president of the republic and 4. the president of the Supreme Court of Justice, who shall, in person, give an account of their respective functions. To declare war and make peace, after hearing the report of the 5. president of the republic. To permit or refuse the transit of foreign troops through the national 6. territory, and the transit, entry, or stationing of warships and warplanes in Ecuadorian territorial waters or airports for a greater time than that permitted by international custom. To issue the budget of expenditures of the legislative function and fix 7. the compensation for the services of legislators. Any increase in allowances and expenditures shall become effective beginning with the next session of the Chamber of Deputies. 8. laws. To exercise the other powers stipulated in the Constitution and the

Article 137. It is prohibited for Congress: 1. To intervene in matters which, according to the Constitution, are reserved to another authority or governmental body. 28

2. To obstruct the independence of the judicial function, interpose its authority in the judicial process, or impair the powers conferred by the Constitution on another branch of the public power. 3. To order any payment if the credit is not found to have been previously approved according to law, or to order indemnity without a prior final judgment. 4. To remit balances and other debts declared in favor of the State.

5. To grant life pensions directly, except in the cases expressly stipulated by law. 6. To establish or recognize lifetime public positions or offices.

7. To suggest promotions or reinstatements of officers of the armed forces and to promote them without the prior request of the president of the republic. To enact laws that unbalance the budget of the State, or to approve 8. expenditures that affect or unbalance it, or affect or unbalance the budgets of semipublic juridical persons, unless the corresponding revenues have been established previously. To deprive local entities of taxes or other sources of income without granting them equivalent revenues at the same time. 10. To approve agreements and other acts of greeting or mere courtesy. 11. To delegate its powers. The granting of powers by this Constitution to the Permanent Legislative Committee, as a permanent organ of the legislature, does not constitute delegation.

Chapter IV

Committees

Article 138. There shall be the following committees: permanent, internal, ad hoc, and specialized. There shall be the following permanent committees: one legislative committee and four auxiliary committees, all of which shall function continuously throughout the year. The internal committees shall be those formed by Congress to function during its sessions. Those established to study draft bills or decrees shall be joint committees composed of two senators and three deputies. The ad hoc committees shall be those appointed to study a specific matter.

29

For matters requiring special advisory services, Congress or the Permanent Legislative Committee shall form specialized committees with the participation of technical personnel from outside the legislature. Article 139. The Permanent Legislative Committee has its seat in the city of Quito, and shall be composed of four senators and five deputies elected by the respective chambers. Article 140. The members of the Permanent Legislative Committee and those of the auxiliary committees shall hold office for two years. Article 141. The Permanent Legislative Committee has the following powers: 1. To issue laws and decrees when the national Congress is in recess and when the enactment of such laws and decrees is not reserved to that body. 2. To prepare draft bills interpreting or amending the Constitution.

3. To prepare draft bills with respect to the Law of Elections and the tax laws, and to submit them to Congress for consideration. To codify and edit the laws; such codifications and editions shall have 4. binding force, unless Congress in joint session, in a single discussion, decides to amend them or leave them without effect. To report to Congress on laws or decrees objected to by the president 5. of the republic, except in case of an objection based on unconstitutionality, in which case the opinion of the Supreme Court shall be requested. Article 142. Each auxiliary committee shall be composed of two senators and one deputy, elected by the respective chambers. Article 143. The auxiliary committees have the following powers: 1. To prepare draft bills or decrees within their field of specialization and to submit them to Congress for consideration, or, if Congress is in recess, to the Permanent Legislative Committee. To report on draft bills within their field of specialization. If the 2. report is unfavorable, the issuance of such laws shall be the exclusive power of Congress. 3. To make studies, within their sphere of competence, entrusted to them by Congress or the Permanent Legislative Committee.

30

Chapter V

Legislative Acts

Section I

Legislative Acts in General Article 144. Legislative acts are expressed in laws, decrees, agreements, and resolutions. A law is understood to be a norm of an obligatory, permanent nature that deals with a matter of general interest. A decree is understood to be an obligatory norm that deals with a matter of particular interest when it creates, modifies, or represses rights. The terms "resolution" or "agreement" shall be used for decisions that are merely procedural and for acts not covered in the preceding paragraph. Article 145. The power to present draft laws and decrees to Congress is vested solely in the legislators, the committees, the president of the republic, and the Supreme Court. The presentation of the proposed State budget is an exclusive power of the president of the republic. Article 146. Every proposed law or decree must be presented with an explanation of its purposes to the president of Congress, or, if Congress is in recess, to the chairman of the Permanent Legislative Committee. One or the other shall refer it to the corresponding committee, without whose approval the process may not continue. If the report of the committee, is favorable, the draft bill shall be sent to the Chamber of Deputies, which shall consider it in a single discussion. If the proposal is rejected by the committee, it shall be tabled. Article 147. When a proposed law or decree has been approved in the Chamber of Deputies, it shall be sent immediately to the Senate, which may give or deny its approval or make such changes, additions, or modifications as it deems appropriate. If the Senate rejects, in whole or in part, the bill that has come from the Chamber of Deputies, the two chambers shall meet to reconcile the differences in a single discussion. Article 148. The draft bills referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 141, and the proposed State budget, are reserved to Congress; such bills shall be

31

referred to the respective committee and, with its approval, to the Chamber of Deputies for the procedure established in this Constitution. Article 149. For a proposed law or decree to be processed in the Permanent Legislative Committee, the favorable vote of at least six of its members is required. It may then follow the course established in the Organic Law of the Legislative Function and in its regulations. Article 150. Congress in joint session, in a single discussion, may repeal, in whole or in part, or amend the laws issued by the Permanent Legislative Committee, without prejudice to the validity of the acts carried out and the rights acquired during the period that such laws are in effect. Article 151. A bill that receives definitive approval in the manner prescribed in this Constitution shall be sent to the president of the republic, who shall approve or object to it within a period of fifteen days. If he approves it, he shall promulgate it; if he objects to it, he shall refer it to the Permanent Legislative Committee, with his observations, whether they are on grounds of unconstitutionality or inadvisability. With the report of the Permanent Legislative Committee or of the Supreme Court, as appropriate, Congress in joint session, in a single discussion, shall resolve the objections. If the Supreme Court also considers the bill to be unconstitutional, Congress shall not continue to discuss it, but shall table it. If the President does not return the bill approved or objected to within the period stipulated above, or if he does not ratify it after the constitutional requirements have been fulfilled, the bill shall have the force of law. Article 152. A law is not binding except by virtue of its promulgation in the official register. Article 153. The agreements and resolutions of Congress in joint session or of the chambers shall be issued after a single discussion; they do not require the approval of the president of the republic, and shall be communicated to whoever must comply with them.

Section II

The State Budget

Article 154. The State budget shall be enacted annually, and shall be destined to cover the provision of public services and the execution of economic and social development programs. Article 155. All general revenues of the State shall constitute a single fund applicable to general expenditures. No revenue indicated for a special purpose may be applied to the general expenditures of the State. Administrative expenditures of a permanent nature may not be met by loans.

32

Article 156. The budget may not be issued unless it contains an item destined for the payment of the national debt. Article 157. Public education and national defense shall be given preferential attention in the budget. Not less than thirty percent of the general revenues of the State shall be destined for education. To this end, the corresponding items shall be increased annually, so that in five years from the date of the entry into force of this Constitution, the percentage indicated shall be reached. Items for education may not be destined for any other purpose, except in case of national disaster and as provided in Article 186.5. Article 158. There shall be no reserved expenditures other than those for national security. Article 159. When the financing of the budget requires new taxes, they shall be established in accordance with the proceedings prescribed in the Constitution for the enactment of laws. Article 160. Congress may not enact laws repealing or modifying those which establish revenues covered by the current budget or by that issued for the following fiscal year, except on condition that, at the proper time, it create new revenues or increase those in existence to make up for the revenues it modifies or repeals; and in no case may it approve any law that unbalances the budget by new expenditures. Whenever Congress discusses bills that increase expenditures or create or increase taxes, it shall first consult the minister in charge of finances, who shall render his opinion within the period the Congress indicates; if for any reason the minister does not make his opinion known, Congress shall proceed freely. Article 161. The preparation of the national budget is the function of the Technical Budgetary Commission, constituted as provided by law; after approval of the budget by the president of the republic, he shall present it to Congress on the tenth of August, together with the corresponding message. In discharging its function, the Commission shall consider the suggestions of the legislators, authorities, and corporations, with respect to national or provincial needs. No proposed budget may be presented to Congress unless its expenditures are properly financed. Article 162. Congress shall refer the proposed budget to an internal committee for study; this committee shall consist of one legislator for each province. Within a period of thirty days, the committee shall submit a report specifying the items regarding which agreement has not been reached with the Technical Commis sion. The internal committee shall also consider the suggestions presented by the legislators, authorities, and corporations during the first ten days of the sessions.

33

Article 163. After taking note of the report of the internal committee, Congress in joint session, in a single discussion, shall resolve the differences mentioned in the preceding article. If there are none, or when Congress has resolved those that have arisen, the budget shall be approved without further proceedings. Article 164. After approval by Congress in accordance with the foregoing provisions, the budget may not be objected to by the executive. Article 165. If for any reason the constitutional proceedings established for approval of the budget have not been completed by the tenth of September, the proposed budget submitted by the president of the republic shall enter into force. Article 166. The State budget shall be promulgated during the first fifteen days of November and shall take effect from the first day of the fiscal year following its enactment. Article 167. The Office of the Comptroller General of the State shall see to the execution of the budget, shall close and liquidate it, and, in particular, shall submit a documented explanatory message to Congress; this document shall provide an explanation of the transfers, increases, and reductions of items appropriated in accordance with the law. Article 168. Whenever a deficit appears in the final liquidation of the budget, the President of the Republic shall send a message to Congress, with the corresponding documents, explaining the deficit. Article 169. The budgets of the provincial and municipal councils and of semipublic and public law institutions shall be governed by the corresponding laws.

TITLE VIII

The Executive Function

Chapter I

The President and Vice President of the Republic

Article 170. The executive function is exercised by the president of the republic; he is the chief of state, and as such, represents it. Article 171. To be elected president of the republic it is required to be Ecuadorian by birth, to have reached the age of forty, and to be in the exercise of political rights. Article 172. The following may not be elected president of the republic:

34

1. Relatives of the president of the republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity. 2. The vice president.

3. He who, at the time of the election, is occupying the presidency or has occupied it within six months immediately prior to the election, and his relatives within the degrees indicated in paragraph 1 of this article. 4. Ministers of state who are such at the time of the election or within six months immediately prior thereto. 5. Members of the public forces on active service within six months immediately prior to the election. 6. Ministers and religious of any denomination.

7. Those who have contracts or concessions with the State for the exploitation of the national wealth or the operation of public utilities, and the representatives of such persons or of domestic or foreign companies of like nature. This disqualification does not apply to the legal representatives or agents of institutions of public law that have obtained such concessions. Article 173. The president of the republic shall be elected every four years, by popular, direct, and secret ballot, on the first Sunday in June. He shall hold office for four years and may not be reelected until after four years counted from the end of his own term. Article 174. There shall be a vice president of the republic elected by popular and secret ballot, at the same time as the president and for a like term of office. In order to be elected vice president of the republic the same qualifications are required as to be president. Article 175. In all cases of permanent or temporary absence of the president of the republic, the vice president shall exercise the functions of the president, as provided in this Constitution. The vice president, while not occupying the presidency of the republic, may discharge any public or private function, except that of legislator, without losing his office. Article 176. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall verify the counting of the vote in the elections for president and vice president, and shall communicate the results thereof to Congress on the first day of the sessions following the election. Congress in joint session shall declare elected the citizens who have obtained the greatest number of votes. Congress, if it deems this necessary, shall check the counting. In case of a tie vote, the elections shall be decided by the vote of an absolute majority of the legislators present, by secret ballot, limited to the citizens who have received the same number of votes in the election; if there is a tie in this vote, the decision shall be by lot.

35

If the Supreme Electoral Tribunal has not verified the election returns within the period specified by law, Congress in joint session shall do so. Article 177. The president of the republic shall take the oath of office before Congress on the thirty-first of August; he shall solemnly swear, in the manner prescribed by law, to obey and enforce the Constitution and the laws of Ecuador. If for any reason he cannot take the oath of office before Congress, he shall do so before its president, or, in the absence of the latter, before the president of the Supreme Court of Justice. In the event that the president-elect cannot take office on the Article 178. date specified, the citizen designated by the Constitution shall be summoned, and the outgoing president shall resign his powers before the latter. If the president-elect does not take office by the thirtieth of September, Congress shall declare the office vacant and shall order the designated person to occupy the office until the end of the term. Article 179. Neither the president of the republic nor he who takes his place may absent himself from the national territory without the authorization of the Senate, or, if that body is not in session, of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, nor may he remain absent for a longer period than authorized. Failure to comply with this provision, without just cause, shall constitute abandonment of office and shall cause Congress in joint session to declare the presidency of the republic vacant and to call upon the designated substitute to occupy it until the end of the term. This provision also applies to the person who has occupied the presidency of the republic during the first year after the end of his term. Failure to comply with this provision, without just cause, shall be punished by Congress in joint session with the suspension of political rights for up to two years. The president shall not require authorization to cross international territory en route to the territorial islands.

Article 180. terminated: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.

The functions of the president of the republic are definitively

By the end of the term for which he was elected. By death. By removal. By acceptance of his resignation. By abandonment of office. By unfitness. By permanent physical or mental incapacity.

36

The existence of a vacancy for the reasons set forth in paragraphs 3, 5, 6 and 7 of this article may be declared only by Congress, as provided in this Constitution. If, when Congress is in recess, the Tribunal of Constitutional Article 181. Guarantees considers that there has been an abandonment of office by the president, or that because of unfitness or permanent physical or mental incapacity he is disqualified from exercising his functions, it shall immediately convoke an extraordinary session of Congress so that it may resolve the matter. Article 182. In all cases when there is definitively or temporarily no president of the republic, the functions of the president shall be exercised by one of the following officials, in this order: the vice president; the president of Congress; the president of the Chamber of Deputies; the vice president of the Senate; and the vice president of the Chamber of Deputies. When the absence of the president is definitive, the vice president shall exercise his functions until the end of the period for which the titular president was elected. Until the designated person assumes his functions, they shall be exercised temporarily by the next person in the order of substitution established in this a rticle. In the event of the definitive absence of the vice president of the Article 183. republic, Congress in joint session shall elect a new vice president.

Chapter II

Duties, Powers, and Responsibilities of the President of the Republic

Article 184. The powers and duties of the president of the republic are: 1. To maintain national unity, internal order, and external security.

2. To comply with and enforce the legal norms of the State and international treaties validly concluded. 3. To direct international relations and diplomatic negotiations; to enter into treaties and ratify them, after their approval by the Senate in the required cases; to exchange ratifications and denounce treaties in force, in accordance with the international agreements entered into by the State. The approval of the Senate is not required for treaties that do not concern permanent obligations or charges for the public treasury or for Ecuadorian citizens, nor, in general, for those that do not require legislative measures for their compliance. Such treaties shall be submitted to the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, and the president of the republic shall inform Congress, during its next session, of their nature and contents.

37

4. To appoint and remove diplomatic and consular agents, as provided by law. The appointment of ambassadors and ministers plenipotentiary to permanent missions to states or recognized international organizations must be preceded by the authorization of the Senate, or, if it is not in session, by that of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees. 5. To appoint and remove freely the ministers of state, governors, and other officials whose appointment and removal are not vested in some other authority, without prejudice to the provisions of the Civil Service and Administrative Career Act. To approve and promulgate the laws and decrees enacted by Congress 6. or by the Permanent Legislative Committee and to issue regulations for their execution which neither amend nor alter them. To convoke Congress or one of its chambers in extraordinary session 7. when he deems it necessary for serious reasons of public interest. 8. To read before Congress in joint session, within the first four days of the session opening on the tenth of August, a message reporting on the political, administrative, economic, and military situation of the State, and on its revenues and resources, indicating the reforms necessary in each branch of the administration. 9. To send special messages to Congress whenever necessary.

10. To call for a plebiscite as a procedure for consulting the citizens, with regard to: a. Amendments to the Constitution proposed by the executive and rejected in whole or in part by Congress. Amendments to the Constitution, when the third paragraph of Article 258 is invoked. Proposed laws of fundamental importance for the progress of the country or for fulfillment of the aims of social justice established in the Constitution, provided that such proposed laws have not been considered for two successive sessions or have been rejected, in their fundamental aspects, by Congress or by the Permanent Legislative Committee. Decisions of transcendental importance for the interest of the nation.

b.

c.

d.

Except in the cases covered by paragraph b. above, the convocation of a plebiscite shall require the favorable opinion of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees. The results of the plebiscite shall be promulgated in the official register within fifteen days from the completion of the counting of ballots and the announcement of the results by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal; from the time of such promulgation, the popular decision shall be binding upon all authorities and those subject to authority.

38

This power shall be exercised without prejudice to the cases covered by Article 132.1, in which the Senate may take the initiative. 11. To approve the proposed budget presented by the respective technical committee and to submit it to Congress for consideration.

12. To direct the administration of the State and to approve and see to fulfillment of economic and social development plans, which shall be submitted to the Senate for ratification. 13. To take care of the national property and of the collection, administration, and expenditure of the national revenues, as well as to see that acounts are rendered and balances collected in accordance with the law.
14. To enter into contracts for loans or guarantees and to conclude other administrative agreements, with the approval of the Senate and as provided by law. 15. To exercise supreme command over the armed forces and the national civil police, to confer the ranks of colonel, navy captain, and higher grades with the approval of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, and to request from the Senate promotions to general and rear admiral. 16. To grant pardons for political crimes, without prejudice to the power of Congress to grant such pardons; to pardon, reduce, or commute, in accordance with the law, sentences that have been imposed in judicial proceedings. 17. To grant certificates of incapacity, orders of retirement, and military pensions, as provided by law. 18. To grant and revoke naturalization certificates, as provided by law. 19. To issue navigation permits.

20. To issue patents and grant certificates of industrial property right, as provided by law. 21. To confer official decorations. 22. To grant the permits to which Article 136.6 refers, if Congress is not in session and with the authorization of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees. 23. To exercise and comply with all other powers and duties imposed or conferred upon him by the Constitution and the laws.
Article 185. In case of internal disturbance or international conflict, the president of the republic may declare a state of siege in all or part of the national territory in order to prevent, meet, or put an end to the emergency situation, subject to the following provisions: 1. If the emergency situation occurs when Congress is in session, the president may not declare the state of siege without the prior authorization of

39

Congress, which shall determine the extraordinary powers that the executive may use, the constitutional guarantees that are suspended, and the period for which this emergency measure is in force. Z. If the emergency situation occurs when Congress is in recess and is so serious that time will not permit its reassembly, the president may declare the state of siege himself, with the obligation to inform the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees and the national Congress, as soon as the latter meets, of the reasons that made this measure necessary and with respect to the use he has made of such powers. In the decree by which the state of siege is declared, an exact statement shall be made of the extraordinary powers that the executive assumes, and also of the constitutional guarantees suspended from that time onward, the period for which the emergency measure shall be in effect, and the reasons for its use. The Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, in its next regular or special session, shall confirm, limit, or revoke the extraordinary powers assumed by the president of the republic. 3.- In no case may the guarantees of the inviolability of life and of personal integrity be suspended, nor may an Ecuadorian be expatriated. 4. At any time when Congress considers that the circumstances causing the declaration of the state of siege have terminated, it may revoke the state of siege or reduce the extraordinary powers of the executive. Article 186. The declaration of the state of siege confers all or some of the following extraordinary powers upon the executive: 1. To declare the armed forces on a wartime basis and to mobilize them to meet the external aggression or to maintain internal order. In case of internal disturbance, the declaration that the armed forces are on a wartime basis shall be limited to the provinces in which this measure is necessary. Z. To increase the armed forces and to appoint military authorities wherever advisable. 3. To order the collection of taxes and other revenues in advance for a period of up to one year. 4. To contract loans.

5. In case of international conflict or imminent invasion, to expend State funds for national defense even though they have been destined for other purposes, with the exception of those set aside for health and public welfare. 6. To transfer the seat of government to any place in the national territory. 7. To close or establish ports temporarily.

40

8. To establish prior censorship of the press, radio, and television. 9. To suspend constitutional guarantees, with the limitations prescribed in Article 185.3, in addition to those contained in the following paragraphs: a. To arrest persons suspected of abetting an invasion from without or a disturbance from within, or of taking part in them. Within a maximum period of six days such persons shall be placed at the disposition of the competent judge, with the records of the proceedings taken and the other documents justifying the arrest; the detention shall be in a building that is not a prison for common criminals. Confinement may be ordered in place of arrest, for a like period of six days. To incarcerate persons suspected of inciting war and those charged with taking part in internal disturbances. No one shall be incarcerated in any place other than a provincial capital. It is especially prohibited to imprison anyone in the Oriente provinces or in the Colón Archipelago, or to obligate the suspect to go to the place of detention by roads that are not the customary ones. It is likewise prohibited to confine residents of the Sierra in the provinces of the Litoral, and vice versa, unless the person arrested requests in writing that his sentence be carried out in one of the prohibited places. If the suspect requests a passport to leave the republic, it shall be granted to him; he shall be given a period of not less than eight days to arrange his affairs, and shall be permitted to select the route at his own free will. Upon termination of the extraordinary powers, imprisoned and expatriated persons shall recover their liberty ipso facto, and may return to their places of residence without the need for a safe-conduct or passport. The provisions of subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this article shall not prevent the regular courts from trying and punishing suspected persons, unless they have been pardoned. If a sentence is pronounced, the time of detention or expatriation shall be credited against the sentence. 10. To declare the entire national territory or part of it as a security zone, and to order the imposition of martial law. Article 187. The state of siege may not be extended beyond the time required to terminate the emergency, whatever may be the period specified in the document ordering it, and shall cease as soon as the circumstances that caused it have terminated. The president of the republic shall be responsible for the unjustified prolongation or the abuse of this measure. Congress shall judge this responsibility.

b.

41

Article 188. The declaration of the state of siege does not interrupt the functioning of the organs of the public power. Article 189. In the event of an earthquake, flood, fire, or other catastrophe that seriously affects the social or economic life of the community, the executive may make use of the extraordinary powers set forth in Article 186, paragraphs 1, 5, and 10, for the time necessary to deal with the emergency. Article 190. The president of the republic, or the person acting as such, is expressly prohibited from: 1. Violating the Constitution and the laws.

Obstructing or interfering with the electoral process, employing 2. methods of moral or physical coercion, or favoring given interests in the elections. 3. Attacking the independence of judges or imposing his authority in judicial proceedings. 4. Dissolving Congress or obstructing the free exercise of its functions.

5. Admitting foreigners to military service, except by a contract previously entered into according to law. 6. Exercising his functions outside the national territory, or absenting himself from the capital for more than thirty consecutive days. During his absence from the capital, the president may exercise his functions at any place in the national territory. 7. Submitting to a plebiscite constitutional amendments extending his mandate, providing for his immediate reelection, or repealing or modifying this article, in whole or in part. Article 191. The president or whoever is acting as such incurs particular responsibility for treason to the country or conspiracy against the republic. He is also especially responsible for: infringing upon the Constitution or the laws; violating constitutional guarantees; attacking the other departments of the State; refusing to approve a law when obligated to do so, or hindering its promulgation; provoking unjust war; and exercising extraordinary powers in violation of the Constitution.

Chapter III

Ministers of State Article 192. The president of the republic shall appoint ministers of state charged with directing the activities of the executive function. The law shall determine the number of ministers and the sphere of competence, powers, and

42

duties of each. No portfolio shall remain without a minister for more than thirty days for any reason whatsoever. Article 193. To be a minister it is required: to be Ecuadorian by birth, to be in the exercise of political rights, and to be at least thirty years of age. Article 194. The decrees, decisions, and resolutions of the president shall lack validity and binding force unless they are authorized by the respective minister. Excepted from this provision are the appointment and removal of ministers of state, which are the responsibility of the president alone. Article 195. The ministers of state shall make annual reports to the nation, not later than the tenth of July of each year, regarding the state of affairs of their respective departments, and shall include such proposed laws or decrees as they deem necessary. The ministers of state shall render reports to the legislative chambers, with the acknowledgement of the president of the republic, regarding their portfolios. When, in the judgement of the executive, these are of a confidential nature, they must be presented in secret session. Ministers of state are obliged to appear before Congress whenever called. Article 196. If it is considered appropriate, ministers may appear before Congress to discuss, without the right to vote, the proposed laws or decrees submitted by them or others which may be of interest to their departments. Article 197. Each minister has total responsibility for the acts of the executive that he himself has signed; he is also jointly responsible for those he has authorized in conjunction with other ministers. Each minister is responsible, moreover, for the actions specified in Articles 190 and 191, and for taking bribes, extortion, negligence, misappropriation of public funds, and delay in compliance with laws or legislative decrees. Article 198. The responsibility mentioned in the preceding article, and in general all those arising from the execution of ministerial functions, shall be given effect by Congress through interpellation. A minister who is censured as a result of interpellation shall immediately cease to be such, and may not serve as a minister for the remainder of the same presidential term or for the two years following the censure. There shall be no votes of lack of confidence.

43

TITLE IX

The Judicial Function

Chapter I The Judiciary

Article 199. The judicial function is exercised by the Supreme Court, the superior courts, and the other tribunals and courts that the Constitution and the laws establish. The judicial profession of magistrates, judges, officials, and employees shall be regulated by law. Article 200. The law shall provide that justice be administered gratuitously. Trials shall be public, except in cases stipulated by law, but tribunals may confer in secret. In no case shall there be more than three instances. Judgments shall include a statement of the facts and the law upon which they are based. In procedural law, there shall be an effort to handle cases simply and efficiently; insofar as possible, oral argument shall be used and justice shall never be sacrificed because of the mere omission of technicalities. Article 201. Magistrates and judges are independent in the exercise of their functions. No other organ of the State shall exercise the powers belonging to the judicial function, unless the law gives it competence to do so, nor may it interfere in judicial activities. Except for cases established in special laws, the review of proceedings or trials of any kind may not be ordered, when such cases have been decided by legitimate authority in the last instance. Article 202. The Supreme Court of Justice has jurisdiction throughout the national –Territory and has its seat in the capital. The law shall determine the number of judges at the number, organization, and functioning of the courts. Article 203. Justices of the Supreme Court shall be elected by Congress in joint session; they shall hold office for six years and may be reelected an indefinite number of times.

44

Vacancies arising in the Supreme Court shall be filled on a temporary basis by the Court itself, and the justices thus elected shall hold office until Congress elects the permanent justices. Article 204. In order to be a justice of the Supreme Court it is necessary: 1. 2. 3. To be Ecuadorian by birth. To be in the exercise of political rights. To be at least forty years of age.

4. To have been a practicing lawyer of recognized integrity for at least fifteen years. 5. If the foregoing requirement is not met, to have been a judge for twelve years, which must include a full term as judge of a superior court. The requirements set forth in paragraphs 4 and 5 of this article may be substituted by the holding of a university professorship in law for at least twelve years. Article 205. The duties and powers of the Supreme Court are as follows: 1. To appoint judges of the superior courts, who shall hold office for five years and may be reelected indefinitely. 2. To supervise the tribunals and courts.

3. In the event of contradictory judgments on the same point of law, to issue a ruling, which shall have force as long as the legislature does not reverse it. 4. To suspend, in whole or in part, and at any time, either on its own initiative or upon petition, the effects of a law, ordinance, or decree that is unconstitutional for reason of form or substance, which measure the Court shall submit to Congress so that it may decide upon it at its next session. Neither the decision of the Supreme Court nor that of Congress shall have retroactive effect. 5. To establish or change the territorial jurisdiction of the superior courts or their divisions, of the regular and special courts, and of their officers and subordinate employees. To determine, at the national, district, or sectional level, the legal 6. or operational fees or charges and those of notaries and registrars of deeds. It shall review these remunerations at least every five years. 7. To prescribe and change the regulations of the various dependencies and activities of the judiciary; these regulations shall establish the penalties to be imposed on officials and employees who fail to fulfill their duties.

45

8. To present proposed laws, and, through one or more of its judges, to attend sessions of Congress or of its committees to discuss them, without the right to vote. To exercise the other powers that the Constitution and the laws 9. confer upon it. Decisions and regulations made by the Supreme Court, in the exercise of the powers granted to it in paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of this article, shall have no effect unless they are published in the official register; such publication shall require only the order of the Court itself. Article 206. Without prejudice to the power set forth in paragraph 4 of the preceding article, the Supreme Court, in particular cases of which it takes cognizance, may declare any legal norm contrary to the Constitution to be inapplicable. This declaration shall have no compulsory force, except in the cases to which it refers. Article 207. Justices of the Supreme Court shall cease to hold office for the following reasons: 1. 2. 3. 4. Termination of the period which they are elected. Death or resignation. Permanent physical or mental incapacity. Negligence or serious deficiencies in the performance of their duties.

In the cases specified in paragraphs 3 and 4, Congress shall declare the cessation of duties after verifying the causes and hearing the interested party, whenever possible. Acceptance of the resignation is the responsibility of Congress, or, if it is in recess, the Supreme Court. Article 208. There shall be a superior court of justice in each district, with jurisdiction in the province or provinces included therein. Its organization, powers, and functioning shall be regulated by law, which shall also establish the other organs of this court. Article 209. To be a judge of a superior court it is necessary to be a native of Ecuador, to be in exercise of one's political rights, to be at least thirty-five years of age, to be a lawyer, and to have held judicial office with integrity or to have held a university professorship in law for at least eight years, or practiced the profession of law with recognized integrity for at least ten years. Article 210. Magistrates and judges have no powers other than those granted to them by law and are responsible for the performance of their duties in accordance therewith. Article 211. Unjustified delay in the administration of justice shall be severely dealt with by the law, and in the event of recurrence, shall be sufficient

46

cause for dismissal of the magistrate or judge, who, moreover, shall be responsible for damages and losses to the affected parties. Article 212. Magistrates, judges, and government attorneys may not practice law except in those cases determined by law; nor may they hold any other public or private office, except a university professorship. They may not be members of the directorates of political parties or, without prejudice to the performance of civic duties, take part in electoral contests.

Chapter II

Litigation

Article 213, Tribunals of law, with headquarters in Quito and jurisdiction throughout the national territory, shall take cognizance of and rule upon administrative and tax questions. The law shall establish the number of chambers and magistrates, and shall determine the organization and operation of the tribunal that is to handle general litigation and that which is to handle tax litigation. Article 214, From the lists of candidates sent by the Supreme Court, Congress in joint session shall elect the magistrates of the tribunals of law for a period of five years. For magistrates of these tribunals, the same requirements prevail as for justices of the Supreme Court in addition to those established in laws on litigation. These magistrates shall be subject to the same prohibitions, responsibilities, and disqualifications as the justices of the Supreme Court. Article 215. The Administrative Law Tribunal hears arguments by natural or juridical persons against regulations, acts, and decisions of the public administration or of semipublic agencies, and decides upon their legality or applicability; it is also responsible for taking cognizance of and settling matters relating to violations of the civil service law and determining the responsibility of the administration, its officials and employees. Article 216. The Tax Tribunal shall hear and decide tax litigation matters, including customs matters and those arising from the violation of tax laws; disputes regarding decisions of the comptroller's office, which establishes financial responsibility in taxes, in state and municipal financial activities, and in the acts of other institutions under its control and jurisdiction; and other matters assigned to it by law. Article 217. The magistrates of the tribunals of law may attend meetings of Congress or of its committees to participate, without the right to vote, in discussions of administrative and tax bills. The procedure of compulsion is established for the Treasury and Article 218. other institutions of public law.

47

The National Social Security Fund may use compulsion to collect taxes, reserve funds, and, in general, funds due from employers; it may also use compulsion against withholding agents to collect discounts or deductions made, as well as interest and fines for delays in payment of funds due.

TITLE X

Other Organizations of the State

Chapter I

The Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees

Article 219. There shall be a Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, with headquarters in Quito and with jurisdiction throughout the republic. Its membership shall be as follows: 1. One senator, elected by the Senate.

2. Two deputies, elected by the Chamber of Deputies, one of whom shall represent the minority. 3. 4. 5. 6. The president of the Supreme Court of Justice. One representative of the president of the republic. The attorney general of the State. The president of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal.

7. Three citizens who are not members of the legislature, elected by Congress, in joint session. The members mentioned in paragraphs 4 and 7 must be Ecuadorians by birth, in exercise of their political rights, and at least thirty years of age; they shall hold office for two years and may be reelected. The other members shallmeet the requirements established by the Constitution and the laws for the performance of their respective duties. The members of this tribunal shall enjoy the same guarantees and immunities as those of legislators. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term by the respective alternates, appointed at the same time as the principal members.

48

The members of the tribunal, elected by the Congress in joint session, must represent the various political opinions of the nation, and at least one of these members must represent the parliamentary minority. The ministers of state, the comptroller general, and the heads of political parties recognized by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal may attend the sessions of the tribunal and participate in its discussions, without the right to vote. Article 220. The powers and duties of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees are as follows: 1. To see to the observance of the Constitution and the laws, especially as regards constitutional guarantees, to which it shall call the attention of the president of the republic and other officials of the government and the administration. 2. To make observations regarding decrees, decisions, regulations, and resolutions issued in violation of the Constitution or the laws, which shall be done after it hears the report of the authority or agency responsible. If the observations are not accepted, the tribunal shall publish them in the press and present them to Congress for consideration, so that it may decide upon the allegation of unconstitutionality or illegality. 3. To take cognizance of the complaints made by any natural or juridical person regarding violation of the Constitution or of the laws; to present the accusation against the officials responsible and, except as provided by the Penal Code, to present these accusations before Congress so that it may prosecute those presumed responsible, or order their prosecution, according to the circumstances. To appoint temporarily, when Congress is in recess, and pursuant to 4. its requirements, officials whose appointment is the responsibility of the legislature and for which no other form of election is provided. 5. To rule on the signing of contracts not covered by Article 184.14 which, because of their amount, require that advance bids be requested. 6. To report to the president of the republic on matters which he wishes or is obligated to consult it. To exercise the other powers conferred upon it by the Constitution 7. and the laws. Article 221. The Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees shall report to Congress regarding the performance of its functions. Article 222. The law shall regulate the organization and functioning of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees and the procedures for its action.

49

Chapter II

The Public Ministry

Article 223. The Public Ministry consists of the attorney general of the State, the government attorneys of the tribunals of justice, and other officials as determined by law. Article 224. The attorney general shall hold office for four years and must meet the same requirements as those specified for a Supreme Court justice. He shall be appointed by Congress in joint session from a list of candidates presented by the president of the republic. The law shall determine the powers and duties of the attorney general and other officials of the Public Ministry as well as the conditions of their reelection, removal, and replacement.

Chapter III

The Office of the Comptroller General of the State

Article 225. The Office of the Comptroller General of the State is the auditing and accounting agency of the public Treasury; it is responsible for supervising the collection and expenditure of public funds. This supervision shall extend to all institutions of public law, and those of private law that collect taxes and receive state. subsidies. In the case of the latter, the Office of the Comptroller shall confine itself to collecting and investing these funds. The Office of the Comptroller General of the State is also responsible for seeing to the proper conservation and use of property belonging to the government, the municipalities, and other institutions of public law. It shall also examine and audit their accounts and maintain the accounts of the Treasury. The Office of the Comptroller General shall enforce the responsibility of contributors who are in arrears on the various payments due to the National Social Security Fund. Article 226. The Office of the Comptroller General of the State is autonomous in its administrative functions and is headed by a comptroller general, who is required to prepare the budget of his agency and to appoint its personnel, as provided by law. The decisions of the comptroller general of the State regarding the accounts of contributors are final as regards the administrative process; nevertheless, they may be reviewed by the comptroller himself and may be contested before the respective court of law.

50

Article 227. From the list of candidates presented by the president of the republic, Congress in joint session shall elect the comptroller general, who shall hold office for four years and may be reelected indefinitely. He may be removed by the Congress only for just cause. Article 228. The law shall regulate the organization and functioning of the Office of the Comptroller General of the State and shall provide it with sufficient funds to ensure its autonomy. The comptroller general of the State shall make an annual report of his activities to the national Congress.

Chapter IV

The Superintendency of Banks

Article 229. The Superintendency of Banks is the autonomous technical agency responsible for supervising the activities of banking institutions, insurance companies, and the other natural and juridical persons as provided by law. It shall take special care to see that the natural and juridical persons under its control act in accordance with the law, guarantee the rights of shareholders and of the public, and pay the corresponding taxes; it shall also see that such persons do not make arbitrary changes in interest or commission rates or in the conditions and legal standards of operation. Article 230. The administration of this technical agency is carried out by a superintendent, appointed for four years by Congress, in joint session which shall select him from a list of candidates sent to him by the president of the republic. The superintendent may be reelected indefinitely. The law shall regulate the duties, powers, organization, and operation of the Superintendency of Banks; it shall set forth the conditions under which the superintendent may be removed and replaced. Article 231. The budget of the Superintendency of Banks is independent of the government budget. It shall be approved by the Monetary Board and administered by the superintendent, who shall render the accounts to the Office of the Comptroller General of the State and shall present an annual report of his activities to the national Congress. Notwithstanding its characteristics as a banking institution, the officials and employees of the Superintendency are public employees.

5

1

Chapter V The Superintendency of Companies

Article 232. The Superintendency of Companies is the autonomous technical agency responsible for seeing that corporations, joint-stock companies, mixed companies, and others established as provided by the laws act in accordance therewith. The activities under the control of the Superintendency of Banks are excepted from the supervision of the Superintendency of Companies. Article 233. The administration of this technical agency is carried out by a superintendent, elected for four years by Congress in joint session from a list of candidates sent to it by the president of the republic. He may be reelected indefinitely. The law shall regulate the powers, duties, organization, and functioning of the Superintendency of Companies, as well as the conditions under which the superintendent may be removed and replaced. Article 234. The budget of the Superintendency of Companies is independent of the government budget; it shall be approved by the executive and administered by the superintendent, who shall render the accounts to the Office of the Comptroller General of the State and make an annual report of his activities to the national Congress. The officials and employees of the Superintendency of Companies are public employees and shall have the same rights and legal standing as do those of the Superintendency of Banks.

Chapter VI

The National Planning and Coordination Board

Article 235. The National Planning and Coordination Board, with headquarters in Quito, is the agency responsible for planning the economic and social development of the country and for coordinating its activities in these fields. Its membership shall be as determined by law. Article 236. The duties and powers of the National Planning and Coordination Board are as follows: 1. To prepare the general economic and social development plan of the nation, submit it to the president of the republic for consideration, and evaluate its implementation.

52

To establish, for the proper implementation and fulfillment of the 2. general development plan, the rules to be followed by public and semipublic agencies in drawing up their programs. 3. To integrate and coordinate within the general development plan the programs of action prepared by institutions of public law and by semipublic agencies. 4. To coordinate the external technical and financial assistance provided to the agencies carrying out the general development plan. 5. To discharge the other functions assigned to it by the Constitution and by the laws.

TITLE XI

Sectional System

The territory of Ecuador is indivisible, and provinces, cantons, Article 237. and parishes are established only for the purpose of sectional government. The law shall determine the requirements that the various territorial divisions must meet to be classified as such. The boundary lines of provinces, cantons, and parishes neither grant nor take away territory. They are simply references to denote the limits of political and administrative jurisdiction and may be modified in accordance with the law.

jefe politico;

Article 238. In each province there shall be a governor; in each canton, a in each parish, a teniente politico.

These officials shall be appointed by the president of the republic and shall exercise their functions in accordance with the law. Article 239. In each province there shall be a provincial council, with headquarters in the capital and jurisdiction throughout the province; its members shall be elected by direct popular vote. These entities have the functional and financial autonomy necessary to fulfill their purposes. The law shall determine their structure, membership, and functioning, and shall provide for the effective operation of this autonomy and for promoting the strengthening and development of provincial life. The provincial prefect, elected by direct popular vote for a term determined by law, shall be the executive authority who presides over the council, having only a deciding vote. Article 240. The provincial councils shall promote the progress of the provinces and their association with central agencies. Their duties and powers shall be established by law.

53

Article 241. Each canton constitutes a municipality. The municipal government is entrusted to a council, whose members shall be elected by direct popular vote, as provided by law. To carry on municipal activities, the councils of the provincial capitals shall have a mayor, elected by direct popular vote, who shall preside over the municipality, having only a deciding vote. Article 242. The municipalities enjoy functional and financial autonomy in order to fulfill their purposes. The law shall provide for the effective operation of the principle of autonomy and shall promote the strengthening and development of municipal life; it shall determine the powers and duties of the municipal governments, and, within constitutional limitations, may establish different systems in accordance with the population, financial resources, and importance of each canton. Article 243. Each rural parish shall have a parish board, whose members shall be elected by direct popular vote. These boards shall supervise parish public services, determine projects of interest to the parish, and manage the funds for projects under its jurisdiction. Each board shall elect a chairman from among its members. Article 244. These boards may form associations for the purpose of uniting their efforts for projects of collective interest; to promote economic and social development, agencies that group together several provinces may also be established in coordination with the general development plan. Article 245. The financial and administrative autonomy guaranteed by this Constitution to the provincial councils, the municipal councils, and the parish boards does not relieve them from their obligation to adhere to the general development plan. Article 246. National, provincial, and cantonal public works and services shall be performed respectively by the State, the provincial council, and the municipal council; public funds shall be distributed for this purpose, taking into account the productive capacity of the territorial divisions, their requirements, and the coordination thereof with national requirements. Each year, following a study by the National Planning and Coordination Board, the national Congress shall distribute the public funds in accordance with the foregoing provision; this distribution shall be taken into account in preparing the general budget of the State. In this budget, sufficient funds shall be allocated each year to the municipality of Quito to enable it to meet its requirements as the capital of the State. The foregoing notwithstanding, basic revenues are established as indicated at the end of this article to guarantee the financial autonomy of the province and in keeping with the amounts currently allotted to other bodies, without prejudice to those that they may receive in accordance with the law. No subsequent law may deprive the provinces, municipalities, or parishes, in whole or in part, of such revenues. The above-mentioned revenues are as follows:

54

1. Ten percent of the income tax in each province, for its provincial council. The urban property tax and retail sales taxes collected within each 2. canton, for its council. 3. The rural property tax, for the respective rural parishes.

If the collectors of the national Treasury or its departments collect the revenues specified above, they shall deliver them to the appropriate bodies within a period not exceeding thirty days. Article 247. The legislative power of the provincial councils and municipalities is expressed through ordinances. The Supreme Court takes cognizance of and resolves any claim presented in this respect.

TITLE XII
The Public Forces

Article 248. The public forces are composed of the armed forces and the national civil police. Their organization, privileges, and jurisdiction shall be regulated by the respective laws. The mission of the armed forces is to protect the sovereignty of the State, guarantee constitutional order, and defend the nation against external attack. The national civil police is responsible for safeguarding internal security and order. Without prejudice to the fundamental mission of the public forces, the law shall determine the tasks they are to carry out in the economic and social development of the country. The public forces are not deliberative. Only the authorities Article 249. giving orders shall be responsible for orders that are contrary to the Constitution and the laws. The public forces are especially prohibited from obeying any order contrary to the provisions of Article 190.4. Article 250. Members of the armed forces and of the national civil police on active duty are subject respectively to military and police command and jurisdiction. The same is true for civil employees of these forces. The professional activities of retired personnel shall be regulated by law; those of military personnel on active duty, by the ministry responsible for national defense; and those of the police, by the ministry responsible for internal order and security.

55

Article 251. In the manner and to the extent determined by law, Ecuadorians as well as foreigners residing in Ecuador are obligated to take part in the national defense. Military service is compulsory, as provided by law. In addition to the armed forces, permanent reserve forces shall be organized in accordance with the needs of the State. Article 252. The president of the republic is commander in chief of the armed forces. In the event of international war or domestic disturbance, he may delegate his authority to the commander of the forces mobilized, for the technical command of such forces. Within the specified zone of operations, the latter shall have command and jurisdiction over the civil and military authorities. Article 253. Frontier commands have civil powers in conformity with the law. Article 254. The professional tenure of members of the public forces is guaranteed; neither their individual nor collective demotion may be decreed except as provided by law.

TITLE XIII

Miscellaneous Provisions

Article 255. The following are juridical persons under public law: the State, the provincial councils, the municipalities, the parish boards, and public institutions established as such and regulated by special laws. Article 256. The permanence and autonomy of the following are guaranteed: the National Social Security Fund, the Central Bank of Ecuador, the National Development Bank, and other semipublic juridical persons. Also guaranteed are the permanence and administrative and financial autonomy of the welfare boards, regional and provincial economic development corporations, and other autonomous bodies having social or public aims. The public funds placed at their disposal may not be withheld or reduced without proper compensation. The employees of the aforementioned juridical entities are governed by the Labor Code and by their special laws; with reference to strikes, they shall be governed by the rules covering the employees of public service enterprises.

56

TITLE XIV Supremacy, Amendment, and Permanence of the Constitution The Constitution is the supreme law of the State. All other Article 257. laws must be in conformity with constitutional principles; therefore, any laws, decrees, regulations, ordinances, provisions, and public treaties that are in any way contradictory to it are null and void. Congress alone has the power to interpret the Constitution in a manner generally obligatory and to resolve doubts that may arise with regard to the meaning of its precepts. Congress in ordinary session may discuss any proposed Article 258. constitutional amendment, provided it follows the procedure established for the enactment of laws. However, Congress may make no change that will replace the republican form of government or the democratic nature of the Ecuadorian State. If the proposal is approved by both chambers, it shall be submitted to the president of the republic so that he may make known his opinion. If he favors the amendment, Congress in ordinary joint session, and with the attendance of the justices and attorneys of the Supreme Court (who shall have the right to voice and vote) shall adopt or reject, in whole or in part, the proposed amendment, in a single discussion and by an absolute majority of all its members. If the president of the republic disapproves of the amendment, in whole or in part, he shall submit the part or parts with which he disagrees to a plebiscite, in accordance with the provisions of Article 184.10. The president of the republic may not veto an amendatory law and shall be obligated to promulgate it. If an amendment to the Constitution is proposed by the president of the republic and rejected in whole or in part by Congress, the matter shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Article 184.10. This Constitution shall not lose its effect, even when it ceases Article 259. to be observed by rebellion or act of force. If by rebellion or act of force a de facto government is established, as soon as the people recover their freedom and normal conditions are reestablished, the Constitution shall again be observed, and in conformity with it and with the laws enacted by virtue of it, those who have exercised the de facto government shall be tried. Those who, through rebellion or act of force, suspend observance of this Constitution and as a consequence thereof exercise de facto government, may at no time be elected or hold any office by popular election. Article 260. This Constitution repeals all previous juridical precepts that are contrary to its provisions, whether issued by legitimate authorities or by de facto governments, so that any laws, decrees, regulations, decisions, orders or

57

resolutions issued before the Constitution takes effect shall be in force only insofar as they are in conformity with it, and provided that they are not or have not been repealed or revoked, with the exception of rights validly acquired in accordance with such precepts. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS FIRST. When this Constitution is promulgated, the National Constituent Assembly shall continue to exercise all its powers until its adjournment. SECOND. On the first Sunday in June 1968, the following shall be elected by direct, secret, popular ballot: the president and vice president of the republic, senators, and deputies, in accordance with this Constitution and the Law of Elections. Functional senators will also be elected, as provided by law. The national Congress will open its first regular session on August 10, 1968. The president and vice president of the republic shall take office on September 1 of the same year. Until that time, and subject to the precepts of this Constitution, the acting president of the republic already elected by the National Constituent Assembly, shall exercise the functions of the chief of State. In the event of the temporary or permanent absence of the acting president, the present president of the National Constituent Assembly shall replace him. THIRD. Until the Supreme Electoral Tribunal approves the credentials of the citizens elected in accordance with the foregoing provision, the deputies of the present Assembly shall remain as such, provided that they have not incurred the disqualifications stipulated in this Constitution. If it is necessary for the legislature to meet before the credentials of the new legislators are approved, the present deputies shall constitute a unicameral congress. The president of the Assembly, either on his own initiative or at the request of an absolute majority of the deputies of the present Assembly, or the acting president of the republic may convoke this legislature, which may deal with no matters other than those expressly set forth in the convocation. If the convocation is requested by an absolute majority of the members of the Assembly, it shall be compulsory, and if it is not issued, the deputies shall meet and shall install the legislature. FOURTH. The National Constituent Assembly shall elect, for this time, members of the Permanent Legislative Committee and of its auxiliary committees from among the deputies who have attended the present Assembly. They shall retain their positions until the regular 1968 session of Congress appoints the senators and deputies who are to replace them. It shall also elect the members of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees and the officials who, in accordance with this Constitution, must be appointed by the national Congress.

58

Moreover, it shall elect for this time all the magistrates of the Supreme Court and of the superior courts of justice. The Permanent Legislative Committee shall distribute the work to the auxiliary committees and shall regulate their activities until the pertinent provisions are issued. FIFTH. On November 16, 1967 and for a period of thirty days, which cannot be extended, the legislature shall meet to enact the Law of Elections and the general budget of the State for 1968.

November 16 of this year, and on that date the Technical Budgetary Committee shall
deliver the preliminary draft budget. Until the next regular session of Congress, the Permanent Legislative Committee may approve contracts committing the credit of the State. The Permanent Legislative Committee shall be especially entrusted with processing claims presented to the Assembly by persons who have suffered damages by the military dictatorship, not yet settled by the special committees. It shall also be empowered to receive the necessary evidence and to indicate the amount of the corresponding indemnities. These shall be paid with State bonds, issued by the executive function for the purpose. The Committee shall complete this work within ninety days from the date that this Constitution enters into force. These claims shall be presented to the National Constituent Assembly until the close of its work. SIXTH. For this time, and until December 31, 1967, political organizations not registered as parties may, in accordance with the law, present lists for elections. Within this same period, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal shall proceed with the new registration of the political parties and with the recognition and registration of those that have requested or do request it and meet the requirements of the law. The decision shall be reached within sixty days from the date that the request is presented. If no decision is issued, the parties shall be considered as legally recognized and it shall be compulsory to register them. SEVENTH. The provisions of Article 29, paragraph 4 shall apply only to estates opened as a result of deaths occurring after the entry into force of this Constitution. EIGHTH. The provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 64 of this Constitution shall apply to all cases in which labor relations end after the entry into force of this Constitution. NINTH. For this time, the presidents of the provincial councils, elected from among their members, shall serve as prefects. Like the councilors and mayors, they shall hold office until replaced by elections held in accordance with pertinent laws. The councilor who becomes prefect shall be replaced by the respective alternate.

The Permanent Legislative Committee shall prepare the elections bill by

59

FINAL ARTICLE This Constitution shall enter into force on the date of its publication in the Official Register, which shall be ordered by the president of the National Constituent Assembly. Done at the Legislative Palace in Quito, on May 25, 1967.*

Published in the Official Register of May 25, 1967.

60

