CONSTITUTION of the Republic of San Salvador, October 16, 1871.

IN the presence of God, Supreme Legislator of the Universe, and in the name of the Salvadorean Nation, the National Constituent Congress decrees, sanctions, and proclaims the following Constitution: 

TITLE I Of the Nation. 

ART. I. The Salvadorean nation i3 the political association of all the Salvadoreans. It is sovereign, free, and independent, and can never be the patrimony of any family or person. II . The sovereignty is inalienable and imprescriptible, and is limited to what is reasonable, just, and expedient for society; it resides essentially in the whole of the citizens; no fraction of population or of persons can assume it, and its exercise is radically circumscribed to making the elections according to the law. 

III . All public authority emanates from the people; the functionaries are their delegates and agents, and have no other powers than such as are expressly given to them by the law. By that they ordain, decide, and govern; by that they are entitled to obedience and respect; and in conformity with that they must give account of their proceedings. 

IV. The boundaries of the territory of Salvador are, to the east the Gulf of Fonseca; to the north, the Republics of Guatemala and Honduras; to the west, the Hiver Paz; and to the south, the Pacific Ocean.- The special demarcation will be the subject of accessory laws. 

V. The Government of the Salvadorean nation is republican, popular, representative and alternative, and shall be exercised by 3 distinct authorities, independent of each other, which will be denominated the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial. 

VI. The Catholic Apostolic religion is the religion of the State, and the Government shall protect it. The public worship of the Christian sects is tolerated in so far as they are not offensive to morality or to public order. 

TITLE II. Of the Salvadoreans and Citizens. 

VII. The native Salvadoreans are: 1. All who are born in the territory of Salvador, except the children of foreigners not naturalised ; 2. The children of a foreigner by a Salvadorean woman, or vice versa, born in the territory of Salvador ; 3. The children born in a foreign country of Salvadoreans not naturalised therein.

VIII. Naturalised Salvadoreans are foreigners who have acquired that character in conformity with the previous laws, and those who obtain it in future according to the following rules: 1. Spanish Americans who obtain letters of naturalisation from the governing authority, who will grant them to any one who proves domiciliation for a year in the Republic, and his good conduct; 2. Other foreigners who solicit and obtain letters of naturalisation from any governing authority, on previous proof of two years' domiciliation and good conduct; 3. Those who obtain letters of naturalisation from the Legislative Body. 

IX . All Salvadoreans are citizens who are full 21 years of age, and of good conduct, and who have besides any of the following qualifications: Being father of a family, or head of a house; Being able to read and write, or having the means of living independently ; Those who are full 18 years of age, and obtain a literary degree, are also citizens. X. The rights of citizenship are suspended : 1. By justified warrant of arrest in criminal proceedings which do not admit of release on bail; 2. For having been legally declared a fraudulent debtor, or debtor to the public revenue, in default of payment on judgment) 3. By conduct notoriously corrupt, or proved vagrancy; 4. By mental alienation; 5. By judicial interdiction. XI . The following lose the character of citizens: 1. Those who are condemned for a crime that does not admit of release on bail; 2. Those who while residing in the Republic accept employment from another nation without licence from the Legislative Power; 3. Those who get naturalised in a foreign country; 4. Those who sell their votes in the popular elections. XII . Only actual citizens can obtain public appointments or posts in the Republic.

TITLE III.  Of Foreigners.

X I I I . Foreigners residing in any part of Salvador areliableto all the imposts and obligations to which the Salvadoreans are liable; and in case they be unduly molested in their persons and property, they shall have the same safeguards as the natives to prosecute the transgressors and offenders at law; and they shall be heard and attended to in the courts the same as the natives. I n the same manner foreigners, when they have to plead any

right against the nation, shall have recourse to the tribunal appointed by law for the Salvadoreans in the same case. XIV. Foreigners shall take no part, on any pretext, in the popular elections, nor in the political questions of the country, and in case of contravention they shall be punished according to law. XV. Foreigners may acquire landed property in the nation, but such property shall not on that account be exonerated from the legal charges to which it would be liable if it were in the hands of Salvadoreans. The circumstance of a foreigner marrying a Salvadorean woman does not deprive her of her character as a Salvadorean, nor does it exempt her property from the imposts and taxes to which the property of other Salvadoreans is liable. XVI. The children of foreigners born in the Republic, and emancipated according to law, must declare before the proper authority, within a year after the emancipation, whether they accept the Salvadorean nationality or not, but if they do not make such declaration they shall be considered as naturalized. IV. Of the Elections. XVII. The elections of the supreme authorities, saving the exceptions hereinafter prescribed, shall be direct, and the law will regulate the manner of carrying them out. XVIII. The population is the basis of the electoral system. Tor this purpose the territory of the Republic shall be divided into circles, districts, and cantons. Registers shall be made of the citizens in each canton ; only those inscribed therein shall have a vote. XIX. Each circle shall consist of 80,000 souls, and shall elect a Senator in his own right, and a substitute; and each district of 15,000 shall elect a Deputy in his own right, and a substitute. The circles and districts which cannot be formed of the aforesaid numbers of souls, provided that the former have not less than 16,000 and the latter not less than 8,000, shall still elect a Senator and a Deputy. If they have less than those numbers they shall be added to the nearest to vote with them.
TITLE

V.  Of the Qualifications necessary to obtain the Posts of the Supreme Authorities. XX. To be President of the Republic it is required to be a native of Salvador, to be full 33 years of age, and not to be more than 65 ; to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship, and not to have lost them for 5 years next preceding the election ; to be of well-known integrity and ability; and to possess landed property situated in the territory of the Republic, free from all encumbrance, and not less than 10,000 dollars in value. The President cannot mortgage nor alienate such property during the exercise of his functions, nor for two years afterwards. Natives of the other sections of Central America may be elected as Presidents of the Republic, if they combine the following qualifications: 1st. Having been domiciled in Salvador for 15 years next preceding the election, and not having lost citizenship for 5 years previously. 2nd. Possessing landed property in Salvador, free from all encumbrance, and not less than 25,000 dollars in value, which must not be mortgaged or alienated during the Presidential period, nor for two years after. 3rd. Having married a Salvadorean woman. 4th. Having rendered important services to the Republic. And 5th. Being 33 years of age, and not more than (35. To be Vice-President, the same qualifications are required in the respective cases. XXI. To be Senator, it is required to be full 33 years of age; to be a native of the Republic, with domiciliation for one year in the electing department; to have a clear capital of not less than 2,000 dollars in landed property, situated in the territory of Salvador ; to be of well-known integrity and understanding, and not to have lost the rights of citizenship in the 5 years preceding the election. The natives of the other Republics of Central America may also be Senators, provided that they possess clear 5,000 dollars in landed property in the Republic, and have been domiciled therein for 10 year3, the last of which has been in the electing department, with the other conditions indicated in the preceding paragraph. XXH. To be eligible as a Representative in the Chamber of Deputies, it is required to be full 21 years of age, of well-known integrity, not to have lost the rights of citizenship for two years before the election, and to be a native of Central America, with 5 years' domicile in Salvador, and one in the electing district. The substitute Senators and Deputies shall have respectively the same qualifications as are required for those in their own right. XXIII. No clergyman can obtain a post by popular election. XXIV. The members of the Legislative Body are Representatives of the whole Republic, and not of the circle or district that elects them. XXV. To be Magistrate of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, it is required to be a native of the Republic, or a Central American naturalized therein, and in actual exercise of citizenship; to be 30 years of age ; to be an advocate of this Republic, of known integrity and understanding ; to have exercised the profession for the space of 4 years in Salvador, or the magistracy or judicature for two years, to the satisfaction of the public; and to possess a capital of 
2,000 dollars, or to give security for that amount. The same conditions are required for the substitute magistrates. XXVI. The condition of magistrate is incompatible with that of functionary of the other authorities. XXVII. Blood relations within the fourth, and relations by affinity within the second degree, cannot act simultaneously as magistrates. If this provision be contravened, the elections subsequent to the first shall be void. XXVIII. No functionary appointed by the Executive can be elected Senator or Deputy until 6 months after he shall have relinquished the exercise of his functions. XXIX. Neither the Senators nor the Deputies can obtain, during the period for which they have been elected, any post in the appointment of the Executive, nor any pension, distinction, or emolument granted by that Power; and, if, in contravention of this prohibition, they should accept any, they shall cease by that fact to be Representatives in the Chambers, and shall lose the rights of citizenship for 5 years, without opportunity of reinstatement. The Judges of First Instance can neither be Deputies nor Senators.

TITLE VI. Of the Legislative Power and its Organization.

XXX. The Legislative Power shall be exercised by two Chambers, one of Deputies and the other of Senators, elected on the terms stated ; they shall be independent of*each other, shall assemble every year without need of convocation from the 1st to the 15th of January, and their sessions must have 40. A lesser number of Representatives in each of them has power to take immediately all the requisite measures in order to procure the attendance of the others, until the completion of the plenary number. XXXI. The majority of the members of each Chamber shall be sufficient to-pass resolutions; but when there are less than two-thirds of the elected, the consent of two-third parts of those present shall be necessary for every legislative resolution. XXXII. They shall open and close their sessions at the same time; neither of them can suspend or prorogue the sessions for more-than 3 days without the consent of the other, nor remove to another place without the concurrence of both. XXXIII. The Chamber of Deputies shall be wholly renewed every year, and its members can always be re-elected. The Chamber of Senators shall be renewed by thirds every year, so that in 3 years it shall be completely new. In the first two years the Chamber itself shall decide by lot those who are to be renewed.



VII. Of the Faculties peculiar to each Chamber. XXXIV. It belongs to each of the Chambers without the intervention of the other: 1. To confirm the election of their respective members, and to approve or reject their credentials. 2. To summon the substitutes in case of the death of the regular members or their inability to attend. 3. To accept the resignations tendered for causes legally proved. 4. To draw up its internal regulations, and to require responsibility from its own members, with the rules by which they are to be tried, both for serious faults in the exercise of their functions, and in the cases specified in the following Article. XXXV. The representatives of the nation are inviolable. Consequently, no Deputy or Senator shall be responsible at any time for his opinions, whether expressed by word of mouth or in writing. No civil action can be carried on or commenced against them from the day of the election until 15 days after the Legislative Power has adjourned. Neither can they be tried from the day of the election to the recess, for serious offences which they may commit, unless by their respective Chamber, for the sole purpose of expelling the delinquent and sending him before the ordinary tribunals. For the serious offences which they may commit during the 15 days subsequent to the recess, they shall be tried by the ordinary competent judge; but they cannot be arrested nor called upon to plead until the expiration of the said 15 days. For the less serious offences and faults which they may commit from the election until 15 days after the recess, they shall also be tried by the ordinary competent judge j but they cannot be arrested nor called upon to plead until the aforesaid 15 days have expired. If during the indicated period a representative be taken in the act of crime, the ordinary authority may place him in custody, giving account thereof and of the proceedings taken to the respective Chamber within 24 hours if it be assembled; and if it be not assembled, he shall be set at liberty within the same term, and he cannot be re-arrested until the expiration of the aforesaid 15 days. 

TITLE VIII. Of the Attributes of the Legislative Power. 

XXXVI. It belongs to the Legislative Power: 1. To enact, interpret, reform, and repeal the secondary laws. 2. To create jurisdictions and to establish tribunals and judges therein, in order that they, in the name of the Republic, may inquire into, by, and pass sentence on every kind of civil and criminal causes and matters. 

3. To specify the attributions and jurisdiction of the different functionaries. 4. To appoint the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice in General Assembly. 5. To establish imposts and taxes on every kind of property and income in due proportion; and to decree forced loans in cases of invasion or war legally declared, provided that the ordinary public revenues are not sufficient, or that voluntary loans cannot be obtained. 6. To authorise the Executive Power to contract voluntary loans within the Republic or out; of it, when serious and urgent necessity requires them ; but the amount of the said loans must not exceed the moiety of the public revenues for a year, calculated on those of the preceding one, and no fresh loan can be negotiated until the previous one is paid. 7. To fix and pass yearly the estimates for the expenses of the public administration, regulating the management and appropriation of the revenues, so that public instruction and the prompt administration of justice be attended to in the first place ; and to assign a sufficient revenue for payment of the special estimate for the Legislative and Judicial Powers, which revenue shall be collected and managed by a treasurer appointed on purpose by the first of the aforesaid Powers. 8. To receive from the Executive, in General Assembly, a detailed and avouched account of all his official acts, and particularly of the appropriation of the public revenues during the preceding year. To confirm and acknowledge the national debt, and to assign funds for its redemption. 9. To create and organize the army and militia of Salvador, and to confer the rank from Colonel inclusive upwards. 10. To provide for the development of public instruction in all the branches of human knowledge, and to decree adequate statutes and systems. 11. To regulate the weights and measures; to promote the ways of communication; to decree the arms and flag of the Republic, and to determine the alloy, weight, and pattern of the coin. 12. To grant titles, honourable distinctions, and gratuities compatible with the established system of government, to persons or towns for eminent services to the country; to assign, increase, or diminish the salaries of the functionaries and persons in service ; to create and suppress offices. 13. To decree and grant rewards or privileges for a certain time to those who introduce new branches of industry advantageous to the country, and to concede exclusive privilege for the inventor of a very useful discovery.


14. To declare war and make peace on examination of the grounds communicated by the Executive Power. 15. To grant amnesties, pardons, or an commutations of punishment, by reason in the two latter cases of a report from the Supreme Tribunal of Justice in favour of the petitioning party. 16. To declare and proclaim in General Assembly the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to elect them, if it appear that they have not been elected by the people. To appoint the Senators who are to exercise the executive power in case of necessity. 17. To administer in General Assembly the oath to the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and to take cognisance of the resignations of those functionaries, and of the Senators designate, as well as of renunciations of rank from Colonel upwards. 18. To resolve in General Assembly any doubts that may arise, or denunciations that may be made as to the incapacity of the President or Vice-President and the other functionaries elected by the said Assembly. 19. To grant letters of naturalisation to the foreigners who solicit them. The Legislative Power may also grant letters of naturalisation and of citizenship to eminent men for their distinguished services rendered to the cause of the Republic or of humanity. 20. To declare the state of siege in the cases and for the causes that will be determined by a constitutive law. 21. To reinstate those who have lost the rights of citizenship. 22. To pass in General Assembly a vote of censure against the Ministers of State, when their official conduct does not satisfy public opinion, in which case they shall be removed from their office. 23. To grant or refuse permission to those Salvadoreans who solicit it, in order to accept employments of another nation, compatible with the Government system of Salvador. 24. To require responsibility from the superior functionaries, following in each case the corresponding provision according to this Constitution and the laws. 25. To ratify, modify, or disapprove the various Treaties and negotiations transacted by the Executive with foreign Powers, and the Concordats adjusted with the Supreme Pontiff. 

XXXVII. The Legislative Power cannot increase the stipend of the President of the Republic, Deputies, and Senators, unless it be to take effect in the following period. 

XXXVIII. When the Chambers are convoked extraordinarily by the Executive, they can only treat of the matters expressed in the minute contained in the decree of convocation


XXXIX. When the Senate has to investigate accusations referred to it by the law, it may continue sitting after the sessions, for as long as may be necessary to dispose of them. 

XL. The faculties of the Legislative Power cannot be delegated, the decrees in which any one or more of them are d to any other Power, are null and of no validity, and the Power that shall avail itself of such concession shall be considered usurper. The Senators and Deputies who may concur by their votes in the aforesaid delegation shall be deemed accomplices the crime of usurpation, and shall lose, by the very fact, of citizenship for the space of 5 years, without possibility of reinstatement during that term. The faculty of swearing-in the and Vice-President of the Republic, and the Magistrates Supreme Tribunal of Justice is excepted from the foregoing provisions.

TITLE IX. Of the Executive Power, the Regulation of the Votes for Election of the President, and the Duration of the President period. 

XLI. The Executive Power shall be exercised by a citizen who shall receive the title of President of the Republic, appointed directly by the Salvadorean nation; but if no one be elected by majority of votes, the Chambers united in General Assembly shall elect him from the three citizens who have obtained the highest number of suffrages. 

XLII. There shall be a Vice-President elected in the same manner as the President, in order to act in place of the latter, in case of death, resignation, removal, or any other impediment. In default of the Vice-President, the Executive Power shall be exercised, during the recess of the Chambers, by one of the three designate, according to the order of their appointment, in default of all the aforesaid, by the Senator nearest to the place where the Executive Power resides ; but if there be several at an equal distance, the exercise shall be assigned to him who is considered most fitting. If the Legislative Body be assembled, it shall provide for the vacancy by appointing the Senator who is to occupy the seat of the Executive. 

XLIII. The duration of the Presidential period shall be for two years, and the person who shall have exercised the Presidency in his own right shall not be capable of re-election until after a like period has elapsed, and that period shall begin and shall end on the February of the year of the renewal, and the functions cannot be exercised one day more. 
XLIV. The citizen who exercises the Presidency of the Republic shall be Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy.



XLV. The decrees, resolutions, and measures of the President of the Republic must be authorised by the Ministers of State in their respective branches. There shall be four Ministers: of Foreign Affairs, of Home Affairs, of Finance and War, and of Public Instruction ; amongst which the President shall distribute the others, as he deems most fitting. XLVI. To be Minister of State it is required: to be a native of Central America, to be full 30 years of age, of well-known morality and ability, not to have lost the rights of citizenship for 5 years previous to his appointment, and to possess a capital of not less than 2,000 dollars. The position of Minister is incompatible with that of any other office.

TITLE X. Of the attributes of the Executive Power.

XLVIL It belongs to the Executive Power: 1. To maintain intact the sovereignty and independence of the Republic, and the integrity of its territory. 2. To preserve internal peace and tranquillity. 3. To publish the law, and cause it to be executed, exercising the veto as established. 4. To appoint and remove the Secretaries of State, the Principals and Subalterns of the Revenue, the Governors of Departments, the general and local Commandants, and to accept their resignations; to appoint and remove the officers of the army from full Lieutenant Colonel downwards, and to allow them to retire; and to appoint and remove all the other functionaries of the administrative branch. 5. To appoint and remove the Ministers, and any other class of diplomatic and Consular agents with other Governments. To receive the same class of Ministers and agents accredited to the Government of the Republic, and to conduct the foreign affairs. 6. To convoke the Chambers extraordinarily when the important interests of the nation require it, summoning in such case the substitutes of the Deputies or Senators who are dead, or are legally impeded. 7. To appoint, before the installation of the Legislative Power, the place for it to assemble, when there may not be sufficient security or freedom for deliberation in that designated by the law. 8. To present to the Legislative Body in General Assembly, through his Ministers, at each ordinary session, and within 8 days from the opening thereof, a circumstantial detail and avouched account of all the acts of public administration in the past year, and the estimate of expenses for the year to come, with the means of providing for them. If this duty is not performed within the aforesaid term, the Minister who neglects it is by the fact itself

suspended from his functions, and this is to be immediately notified to the Executive, so that he may in the 8 following days present the aforesaid account and estimate through the new Minister appointed by him for the purpose, and if this be Dot done the President of the Republic shall be suspended, and the Vice-President shall assume the Executive Power, or, in his default, the Senator nominated by the Assembly General, who shall fulfil the duty within 20 days. In this case the Legislative Power may prorogue its sessions for the same term. 9. To conduct warfare, with power to dispose of the public revenue for the purpose, and conclude Treaties of peace and any other negotiations, submitting them to the ratification of the Legislature. 10. To direct the armed force, with liberty to command the army in person, in which case he shall charge the proper person with the Executive Power. 11. To raise the necessary force over and above the permanent force decreed by law; to repel invasion and stifle rebellion; convoking the Legislative Power immediately, so that, on learning the state of affairs, it may provide accordingly. 12. To commute punishments in the recess of the Legislative Power, on the ground of a report from the Supreme Tribunal of Justice in favour of the petitioner. 13. To furnish the Chambers with the reports which they require of him but if they should be on matters of reserve, he shall explain that they are so, unless the manifestation thereof be considered necessary; but he is not bound to reveal plans of warfare, or negotiations of high policy, unless in case the reports be indispensable, in order to make him responsible; then he cannot refuse them on any account, nor keep back the documents after he has been accused before the Senate by the Chamber of Deputies. 14. To issue regulations, decrees, and orders, to facilitate and secure the execution of the laws, the proper administration of the public revenue, and its legal appropriation, and on all the branches within its range, including its internal management. 15. To watch over the legal correctness of the coin, and to compute the value of the foreign money which is allowed to circulate. 16. All matters of police and order, the establishments for charity, for sciences, literature, and arts, the prisons, and houses of correction, are under his direction and supreme inspection, in accordance with the laws and statutes, likewise the compilation of the census and of statistics. 17. To allow or refuse the transit of troops from other countries in the Republic during the recess of the Legislative Body.

18. To qualify ports, and establish maritime and inland Custom Houses; to nationalize and register vessels. 19. To promote and protect the development of agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial industry. 20. To exercise the right of patronage. 21. To append the licence, if he thinks fit, to the documents which confer ecclesiastical dignity, or benefices, without which requisite the beneficiaries cannot enter into possession. Pontifical bulls, briefs, or rescripts, conciliar decrees, and other provisions, shall not possess force of law, nor can they be published until they obtain the licence of the Executive, but the letters which treat of dispensation for orders or marriages, and those issued by the Penitentiary, are exempt from this formality, 22. To propose amnesties to the Chambers when public welfare requires them, and to grant them himself during the recess of the Chambers. 23. To reinstate, during the recess of the Legislature, those who have lost the rights of citizenship. 24. To afford the functionaries of the Judicial Power the aids and force which they require for the execution of their orders.

TITLE XI. Of the Judicial Power.

XXVIII. The Judicial Power shall be exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, and the inferior Tribunals and Judges established by this Constitution. The Supreme Court shall consist of 11 persons who bear the title of Magistrates, one of whom shall be President, appointed like the rest in General Assembly; but they shall be appointed originally by this Constituent Congress. XLIX. In the capital of the Republic there shall be a Chamber of third instance, consisting of the President of the Court, and of the two Magistrates following him in the order of their appointment; and two Chambers of second instance, each consisting of two magistrates. These three Chambers shall form full court according to the law. L. A Chamber of second instance is established in the city of San Miguel, and another in that of Santa Ana, organized in the same manner as those preceding. LI. There shall be seven substitute magistrates, three for the Chambers of the capital, and two for each of the others, who shall be elected like the principals, and exercise the functions of the latter without distinction. LII. The power of judging and of causing the execution of judgment belongs exclusively to the Supreme Court of Justice and inferior tribunals.
LIII. The Chamber of third instance will take cognisance of all matters for which it is competent according to the law. The Chambers of second instance in the capital will take cognisance of all affairs within their competence, and their jurisdiction will be limited to the departments of San Salvador, La Libertad, Cuscatlan, Chalatenango, San Vincente, and La Paz. 

LIV. The Chamber of second instance at San Miguel will take cognisance on appeal of all civil and criminal causes adjudicated by the judges of first instance in the departments of San Miguel, Usulutan, and La Union, as well as of all other applications for which it is competent according to the law; and that at Santa Ana will take cognisance of the civil and criminal causes in which sentence has been passed by the judges of first instance in the departments of Santa Ana, Sonsonate, and Ahuachapan, as well as of all applications for which it is competent according to the law. LV. The principal and substitute magistrates will remain for 4 years in the exercise of their functions, and may be re-elected. They will be renewed by moiety every two years, three principals and two substitutes going out in the capital in the first period of two years; and one principal as well as one substitute in each of the Chambers of San Miguel and Santa Ana. 

LVI. It belongs to the full court: 1. To draw up the regulations for its internal government. 2. To appoint the judges of first instance and to investigate their resignations. 3. To visit the tribunals and courts by means of a magistrate, in order to correct the abuses that may be observed in the administration of justice. 4. To point out to the Legislative Power the unsuitability of the laws, or the difficulties that may have been observed in their application, indicating the reforms of which they may be susceptible. 5. To suspend, during the recess of the Senate, the magistrates for serious faults in the exercise of their functions, and to investigate the causes; also to grant them such leave as they solicit in accordance with the law. 6. To admit advocates and notaries, to suspend them and even to withdraw their licences for venality, bribery, or fraud, and to investigate the causes. 7. To take cognisance of compulsory appeals. 8. To submit to the Legislative body the estimate of expenses for the judicial power. 9. To take cognisance of prize-cases and all those that are not reserved to another authority. 10. To take incessant care that justice be promptly and fully administered.



11. To settle the contentions that may arise between the tribunals and judges of whatever jurisdiction and nature they may be. 12. To decree and effectuate the safeguard of the habeas coitus against any authority whatever. 13. To receive the oath of the judges of first instance on giving them possession of their offices, likewise of the assistant-judges, who may be appointed to form Chamber in the cases established by the law. 14. To investigate the cases of responsibility of the judges of first instance, departmental governors, and subaltern functionaries of the judicial order, with power to suspend them and deprive them on examination of the case and in conformity with the legal prescriptions. The other attributes of the full court are determined by the law. LVII. The attributions contained in Nos. 10, 11, 12, and 13 of the proceeding Article, are common to the Chambers of San Miguel and Santa Ana, in their respective jurisdiction, and they shall moreover have authority to receive the accusations or denunciations that may be brought against the functionaries referred to in No. 14, but only for the purpose of drawing out the proper indictment and reporting therewith to the full court. 

XII. Of the Formation, Sanction, and Publication of the Laic, 

LVIII. The initiative of the law is reserved exclusively to the Deputies, Senators, the President of the Republic, by means of the Ministers, and the Court of Justice. LIX. Every project of law, after having been discussed and approved in one Chamber, shall be passed to the other to be discussed and approved if it think fit; if the project be approved there, it shall be passed to the Executive Power, who, if he have no objection to make to it, shall give his sanction and cause it to be published as law. LX. If the Chamber which examines the project should amend or modify it, the said project must be returned to the Chamber of its origin, so that it may be discussed again there, with the amendments, additions, or modifications made, and if it be approved by that Chamber, it shall be passed by the same to the Executive so that he may act as directed in the preceding Article. LXI. If the Executive should Bud it inexpedient to sanction the projects of law which are passed on to him, he may return them within 5 days to the Chamber of their origin, specifying the reasons upon which he founds his opinion for the negative ; and if he should not object within the term aforesaid, the projects shall be held as sanctioned and he shall publish them as laws. In case of return, the Chamber may reconsider and ratify the project by the
votes of two-thirds; but it must be passed to the other Chamber to receive its assent by two-thirds of the votes as above, if approved, and in this case the project shall be passed on to the Executive, who shall consider it as law which he is to execute and publish, If the Congress issue a law in the last 5 days of its sessions, and the Executive find difficulties in sanctioning it, he must give immediate notice to the Congress so that it may remain assembled until the expiration of the said term ; and if this be not done the law shall be held as sanctioned. LXII. The Executive Power cannot make observations on, nor refuse his sanction to the resolutions of the Legislative Power, in the exercise of its attributes specified in Nos. 4, paragraphs 1st to 8th, 16, 18, 22, and 24, of Article XXXVI, and in all those of Article XXXIV of this Constitution. LXIII. If a project of law should be rejected and not ratified, it cannot be proposed in the same sessions, nor until those of the following Legislature. In case of the return of projects of law by the Executive, the votings of the Chambers to ratify them shall be by name, and must be recorded in the proceedings of the day. 

LXIV. Every project of law approved in the Chamber of its origin shall be drawn out in triplicate, shall be published therein, and 3 copies with the signatures of its President and Secretaries, shall be passed to the other Chamber. If this should also approve the project, it shall reserve one copy for its archives and pass the others to the Executive with this formula: " To the Executive Power." If the project be not approved, the copies shall be returned to the Chamber from which they came. 

LXV. When a project of law has been, received by the Executive, he shall, if he find no objections to it, sign the two copies and return one to the Chamber which sent them to him, and retaining the other in his archives, he shall publish it as law in the term of 5 days. LXVL When a project of law has been returned by the Executive and ratified by the Chamber of its origin, if this should be the Chamber of Deputies, it shall use the following formula: " Let it pass to the Senate;" and if it should be the Chamber of the Senate : " Let it pass to the Chamber of Deputies;" and if ii; be ratified by both, the following formula shall be used : " Let it pass to the Executive Power." If either of the Chambers do not ratify the project, this formula shall be used: " Let it return to the Chamber of Deputies," or to that of " Senators," as the case may be, " because it has not obtained the Constitutional ratification." LXVII. The publication of law shall take place in this form : " The President of the Republic of Salvador to the inhabitants
thereof: take notice, that the Legislative Power has decreed (or ordered) as follows." (Here the text and signatures.) "Wherefore, let it be executed.

TITLE XIII. Of the Inferior Judges.

LXVIII. There shall be Judges of First Instance in all the districts to investigate and pass sentence in civil and criminal cases; they shall exercise their functions for two years; the extent of territory in which they exercise their jurisdiction and their attributions will be laid down by the law. LXIX. To be Judge of First Instance it is required: to be full 25 years of age, with domiciliation for two years in Salvador ; to be advocate of the Republic, of known morality and attainments, and not to have lost the rights of citizenship for two years before his appointment. LXX. There shall be Justices of Peace in all the towns of the Republic, who shall take cognizance of affairs of minor extent and of faults ; their appointment, qualifications, and' attributes will be determined by the law. LXXI. The Judges of First Instance and every functionary of the judicial order, are subordinate to the Supreme Court of Justice. TITLE XIV. Of the Governors. LXXII, For the political administration, the territory of the Republic shall be divided into Departments, the number and boundaries of which will be fixed by the law. In each of them there shall be a Governor and a Deputy-Governor, appointed directly by the President of the Republic. LXXIII. To be Governor or Deputy-Governor it is required: to be a native or inhabitant of the Department, of known honour and attainments, to be 30 years of age, and not to have lost the rights of Salvadorean citizenship for two years before his appointment. The Governors cannot continue more than two years in the exercise of their functions, and whatever may be the time which they have to act, they shall discontinue on the day that terminates the Presidential period, and they cannot be appointed by the new President. They shall be the organ of communication between the Executive Power and municipal councils, and, moreover, the chief agents in the execution of the laws and in everything relating to the order and political administration of the Department in which they reside ; but they shall not interfere in the economical and administrative affairs of the municipalities, though they are entitled to the inspection which the law gives them in those branches. The law
will specify their attributions, the manner of exercising them, and the stipend which they are to enjoy. LXXIV. The Commander-in-general of a Department is incompatible with the office of Governor thereof.
TITLE

XV. Of the Internal Government of each Town.

LXXV. There shall be municipal councils in all the inhabited places qualified by law; the number of councillors shall be in proportion to the inhabitants; they shall be appointed by means of electors nominated by popular election, and the number of whom will be determined by law; they shall have a secretary and a treasurer, whom they shall freely appoint and remove without the intervention of any other authority, as well as the police agents and other subordinates of their appointment; they shall administer their funds for the common benefit, with entire independence of any other authority, but are bound to render account legally avouched before the authority appointed by law ; they will be responsible for the frauds or malversations which they commit. Their qualifications and attributes, and the manner of making out and explaining their accounts are determined by the law. 

LXXVI. The municipality of the chief town in each district has the power of commuting in accordance with the law, the penalties of minor arrest imposed by all the justices of peace of the district.
TITLE

v

XVI. Of the Public Force.

LXXV1L The public force consists of the national militia and of the standing army and navy; it is instituted to defend the nation from external enemies, and to ensure the maintenance of order and the execution of the laws in the interior. LXXVIII. Every Salvadorean, saving the legal exceptions, is bound to take arms to defend the independence of the Republic and the integrity of the territory. LXXIX. The standing army shall be composed of native or naturalized volunteers enlisted for the term and to the number which will be fixed by the law. In default of volunteers the said number will be made up from the militia men drawn by lot. It is chiefly intended for the Service of the garrisons in the ports, fortresses, and frontiers. LXXX. The national militia will be organized and disciplined in conformity with the law. Its number cannot exceed one per cent, of the population. LXXXI. The armed force is essentially obedient; it cannot deliberate, and the members thereof cannot be elected either as Deputies or Senators.


LXXXII. No armed body can make requisitions, or demand lodgings, beasts of burthen, maintenance, or any other kind of assistance, unless by means of the civil authorities of the towns or cantons, and by their formal order. LXXXIII. Soldiers -who belong to an organized body, and are on active service, shall enjoy the privilege of war.
TITLE

XVII.  Of the Public Treasure,

LXXXIV. The public treasure of the State consists of: 1. All its property movable and immovable, and money owing. 2. All the imposts and taxes now paid, or hereafter to be paid by the Salvadoreans for their persons, occupation, and trade or property. 3. All the duties paid by commerce. LXXXV. No kind of taxes or imposts can be demanded unless they have been previously determined by the law. LXXXVI. No sum can be drawn, paid, or subscribed out of the public treasure, unless by previous assignment of the law. An account of the receipts and expenditure of the public treasure shall be published at the beginning of each year, and the Government shall order the Treasury to publish monthly a statement of the receipts and payments of all the revenues. LXXXVII. Neither the Government nor any other authority can enter into contracts which engage the respective public funds, unless by means of public tender, excepting in the cases provided for by the corresponding organic law. LXXXVIII. The nation is not answerable for the engagements which the Executive Power may contract in non-observance of the pre-existing laws, or for which he is not expressly authorised; such engagements are null, and the persons who may enter into contracts with the Government which infringe any law shall have no right to the profits which they may produce, and shall be answerable at any time with their property for the damages and injuries thereby caused to the Republic.
TITLE XVIII. Of the responsibility of the Public Functionaries.

LXXXIX. Every public functionary on taking possession of his office shall swear to be faithful to the Republic, to observe the Constitution, and cause it to be observed, and to stick to its text whatever may be the laws, decrees, orders, and resolutions that are at variance with it; they shall be responsible at all times with their persons and property for any infraction of it. XC. The Deputies and Senators, the President of the Republic, the Vice-President, and the Senators designate, who have entered


upon the exercise of the Executive Power, the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Ministers of State, Diplomatic and Consular Agents, functionaries, and other depositaries of the public authority, are responsible in what concerns each and all of their official acts. The responsibility of the Ministers shall be associated with that of the President, except in the cases wherein they have reserved their opinion and entered it in a book to be kept for the purpose. XCI. Every measure by which the President of the Republic dissolves the Legislative Power, or prevents its assembling, is a crime of high treason. XCII. Every Salvadorean citizen has a right to accuse the President of the Republic, Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, Ministers of the Government, and Diplomatic or Consular Agents, before the Chamber of Deputies, for treason, venality, usurpation of power, serious default in the exercise of their functions, and ordinary offences which do not admit of release on bail. The Chamber shall always receive this accusation, and shall renew it before the Senate by means of one of its legal members, who is to be appointed for the purpose. The persons who cannot come forward as accusers shall have the rights of complaint or denunciation in conformity with the law. In the offences which are entitled to release on bail, and misdemeanours, the proper indictment shall be drawn up, and an account given to the Supreme Court of Justice, in order that the trial may take place according to the law. XCIII. The legal arrangement of the case and its proceedings shall take place in the Senate collectively, or by a commission of its members; but the trial and decision shall be in the first way, and two-thirds of the votes must concur in passing sentence. XCIV. The principal object of the sentence or decision of the Senate in this kind of cases is to divest the accused of his office, if there be reason to do so; and there must also be a declaration whether there is cause for regular proceedings against the delinquent before the ordinary tribunals, and if so the case is to be referred to the proper judge or tribunal. XCV. So soon as it is declared in the Senate that there is reason to take proceedings, the accused is at once suspended from the exercise of his functions, and he can on no account remain any longer in his post without becoming answerable for the crime of usurpation, and no person must obey him. XCVI. The decrees, ordinances, or sentences passed by the Senate in this kind of cases are to be fulfilled and executed without necessity for any act of confirmation or sanction, and the appointed advocate is to take part in the trial until sentence is passed. XCVTI. If the Executive, in the accounts which he is to render


through the Ministry to the Legislative Power should ocait any one or more of the items which, according to the law, ought to be included therein, the Assembly shall call upon him to fulfil his duty in this respect. The general approval of the respective memoirs shall not at any time prevent the requirement of the proper responsibility for the items omitted. 

XIX.  Of the Rights and Obligations guaranteed by the Constitution. XC VIII . Salvador recognises rights and obligations anterior and superior to the positive laws. She holds as principles, liberty, equality, fraternity; and as bases, family ties, labour, property, public order. XCIX. All the inhabitants of Salvador have incontestable rights to preserve and defend their life and their liberty, to acquire, possess, and dispose of their property, and to seek their happiness without injury to others. C. Every man is free in the Republic. He who enters its territory shall not be a slave, nor shall he be a citizen who traffics in slaves. CI. The Republic is a sacred asylum for every foreigner who likes to reside in its territory, provided that he submits to its laws, and obeys the constituted authorities. Nevertheless the Government will deliver up persons guilty of ordinary crimes, if they be claimed from it by the Government of another nation, in virtue of existing Treaties, in which there is a stipulation for extradition. CII. Every citizen or inhabitant free from responsibility may emigrate wherever he chooses, without necessity for passport, and may return to the Republic when it suits him. CIII . Every man, free from responsibility, may travel in the territory of the Republic, without necessity for passport; and no person can be compelled to change domicile or residence unless in virtue of sentence put in execution. CIV. The Supreme Power can only be attained by Constitutional means ; if any one usurp it by means of force or sedition he is guilty of the crime of usurpation; all that he does shall be null, and things shall return to the state in which they were before, so soon as constitutional order is re-established. CV. Every man may freely express, write, print, and publish his thoughts without previous examination or censure, he will only be hold responsible for the abuse of this freedom, before a jury which will be established by the law. The printing offices shall not be subject to any tax or security. CVI. The Salvadoreans may likewise assemble peacefully and in good order to discuss questions of public interest; but the instigators of such meetings shall answer for any disorder that may be committed. CVII. Every inhabitant of the Republic has a right to address his petitions to the constituted authorities, who must take their, into consideration, provided they be made in a decorous manner and in accordance with the law. CVIII. Private actions and beliefs which do not offend public order, nor produce injury to others, are beyond the dominion of the law. CIX. The penalty of confiscation is abolished. No person can be deprived of his life, his property, his honour, or his liberty, without having been previously heard and condemned on trial, in accordance with the formulas established by the laws ; nor can he be tried twice for the same offence. The authorities or persons who contravene this provision shall be liable at all times in person and property, to make reparation for the injury done, and the confiscated property cannot be released at any time. CX. Every inhabitant has the right of exemption from inquisitions, searches, and constraints, in his person, his house, his papers, family, and all his possessions. The law will arrange the manner for the visitation of suspected places, the inspection of houses for proof of offences, and apprehension of delinquents in order to bring them to trial; and no person shall be tried in another jurisdiction than that in which the offence is committed, except in the cases determined by the law, and by decision of the court of justice. CXI. All men are equal before the law whether it protect or chastise. CXII. The punishments must be proportionate to the nature and gravity of the offence ; the punishment of death is abolished in political mutters, and can only be inflicted for the crimes of assassination and incendiarism if followed by death. CXIII. None but the tribunals previously established by the law can try or take cognisance of the civil and criminal causes of the Salvadoreans. Special commissions and tribunals are abolished, as contrary to the principle of equality of rights and conditions. Consequently all are to be subjected to the same order of proceedings and of trial as established by the law. CX1V. All causes, of whatever kind they may be, excepting the ecclesiastical, when it may not be possible, shall be concluded within the territory of Salvador ; they cannot pass through more than three instances; and no citizen, or inhabitant can withdraw himself on any account from the jurisdiction of the authority appointed by the law. CXV. No inhabitant of the Republic can be illegally detained in prison, and every one has the right of soliciting from the proper

tribunal an order for the production of his person. The tribunal will decree this and provide for the execution of its orders by all legal means. If the President of the Republic should be the authority that resists the execution of the order for production, the tribunal shall protest; and if after this proceeding the order should not be obeyed, it shall publish its decisions, and as a last resort shall institute the respective accusation before the Legislative Power at its next meeting. CXYI. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable, and cannot be intercepted or opened, except in the cases expressly determined by the law, and when the safety of public order requires it; but still with the formalities and requirements which the same law establishes. Beyond these cases the interception and examination are of no avail as evidence on trial, or otherwise, against any person. CXVMI. The person who gives bail, in cases wherein the law does not expressly prohibit it, shall not be taken into nor kept in custody. CXVIII. No citizen or inhabitant can be compelled to give evidence against himself in criminal matters. Neither shall he be allowed to depose against his progenitors or his descendants, nor against his brother or brother-in-law, nor against his wife ; and in all criminal proceedings he shall have the right of producing all evidence in his favour, to be confronted with the witnesses if he desire it, and to make his defence himself, or by means of his advocate or defender. CXIX. The protective police can only be entrusted to the civil authorities. CXX. The power of appointing arbitrators and of coming to an arrangement at any stage of the suit, is inherent in every person saving in the cases expressly excepted by the law. OXXI. The same persons cannot be judges in two different instances; and no authority can call up pending causes from another to take cognizance thereof, nor re-open trials already disposed of. CXXII. Property of every kind is inviolable. Nevertheless, the State may require the sacrifice of property by reason of public utility, legally proved, and upon just and previous indemnification. All property is transmissible in the form determined by the laws, consequently every kind of entail is prohibited. CXXII I. The detention for inquiry into criminal matters shall not exceed the term prescribed by law. The presumed delinquent may be detained by those who have the right of arresting; but by any person, if seen in the act, and account is then to be rendered to the authority. CXXIV. No one can be arrested except in virtue of written order from
the competent authority. No such order can be issued without previous full proof that an offence has been committed, nor without apparent proof at least, who is the delinquent. 

CXXV. Secondary and superior instruction are free, but subject the supervision of the authority. This supervision is to extend all the establishments for instruction and education without any exception. Primary instruction in the Republic is uniform, gratuitous, and obligatory. Every person may teach and establish schools provided he combine the necessary conditions of knowledge and morality. The pupils of such establishments shall be at all times admitted to the literary degrees in the national university on undergoing the proper examinations. 

CXXVI. Neither the Legislative nor the Executive Power, nor any tribunal or authority can restrict, alter, or violate any of the specified guarantees, and any power or authority that infringes them shall be reputed an usurper, and be individually responsible for the damage done, and be tried in accordance with the Title of Responsibility of this Constitution.  

TITLE XX. Revision and Reformation of the Constitution, and other Provisions. 
CXXVII. The reformation of this Constitution can only be agreed to by two-thirds of the votes of the Representatives elected to each Chamber. This resolution shall be published by the press, and shall be taken into consideration again in the next Legislature. If it be ratified by that Legislature, a Constituent Assembly shall be convoked to decree the reformations; but no such reformations shall be proposed until after six years from the promulgation of this Constitution. 

CXXVIII . This Constitution can only be reformed or altered by the proceedings prescribed in the preceding Article. Therefore any that contravenes this enactment shall be considered as an usurper, and those who exercise such an authority shall be reputed traitors to the country. No corporation, municipality, or citizen can pass resolutions, or draw up resolutions in which the non-observance of the aforesaid Article is solicited ; and those who sign such documents shall be accounted seditious, and responsible at all times in person and property for the evils which the Republic may incur.

CXXIX. Salvador retains the capability of concurring with all or with any of the States of Central America in the organisation of a National Government, when circumstances admit of it, and it may be consistent with her interests, likewise of forming part of the great Latino-American Confederation. 
CXXX. The Constitution of 19th March, 1864, is abolished.

The provisions of the existing codes, laws, and regulations, which are not at variance with the present Constitution will remain in force until they are legally repealed. 

CXXXI. The Chamber of third instance of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be bound to examine all the existing secondary laws, in order that, on comparing them with the provisions of this Constitution, it may present to the Legislatures the catalogue of the laws that are repealed, and the projects of law that are to take their place. Let this be communicated to the Executive Power. Given in the National Palace of San Salvador, on the 16fch of the month of October, in the year of Our Lord 1871, and the 50th of our Independence. 

National Palace, San Salvador, 17th October, 1871. Let this be fulfilled. SANTIAGO GONZALEZ. Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Salvador, JOSE TEIGUEROS.

