CONSTITUTION

of the Republic of Salvador. San Salvador, February 16, 1880.


IN the presence of God, and in the name of the people of Salvador, the National Constituent Assembly decrees, sanctions, and proclaims the following Constitution, reforming that of the 9th November, 1872:

CHAPTER I.§ 1. Concerning the Nation.

1. The nation of Salvador is sovereign, free, and independent. The sovereignty is essentially vested in the nation, and will be exercised in the form prescribed by this Constitution. All public authority emanates from the people, and the individuals who exercise it will have no other powers than those which the law expressly confers on them; by the law, obedience is due to them, and in accordance with the law they must render an account of their actions. 
§ 2. Concerning the Territory. 2. The territory of Salvador is bounded on the east by the Gulf of Fonseca, on the north by the Republics of Guatemala and Honduras, on the west by the River Paz, and on the south by the Pacific Ocean. The special delimitation of the boundaries will be the subject of subsequent laws. § 3. Form of Government. 3. The Government of the nation of Salvador is Republican, popular, representative, and alternative. It will be composed of three Powers, distinct and independent of one another, which will be denominated, Legislative, Executive, and Judicial.

1083

4. Religion 4.The free exercise of all religions is guaranteed; but this will not extend to the exercise of any acts which would be subversive of, or practices incompatible with, peace and public order, nor does it give the right of refusing to fulfil civil and political obligations; as, however, the inhabitants of Salvador profess the Roman Catholic Apostolic religion, the Government will protect that religion.

CHAPTER

II. § 1. Concerning Native and Naturalized Salvadoreans.

5. The following are natives of Salvador: (1.) All those born in the territory of Salvador, except the children of foreigners not naturalized; (2.) The children of a foreign father and Salvadorean mother, or of a Salvadorean father and a foreign mother, who are born in the territory of the Republic and resident in it ; (3.) Children born in a foreign country of Salvadoreans not naturalized there, and who are domiciled in Salvador. 6. Naturalized Salvadoreans are those who, in conformity with the laws hitherto existing, have acquired this qualification, or who in the future may obtain it in accordance with the following rules: (1.) Spanish-Americans who may have become domiciled in the Republic without expressly reserving their nationality; and (2.) Other foreigners who obtain letters of naturalization from any administrative authority, S 2. Concerning the Citizens. 7. The following are citizens:  All Salvadoreans of the age of 21 years who can read and write, or who possess an independent means of livelihood, and individuals of the same age who are enlisted in the armed forces or in the army of the Republic. Also those over 18 years of age who have obtained any literary degree, and married men, although they may not have reached that age. 8. The rights of citizenship are suspended  (1.) In case of committal to prison in a criminal case which does not admit of release on bail; (2.) Of being legally declared a fraudulent bankrupt; (3.) For conduct notoriously vicious or licensed vagrancy; (4.) In case of loss of mental faculties; and (5.) Of judicial prohibition. 9. The following lose the rights of citizenship:  (1.) Those who are condemned for crimes which do not admit of release on bail;


(2.) Those who, residing in the Republic, accept employment from another nation without the authorization of the competent authority; and (3.) Those who become naturalized in a foreign country. § 3. Concerning Foreigners. 10. Foreigners resident in Salvador are obliged to obey the laws and to pay the ordinary taxation, the same as the Salvadoreans; and in case of their being improperly molested, either personally or in their interests, they will have the same rights as natives. 11. When they may have to prosecute any claim against the nation, they will apply to the Tribunals designated by the laws. 12. Foreigners may acquire real property in the country; such real property not being exempted from the legal charges to which it would be subject if it were in the hands of Salvadoreans. 13. The fact that a woman of Salvador marries a foreigner does not deprive her of her status as Salvadorean, nor is her property exempt from the imposts and taxes to which the property of natives is subject.
CHAPTER

111. Rights and Guarantees of Salvadoreans.

14. Salvador recognizes rights anterior and superior to the actual laws, having, as their principle, liberty, equality, fraternity; and as their basis, family, labour, the rights of property, and public order. 15. All the inhabitants of Salvador possess the incontestable right of preserving and defending their life and liberty; of acquiring, possessing, and disposing of property; and of procuring their happiness without doing harm to others. 16. Every individual in the Republic is free. A slave entering its territory becomes free, and no one dealing in slaves will be a citizen of the Republic. 17. The Republic is a sacred asylum to the foreigner who wishes to reside in its territory; except to persons convicted of ordinary crimes who may be demanded by another nation in virtue of existing Treaties in which there are stipulations for extradition. 18. Every inhabitant of the territory of the Republic, free from liability, may emigrate to wherever he wishes, without necessity for a passport, and may return when it suits him. Also, he may travel within the territory of the Republic without a passport, and no one can be compelled to change his residence except in virtue of a judicial sentence. 19. Every person may freely express, write, print, and publish his opinions without previous examination or censorship, and only

under the obligation of answering before the Magistrate's Tribunal for the abuse of such liberty. 20. In the same way, the Salvadoreans may hold public meetings, peacefully and without arms, to consider subjects of general interest, in the manner prescribed by law. 21. Every inhabitant of the Republic possesses the right of addressing Petitions to the constituted authorities, provided that they are addressed in a decorous manner and in conformity with the law. 22. The penalty of confiscation is abolished. The authorities who violate this provision will always be answerable with their persons and property to repair the damage inflicted, and confiscated goods are imprescriptible. 23. No person may be deprived of life, liberty, of honour, nor of property without being previously tried and convicted in a Court of Justice in conformity with the laws; nor may anyone be tried twice for the same offence. 24 Every inhabitant of the Republic possesses the right to be free from inquisitions, investigations, or judicial compulsion, either personal, in his family, in his residence, as to his papers, or his possessions. The law will determine the mode of visiting suspected places, of examining houses for the purpose of proving crimes, and of apprehending offenders to subject them to trial. No person will be tried in a different jurisdiction to that in which the offence was committed; except in cases provided by law on the order of the Court of Justice. 25. All persons are equal before the law, whether it protects or punishes. 26. Punishment must be duly proportioned to the nature and gravity of the offence, its object is to correct and not to exterminate individuals; consequently, all opprobrious or perpetual punishment is prohibited. Capital punishment may only be applied for crimes of assassination, assault and arson where death results, and in case of those other crimes specified in the Military Penal Code; but never for political offences. Nor may any force be imposed which is not necessary to maintain the security of the individual. 27. Only the Tribunals established by authority may judge and try the civil and criminal actions of Salvadoreans, in accordance with the law. Commissions and Special Tribunals are abolished. 28. Actions, of whatever class they may be, will be terminated within the territory of Salvador, and may not be subjected to more than three hearings. 29. No inhabitant of the Republic may be illegally detained in prison; everyone has the right of demanding before the proper Tribunal a decree for the production of his person {habeas corpus).

1086
The Tribunal will grant the decree, and will cause its orders to be complied with by all legal means. 30. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable, and may not be intercepted, opened, nor revealed; that which may have been intercepted or revealed may not be accepted as evidence either in a Court of Law or elsewhere. 31. The individual who gives bail shall not be taken to or kept in prison in cases in which the law does not expressly prohibit bail. 32. No citizen or inhabitant of the Republic may be compelled to give evidence against himself in a criminal case. Nor will he, or she, be permitted to give evidei.ee against progenitors, nor against descendants, nor against his, or her, wife, or husband, nor against brother or sister, or brother- or sister-in-law. 33. The police force will be confided to the civil authorities alone. 34. The right of nominating arbitrators and of making a compromise at any stage of an action is inherent in every person, except in the instances expressly excepted by law. 35. The same individual Judges may not sit in different hearings of the same cause, and no authority may summon up causes pending from inferior Courts in order to adjudicate on them, nor may reopen causes that have been determined. 36. Property of whatever description so ever is inviolable; nevertheless, the State may take possession of property for purposes of public utility, legally proved, and subject to a just indemnity given beforehand. All property is transmissible in the form prescribed by law; consequently, entail of any description is prohibited. 37. No one may be detained or imprisoned except by virtue of an order of a competent authority, executed in the form prescribed by law, unless the offender is taken in the act, in which case he may be detained by any person in order that he may be handed over to the proper authorities. 38. Education is free in the Republic, and primary education is gratuitous and obligatory. The Executive Power has the direction of the education paid for by the State, having authority for this purpose to enact the statutes and other laws which regulate it. In the same way, the supreme inspection over all establishments of public instruction, even when they are not supported by national funds, is vested in the Executive Power. 39. Every trade is free, and only the trade in brandy, saltpetre, and gunpowder may be created monopolies for the benefit of the nation, to be administered by the Executive. 40. The right of association is guaranteed, and the establishment of conventual institutions and of all kinds of monastic institutions is alone prohibited.
1087

41. Labour is obligatory. 42. The citizens of Salvador possess the right to be appointed to all the public offices, without further preference than that of merit, and without further conditions than those fixed by law. 43. No power, Tribunal, or authority may alter or violate any of the aforesaid guarantees, and whoever may do so will be held responsible, and will be tried in accordance with the Chapter on "Responsibility" in this Constitution.
CHAPTER

IV. Concerning the Elections.

44. The elections of the supreme authorities, except in the cases provided for below, will be direct, and the law will regulate the manner of conducting them. 45. The right of voting is inalienable, and its exercise is obligatory. 46. The basis of the electoral system is the people; the administrative division of the Republic into departments, districts, and cantons serving for the present as a guide until an exact census is taken. 47. At present each department will elect an Acting Senator and a Substitute, and each district an Acting Deputy and a Substitute ; and when the census prescribed by the last clause is taken, the Legislative Power will enact the necessary law regulating the number to be elected. 48. No holder of an of office in the appointment of the Executive may be elected Senator or Deputy until the expiration of six months from the time when, he ceased to exercise the duties of such office. 49. Senators and Deputies may accept posts in the appointment of the Executive, after the expiration of the period of their inviolability, renouncing by this fact their character of Representatives. 50. No ecclesiastic may obtain office by popular election. 51. A special law will regulate the manner of conducting the elections, the qualifications of the electors and elected, and the registration of citizens.
CHAPTER

V. § 1. The legislative Power, and its Organization.

52. The legislative power will be exercised by two Chambers, one of Deputies and the other of Senators, which will be independent of one another. 53. The Legislative Body will meet in the capital of the Republic, without necessity of summons, from the 1st to the 15th January in each year; and in extraordinary session when it is convoked by the Executive Power. 54. The number of its ordinary sessions will not exceed 40, and

that of the extraordinary sessions will be the number necessary to settle the questions mentioned in the Minute convoking them. 55. Three Representatives in each of the Chambers, formed into a preparatory Committee, have authority to take at once all the measures which may be necessary to cause the assembly of the other members until all are present. 56. The presence of a majority of the members of each Chamber will be sufficient for deliberations; but when less than two-thirds of the members elected are present the assent of two-thirds of those present will be necessary for every legislative resolution. 57. The two Chambers will open and close their sessions at the same time; neither of them may suspend their sittings, prorogue them, or move to another place, without the consent of the other. 58. The Chamber of Deputies will be renewed every year; the Chamber of Senators will also be renewed one-third in each year, and its members may be re-elected. 

§ 2. Qualifications. 59. The qualifications of a Senator are: to have attained the age of 30 years; to be in enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, without having lost such rights within the five years previous to the election; to be a native or inhabitant of the department for which he is elected; and to be of well-known integrity and intelligence. 60. The qualifications for election as Representative in the Chamber of Deputies are: to have attained the age of 25 years; to be of well-known integrity and intelligence; not to have lost the rights of citizenship in the five years previous to the election; and to be domiciled in the department in which the district for which he is elected is situated. 61. The qualifications for the Senator and Deputy Substitutes will be the same as for the Acting Senators and Deputies. § 3. Inviolability of the Representatives. 62. The Representatives of the nation in both Chambers are inviolable; in consequence, no Deputy or Senator will be answerable at any time for his opinions, whether they are expressed verbally or in writing. 63. Prom the date of the election till 15 days after the recess of the Legislative Power has commenced, no civil proceedings may be begun or carried on against Representatives. Nor may they be tried, from the day of the election till 15 days after the recess has commenced, for crimes and offences they may commit, except by the Chamber to which they belong, for the sole purpose of deposing the accused and handing him over to the ordinary Tribunals. 
1089

64. The provisions of the two preceding clauses will be applicable to Congresses and Constituent Assemblies, § 4. Powers peculiar to each of the Chambers. 65. Each of the Chambers, without the intervention of the other, has the right  (1.) To certify the election of its members, approving or rejecting their credentials; (2.) To summon the Substitutes in case of the death or inability to attend of the sitting members; (3.) To accept the resignation of members for reasons legally verified; (4.) To make its interior regulations; (5.) To exact the responsibility of its members, whether for grave faults in the exercise of their functions or in the eases mentioned in Clause 63, and to enact the Ordinance whereby they are to be tried. § 5. General Attributes of the Legislative Power. 66. The duties of the Legislative Power are  (1.) To decree, interpret, reform, and repeal the laws; (2.) To create jurisdictions, and to establish in them functionaries who may, in the name of the Republic, within their respective jurisdictions, try, judge, and pronounce sentence in every description of cause or business, both civil and criminal; (3.) To designate the attributes and jurisdictions of the different officials; (4.) To establish imposts and taxes on every class of property and income in due proportion, and to decree forced loans in cases of invasion or of war legally declared, in case the ordinary public funds are not sufficient, or it is not possible to obtain voluntary loans; (5.) To grant authority to the Executive Power to contract voluntary loans, within or without the Republic, when a grave and urgent necessity arises, to a sufficient amount to satisfy the said necessity; (6.) To fix and decree annually the Budgets of the expenses of the public administration; (7.) To create the army of the Republic, and to confer the ranks of Brigadier and upwards, taking into account the record of services rendered by the officer promoted; (8.) To effect the spread of public instruction in all branches of human knowledge, determining the statutes and methods adequate for that purpose; (9.) To decree the coat-of-arms and flag of the Republic, fix the 


alloy, weight, and pattern of the money, to regulate the weights and measures, and to order the opening and improvement of the modes c of communication; (3.0.) To confer on individuals or towns titles, honourable distinctions, and recompenses compatible with the established system of government, for notable services rendered to the country ; (11.) To assign, raise, or diminish the salaries of officials and functionaries; to create and abolish public offices ; (12.) To decree prizes or concede temporary patents to the authors of useful inventions and to the introducers of industries of great utility; (13.) To declare war and to make peace, after consideration of the information communicated to it by the Executive Power; (14.) To grant amnesties, pardons, and commutation of punishments, in view, in the two last cases, of the representations made by the Supreme Tribunal of Justice; (15.) To grant letters of naturalization to foreigners applying for them; (16.) To decree the state of siege in the cases and for the causes which a law for that purpose will determine; the state of siege will be raised in accordance with the same law j (17.) To restore the rights of citizenship to those who may have lost them; (18.) To approve or disapprove the acts of the Executive; (19.) To decree laws respecting the acknowledgment of the National Debt, and the creation of the funds necessary for its payment; (20.) To concede or refuse permission to the Salvadoreans who may apply for it to accept service under another nation, compatible with the system of the government of Salvador; (21.) To exact the responsibility of the superior officials, following in such case the appropriate course of trial in accordance with this Constitution and the laws; (22.) To ratify, modify, or disapprove the different Treaties and negotiations which the Executive enters into with other Powers. 67. When the Chambers are convoked by the Executive to an extraordinary session, their discussions must be confined to the subjects expressly indicated in the Decree convoking them. 68. The Senate may remain sitting after the sessions are closed, when it has to try impeachments which the law refers to it, as long as may be necessary to conclude such actions. § 6. General Assembly. 69. The two Chambers united form the General Assembly, whose attributes are the following; 

(1.) To open and close the sessions of the Legislative Body, and to agree upon the terms in which the reply to the Message of the Executive is to be couched; (2.) To open the folded papers which contain the votes for the Presidency of the Republic, and to make the computation or the scrutiny of the votes for the election of the said functionary in accordance with the decision of the Committee of Scrutiny, in which it must also be expressed that; the person elected in a proper person for the post, possessing the qualifications required by law; (3.) To instal the President of the Republic; to take into consideration his resignation, and the leave of absence for which he applies; (4.) To elect the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, and to take into consideration their resignations ; (5.) To receive the Reports of the Ministers of State, and to hand them to the Chambers for the purposes of Clause 66, paragraph 18; (6.) To nominate the Senators who are to exercise the executive power in the cases prescribed by law; (7.) To decide with reference to any doubts which may arise, or accusations which may be made, as to the incapacity of the President and of the other officials elected by the same Assembly, 70. The powers appertaining to the Chamber separately or united in General Assembly, as well as those belonging to the Legislative Power in general, may not be delegated, except the power of installing the President of the Republic and the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. § 7. Formation, Publication, and Sanction, of the Law, 71. The right of initiating laws is reserved exclusively to Deputies and Senators, to the President of the Republic by means of his Ministers, and to the Supreme Court of Justice. 72. Every Bill, after it has been discussed in, and received the approbation of, one House, will be passed on to the other, that it may be discussed and approved, if such other House is prepared to grant its approval; if such other House approves, it will go on to the Executive Power, who, not disapproving, will give it his sanction, and will cause it to be published as law. The Decrees which the Chambers may pass approving or disapproving of the acts mentioned in the Minutes of the Ministers of State do not need the sanction of the Executive, who is obliged to publish them. 73. If the Chamber which examines the Bill amends it or modifies it, the said Bill must be returned to the Chamber whence
it originated, in order that, with its amendments, additions, or modifications, it may there be discussed anew, and if it is approved as amended it will be sent up to the Executive, that he may proceed in the terms of the last clause. 74. When the Executive objects to sanction the Bills which are sent up to him, he may return them within 10 days to the Chamber whence they originated, specifying the reasons on which he founds his refusal; and if, within the time named, he offers no objection, they will be considered sanctioned, and will be published as laws. In case of their return, the Chamber may reconsider and ratify the Bill by two-thirds of its votes, but with the obligation to pass it on to the other Chamber, that it may give its consent by two-thirds of its votes in the same way, if it thinks fit; and, in this case, being sent up to the Executive, he will treat it as law, which he will put in execution and comply with. When Congress sends up a law in the last 10 days of the session, and the Executive objects to sanction it, he is obliged to give immediate notice to Congress, in order that it may remain in session till the expiration of the stipulated interval; and in the event of his not doing so the law will be considered to have received his sanction. 75. When a Bill is thrown out and not ratified, it may not be reintroduced in the same session, but in that of the following Legislature. Every Bill approved in the Chamber wherein it originates will be copied in triplicate. 

CHAPTER VI. § 1. The Executive Power, and its Organization 76. The executive power will be exercised by a citizen, who will receive the title of President of the Republic, with the respective Ministers. He will be elected directly by the people of Salvador; but when no one is elected by an absolute majority of votes, the General Assembly will elect one of the three citizens who have obtained the largest number of votes. 77. In default of the President, the executive power will be exercised, during the recess of the Chambers, by one of the three Senators named for that purpose, at the choice of the President. In case of the President being incapacitated from electing one, they will serve in the order of their nomination. If the Legislative Body is sitting when the vacancy occurs, it will fill the vacancy by the election of the Senator who shall exercise the executive power.

§ 2. Duration of the Term of Presidency. 78. The duration of the Presidential term of office will be four years; the outgoing President may not be re-elected immediately,

but only after the lapse of an equal terra. His term of office will commence and conclude on the 1st February of the year of the change, it not being lawful to retain office one day longer than the said term. § 3. Qualifications. 79. To be President of the Republic it is necessary to be a Salvadorean, born in the territory of the Republic; to have attained the age of 30 years; to be in exercise of the rights of citizenship, without having lost them within the five years previous to his election; and to be of well-known integrity and intelligence. § 4 Ministers of State and their Qualifications. 80. There will be four Ministers of State: for Foreign Affairs, for the Home Department, of Public Instruction, and for tbe Treasury and the "War Department; between whom the President will distribute the other branches of affairs as he considers convenient. 81. To be Minister of State, it is necessary to be a native of Central America; a layman; to have attained the age of 25 years; to be of well-known morality and ability; and not to have lost the rights of citizenship within the five years preceding nomination to the post. 82. The decrees, decisions, and edicts of the President of the Republic must be authorized by the Ministers of State in their respective Departments. 83. The President of the Republic and his Ministers are responsible collectively for all the acts of the Executive. § 5. Supreme Command of the Army. 84. The citizen who holds the office of President of the Republic will be Commander-in-chief of the army. When it is necessary for him to place himself at its head, he will hand over the executive power to one of the Senators designated for the purpose. § 6. Duties of the Executive Power. 85. The following are the duties of the Executive Power:  (I.) To maintain intact the sovereignty and independence of the Republic, and the integrity of its territory; (2.) To preserve peace and tranquillity within the Republic; (3.) To publish the law, and cause it to be executed ; (4.) To present, by the medium of his Ministers, to the Legislative Body, within the eight days next after the opening of the ordinary sessions, a circumstantial statement, and accounts with
vouchers of the public administration in the previous year, together with the Budget of expenses for the coming year, indicating the measures for providing for them. If within the time named this obligation is not complied with, the Minister who fails to comply with it will by that fact be suspended from the functions of his office, and this will be immediately notified to the Executive, in order that, within the eight days following, he may present, by the Minister whom he will nominate for that purpose, the said statement and Budget, and if this is not done, the President of the Republic will be suspended, and the executive power will be assumed by the Senator nominated by the General Assembly, who will comply with the said duty within 20 days: in this case the Legislative Power will have the right to prorogue its sessions for a similar term; (5.) To render to the Chambers the information they may demand ; but if such information refer to matters under secret consideration, he shall explain that such is the case, unless he consider it advisable to communicate them, being under no obligation to publish the plans of a war, nor the negotiations of high politics, except in case the information is necessary on account of his responsibility being called in question; in which case he may not refuse it for any motive, nor may he retain the documents after having been arraigned before the Senate by the Chamber of Deputies; and (6.) To give to the functionaries of the Judicial Power the aid and forces necessary to render their judgments effective. 

§7. Attributes of the Executive Power. 8Q. The following are attributes of the Executive Power:  (1.) To appoint and remove the Ministers of State, Governors of departments, Generals commanding in departments and districts, and to accept the resignation of officers in the army of the rank of full Colonel and lower, and to grant them permission to retire; and the same with all the officials of the administrative branch of the Service; (2.) To confer the military steps of Colonel and below that rank, (3.) To appoint and remove the Ministers, and Diplomatic and Consular Agents of any other class accredited to other Governments ; to receive the Ministers and Agents, of the same class, of other* nations, and to direct foreign affairs; (4.) To convoke the Chambers in extraordinary sessions, when important interests of the nation render it necessary, summoning in such ease the Substitutes of Deputies and Senators who may have died or are legally prevented from attending; (5.) To indicate, previous to the installation of the Legislative
1095

Power, the place where it is to assemble, when in the place designated by law there is not sufficient security or liberty for its deliberations; (6.) To direct the operations of war, and to organize the army of the State, with power of disposing for this purpose of the public funds; (7.) To conclude Treaties of Peace and any other negotiations, submitting them to the ratification of the Legislature; (8.) To raise the force necessary over and above the permanent force to repel invasions and repress rebellions; (9.) To grant or refuse permission for the transit of the troops of other nations through the territory of the Republic; (10.) To fit out and close seaports, and establish sea and land custom-houses, to nationalize and register ships; (11.) To exercise the right of patronage; (12.) To suspend the execution of the death penalty in any case whilst the Legislative Body is considering the matter; (13.) To exercise the right of veto in the cases provided for by section 7 of Chapter V of this Constitution; (14.) To exercise the attributes 14, 15, 1G, 17, and 20 of the Legislative Power (Chapter V, Section o) when it is not sitting, with the obligation of rendering to it a special account of such exercise of its attributes at its next session. 

§ 8. Attributes of the Executive Power in sanctioning the. Law, 87. In giving sanction to and publishing the law, the Executive Power will proceed in the following manner: when he receives a Bill, and has no objections to make to it, he will sign the two copies of it which are placed before him, and will return one to the Chamber from which they issued, retaining the other copy in his archives, and will promulgate it as law with the due formalities within a period of not more than 10 days. § 9. Political Government of the Departments. 88. For the purposes of political administration, the territory of the Republic will be divided into departments, the number and boundaries of which will be fixed by law. 89. For the post of Governor, whether Acting or Substitute, the following qualifications are necessary:  (1.) To be citizen in the exercise of his rights, and not to have lost those rights in the two years previous to the nomination; (2.) To have attained the age of 20 years, and to be of well-known integrity and intelligence.
§ 10. Internal Government of Towns,

90. The local government of towns will be in the hands oi Municipalities elected popularly and directly by the citizens resident in each popular district. Each Municipality will be composed of a Mayor, a Syndic, and two or more Aldermen in proportion to the number of inhabitants as will be provided by the law. 91. The Municipal Councils will administer their funds for the benefit of the community, rendering account of their administration to the Tribunal established by law. 92. The attributes of the Municipalities, which will be purely economic and administrative, will be determined by law, as well as the qualifications for election which must be held by their members. 93. In addition to the attributes which the law confers on Municipalities, those of the chief town of a district have that of commuting, in conformity with the law, penalties imposed for slight offences, 94. Municipalities in the exercise of their duties are entirely independent; but they will be responsible before the law for their actions, whether as judicial personages or as individuals, according to circumstances.

CHAPTER
VII. § 1. Judicial Power.

95. The judicial power will be exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, Tribunals, juries, and inferior Judges which are established by this Constitution. The Supreme Court of Justice will be composed of 11 individuals, who will hold the title of Magistrates, ono of whom will be President, nominated as the others will be in the General Assembly. 96. To be appointed Magistrate of the Supreme Tribunal, whether Acting or Substitute, the following qualifications are requisite :  (1.) To be native of the Republic, or naturalized in it; (2.) To be in the exercise of rights of citizenship ; (3.) To have attained the age of 30 years 5 (4.) To be Advocate (Barrister) of the Republic; (5.) To be of well-known intelligence and morality ; (6.) To have practised the profession of advocate for four years in Salvador, or to have served for two years as a Judge of First Instance. 97. The position of Magistrate, or of Judge of First Instance, is incompatible with that of an official of other Services. 

98. In the capital of the Republic there will be a Chamber of Third Instance, formed of the President of the Supreme Court and
1097

the two Magistrates next in rank, and two Chambers of Second Instance, each composed of two Magistrates. The majority of the Magistrates composing these three Chambers are sufficient to form the fall Court. 99. The Chambers of Second Instance of San Miguel and Santa Ana will be organized in the same manner as those described above. 100. There will be seven Magistrates Substitute, throe for the Chambers of the capital, and two for each of the others; they must be elected like the sitting Judges, and will enter upon the execution of the functions of the latter indiscriminately when they are summoned by the Supreme Court or the Chamber respectively. 101. The Chamber of Third Instance will try all the matters which it is competent to try in conformity with the law. The Chambers of Second Instance in the capital will try all matters which they are competent to try, and their jurisdiction will be limited to the Departments of San Salvador, La Libertad, Cuscatlan, Cabanas, Chalatenango, San Vicente, and La Paz. 

102. The Chamber of Second Instance of San Miguel will try on appeal all civil and criminal causes in which sentence has been pronounced by the Judges of First Instance of the Departments of San Miguel, Usulutan, La Union, and Gotera, as well as any other appeals which they are allowed by law to try; and the Chamber of Second Instance of Santa Ana will try the civil and criminal causes in which sentence has been pronounced by the Judges of First Instance of the Departments of Santa Ana, Sonsonate, and Ahuaehapan, and any other appeals which by law they are competent

to try.
103. The Magistrates, Acting and Substitute, will remain for four years in the exercise of their functions, and may be re-elected. They will be renewed one-half every two years; at the end of the first period of two years three sitting Magistrates and two Substitutes in the capital, and one sitting Magistrate and one Substitute in each of the Chambers of San Miguel and Santa Ana, all to be chosen by lot, will resign. 104. The attributes of the full Court are as follows:~ (1.) To form rules for its internal organization} (2.) To appoint the Judges of First Instance, and to receive their resignations; (3.) To visit the Tribunals and Courts by means of one of its Magistrates, in order to correct the abuse which may be noted in the administration of justice; (4.) To indicate to the Legislative Power the unsuitability of the laws or the difficulties in their application which it may have noted pointing out the reforms of which they are susceptible;

(5.) During the recess of the Senate, to suspend Magistrates for grave faults in the exercise of their functions, on proof after trial, and to grant them any leave of absence they may demand in conformity with the law; (6.) To admit advocates and notaries, to suspend them, and even to withdraw from them their right to practise, for venality, bribery, or fraud, on proof after trial; (7.) To try cases arising out of appeals to force; (8.) To try causes relating to prizes, and any other actions which are not reserved for trial by another authority; (9.) To keep constant watch that speedy and ample justice is administered; (10.) To adjust any differences which may arise between the Tribunals and Judges, of whatever jurisdiction and nature they may be; (11.) To decree and render effective the guarantee of habeas corpus against any authority whatever; (12.) To receive the declaration, provided for by this Constitution, of the Judges of First Instance on their taking office, as well as of the Judges who may be nominated conjointly with them to form the Chamber in the circumstances provided for by law; (13.) To investigate accusations of responsibility brought against the Judges of First Instance and subordinate officials of the Judicial Staff, with power to suspend them and deprive them of their office, on proof after trial, and in conformity with legal formalities. The other attributes of the full Court will be determined by law. 105. The attributes contained in paragraphs 9, 10, 11, and 12 of the preceding clause are common to the Chambers of San Miguel and Santa Ana, each in its respective jurisdiction, they having also the right to hear the accusations or charges which may be brought against the officials referred to in paragraph 13 of the same clause, only for the purpose of collecting the evidence relating thereto and reporting it to the full Court. 106. The power of administering justice and causing judgments to be put in execution is vested exclusively in the Supreme Court of Justice and the inferior Tribunals. § 2. Judges of First Instance. 107. There will be Acting and Substitute Judges of First Instance in the chief towns of each department to try and deliver judgment in civil and criminal cases. The Court, in concert with the Executive, may also appoint them in the principal towns of districts whenever it may consider this necessary for the proper
1099

administration of justice. They will be appointed for two years, and may be re-elected.

108. The qualifications necessary for the post of Judge of First Instance are: to have attained the age of 25 years; to have been two years domiciled in Salvador; to be Barrister of the Republic, of known morality and education, and not to have lost the rights of citizenship during the two years preceding the nomination. § 3. Institution of the Jury. 109. Trial of facts by jury is established wherever there are Judges of First Instance, and in every description of offence which obey are competent to try. A supplementary law will issue regulations for the said institution. § 4. Inferior Judges. 110. There will be Justices of the Peace in all the towns of the Republic, who will try matters of minor importance and those punishable by fines in the Penal Code. Their election, qualifications, and attributes will be determined by law.
CHAPTER

VIII. § 1. National Exchequer. Minds which constitute National Treasure.

111. The following are the public funds of the nation :  (1.) All its real and personal property\ (2.) All its assets; (3.) All the duties, imposts, and taxes which are paid or may be paid in the future by Salvadoreans and foreigners. § 2. Administration. 112. For the administration of the public funds there will be only one General Exchequer for purposes of collection and of payment, and a superior Tribunal, or Audit Office, where accounts will be kept of all funds which are administered in the interest of the State. 113. The General Exchequer will publish each, month a statement of the state of the funds administered by it, and the Audit Office will publish yearly a general tabulated statement of all the funds. 114. No sum may be withdrawn from the Treasury, paid, or subscribed, except in virtue of a previous authorisation of the law. CHAPTER IX. The Armed Forces. 115. The armed forces are instituted to maintain intact the integrity of the territory of Salvador, to preserve and defend the

1100. 
national autonomy, to insure compliance with the law and to guard public order, as well as to render effective the Constitutional guarantees. 116. The armed forces are essentially obedient, and may not deliberate. 117. The army of the Republic is composed of the national army and navy. The permanent strength of these forces in time of peace will be fixed annually by the Legislature. 118. Individual members of the army of the Republic will enjoy the war privileges, provided that they belong to an organized body, except in cases of exemption from the Charter as provided by law, and incurred by infringements of regulations and of the Police Laws. Those who are in the enjoyment of the war privilege will be subject to the procedures and penalties of the military ordinances and laws. 119. In case of invasion, of war lawfully declared, and of internal rebellion, all Salvadoreans between 18 and 50 years of age are soldiers.
CHAJTEE

X. Liability of Public Functionaries.

120. Every public functionary on taking possession of his office will declare on his word of honour that he will be faithful to the Republic, comply with the Constitution, and cause it to be complied with, abiding by his declaration, whatever may be the laws, decrees, orders, and resolutions that may oppose it; promising, further, exact compliance with the duties which his office imposes on him, for the infringement of which he will be responsible with his person and possessions. 121. The liability of Ministers of State will be consolidated with that of the President of the Republic, except in cases in which they may have reserved their vote, it being registered in the Minutes. 122. Every measure by which the President of the Republic dissolves the Legislative Body, or prevents its meeting, is a crime of high treason. 123. Every Salvadorean citizen has the right to accuse, before the Chamber of Deputies, the President of the Republic, the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, Ministers of State, Governors of departments, and Diplomatic or Consular Agents, of treason, venality, usurpation of power, grave neglect in the exercise of their functions, and ordinary crimes which do not admit of release on bail. The Chamber will always receive this accusation, and will pass it on to the Senate, by means of one of its members who is an attorney, and whom it will nominate for the purpose. Persona who

are not entitled to constitute themselves accusers will have the rights of complaint or denunciation according to law. 124. The conduct of the action and its procedure will take place before the Senate as a whole, or before a Committee of its members; but the sentence and its delivery will be that of the Senate as a whole, the concurrence of two-thirds of its votes being necessary in order that sentence may be passed. 125. The sentence or proclamation of the Senate in this description of actions has for its principal object the deposition of the accused from his post if necessary ; with the duty, at the same time, of declaring whether the merits of the case demand that the guilty party should be submitted to an ordinary trial before the regular Courts, in which case it will remit the cause to the proper Judge or Tribunal. 126. From the time that the Senate decides that there is ground of action, the accused party is suspended from the exercise of his functions, and on no account may he remain longer in possession of his office without rendering himself liable to the crime of usurpation, and no person may render him obedience. 127. The decrees, edicts, and sentences pronounced by the Senate in this class of actions must be complied with and executed without necessity for confirmation or sanction of any kind; the attorney nominated must attend the trial till the delivery of the sentence. 128. When the Executive in the statements which his Ministers submit to the Legislative Power omits any of the particulars which, according to the law, should be comprised in them, he will be summoned by the General Assembly to comply with his duty in this reject. At no time will the approbation in general of the different statements be a bar to the exaction of the liability incurred by the omission of particulars in them.
CHAPTER

XI.  General Provisions.

129. Salvador retains the power of joining with all or any of the States of Central America in the organization of a National Government, in case circumstances permit, and such a course conduces to its interests, as well as that of forming part of the Great Latin-American Confederation.

CHAPTER

XII. Revision and Reform of the Constitution.

130. The reform of this Constitution may only be agreed on by two-thirds of the votes of the Representatives elected to each Chamber, and the clause or clauses which are to be altered must be specified. This resolution will be published in the official periodical,

1102

and will be taken again into consideration in the next following Legislature. If it is ratified by this latter, a Constituent Assembly will be convoked to decree the reforms. 131. Temporary. On this occasion only the National Constituent Assembly will elect and directly instal the President of the Republic for the first Constitutional term, the Judges of the Court of Justice, and the three Senators nominated in accordance with paragraph 7 of Clause 69. In the same way it will convoke the constituencies for the next elections of Representatives to the Legislative Assembly. 132. In these terms the Constitution of the 9th November, 1872, is reformed and annulled; the provisions of the existing codes, laws, and regulations which are not opposed to the present Constitution remain in full force and vigour. To the Executive Power. Given in San Salvador, in the National Palace, on the 16th February, 1880, the 59th year of our Independence. TEODOEO MOEENO, President. DAEI'O MAZAEIEGO, Vice-President.  Let it be complied with and published. EAPAEL ZALDIVAB. C. TJLLOA, Minister for Foreign Affairs. PEDRO MELENDSZ, Secretary of State for the Treasury and War Departments. SALVADOR GALLEGOS, Secretary of State for Public Instruction, EDUAEDO AEEIOLA, Sufi-Secretary of State for the Home Department.

