CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Salvador. San Salvador, December 8,1883.

In the name of the Salvadorean people the National Constituent Congress decrees, sanctions, and proclaims the following Constitution: 

Title I Of the Nation. 

1. The Salvadorean nation is sovereign, free, and independent. The sovereignty resides essentially in the nation, and will be exercised in the form prescribed by this Constitution. 2. Salvador considers herself a separate section of the Central American nation, and is disposed to agree with all or any of the Republics into which it is divided in the organization of a National Government, whenever circumstances may permit and it may be consistent with her interests to do so, as also to form part of the great Latin American Confederation. 3. All public authority emanates from the people, and the persons who exercise it shall have no powers other than those expressly designated by the law. By that they are entitled to obedience, and in conformity with it they must give account of their proceedings. 4. The boundaries of the territory of Salvador are; to the east, the Gulf of Fonseca; to the north, the Republics of Guatemala and Honduras; to the west, the River Paz; and to the south, the Pacific Ocean. The special demarcation will be the object of secondary laws. Title II. National Guarantees. 5. Neither hereditary offices nor privileges will be recognized in the Republic. Entail is prohibited, and all property is alienable in such manner as is determined by the laws. 6. Contributions shall only be levied in virtue of a law, in proportion to the means of the contributor, and for the public service. 7. The receipts and expenses of the nation shall be determined by law. In the case of any sum being raised or spent contrary to the tenor of the law, the person who ordered such exaction or expenditure shall be held responsible, together with the executor, unless the latter shall be able to prove his inculpability. 8. Any person who holds any public office is directly and immediately responsible for the acts performed by him in the exercise of his functions. The law shall determine the method by which such responsibility shall be made effectual. 9. Any Salvadorean shall be qualified to lay before Congress, the Executive Power, or any competent authority, a remonstrance against infractions of the Constitution. Title III. Individual Guarantees. 10. Salvador recognizes rights anterior and superior to the absolute laws, and holds as principles, liberty, equality, and fraternity ; and as bases, family ties, labour, property, and public order. 11. All the inhabitants of Salvador have incontestable rights to preserve and defend their lives and their liberty, to acquire, possess, and dispose of their property, and to seek their happiness without injury to others. 12. Every man in the Republic is free. He who enters its territory shall not be a slave, nor shall he be a citizen who traffics in slaves. 13. The Republic is a sacred asylum for the foreigner who wishes to reside in its territory, except for such as are guilty of ordinary offences, and who may be claimed by other nations in virtue of existing Treaties containing stipulations for extradition. The stipulations for extradition shall in no case have reference to natives or to political offenders. 14. The free exercise of all religions is guaranteed, with no restrictions other than those prescribed by morality and public order. 15. Every inhabitant of the territory of the Republic, free from responsibility, may emigrate whithersoever he pleases, without

necessity for passport, and may return when it suit him. He may also travel in the territory of the Republic without passport. No person shall be compelled to change his residence except in virtue of the execution of a sentence. 16. Salvadoreans shall also be at liberty to meet together, publicly and peacefully, and without arms, for the discussion of matters of public interest, in such manner as is prescribed by law. 17. Every inhabitant of the Republic has a right to address Petitions to the constituted authorities, provided they be made in a fitting manner, and in accordance with the law. In like manner, they have free access to the Tribunals of the country to carry on suits in the manner prescribed by law. Foreigners cannot resort to diplomatic procedure except in cases of a denial of justice. The fact that a sentence carried into effect is unfavourable to the claimant shall not in this sense be deemed a denial of justice. 18. The penalty of confiscation remains abolished. The authorities who contravene this disposition shall be liable at all times, in person and property, to make reparation for the injury done, and the property confiscated shall be imprescriptible. 19. No person can be deprived of his life, his liberty, his honour, or his property, without having previously been heard and sentenced on trial in conformity with the laws, nor can he be tried twice for the same offence. 20. Every inhabitant of the Republic has the right to protection against inquisitions, searches, and constraints, in his person, his family, his house, his papers, and his possessions. The law shall determine the manner in which suspected places shall be visited, houses searched for the proofs of offences, and offenders apprehended in order to bring them to trial. No person shall be tried in a jurisdiction other than that in which the offence was committed, except those cases which the law shall determine as being triable before the Court of Cassation. 21. All men are equal before the law, whether in respect to protection or punishment. The laws have no retroactive force or effect. 22. Punishments must be in proportion to the nature and gravity of the offence, the object being to correct and not to exterminate men; consequently, all infamous penalties and those of

perpetual duration remain prohibited. The penalty of death shall only be applicable in cases of treason, assassination, assault, and incendiarism; the latter if followed by death. It shall never be inflicted for political offences. 23. Only those Tribunals established with priority shall try or take cognizance of civil and criminal cases of Salvadoreans in conformity with the law. Special Commissions and Tribunals remain abolished. 24. The same Judges shall not be able to try cases in different instances. No power or authority shall be able to carry pending cases before any other power or authority, whether to carry them to a termination or to reopen concluded cases, contrary to the proceedings. 25. No inhabitant of the Republic shall be illegally detained in prison, and every one shall have the right to solicit from the proper Tribunal the order for the production of his person. The Tribunal will decree this, and will provide for the execution of its orders by all legal means. The prisons are places of correction, not of punishment. All severities which are not necessary for the custody of prisoners are prohibited. 26. Labour is obligatory, except on Sundays and national festivals. 27. Every man may freely express, write, print, and publish his opinions, without previous examination or censorship, with the sole obligation of responding before a jury for any abuse of this liberty. 28. Epistolary and telegraphic correspondence is inviolable, and may not be intercepted, opened, or disclosed; that which may be intercepted may not be used as evidence in a trial or otherwise. 29. Property is inviolable, whether it may be material, intellectual, literary, or artistic; no one may be deprived of his own except by reason of public utility, proved legally, and upon fair and previous compensation. In case of war the compensation may not be arranged beforehand. 30. The nation guarantees the existence and diffusion of primary instruction, which shall be gratuitous, secular, and obligatory; the same shall apply to the promotion of public establishments for sciences and arts, and for charitable purposes. All who can offer the guarantees of capacity and morality as prescribed by law may freely practise teaching and the direction of establishments for public instruction, subject to the inspection of the authorities. 31. All industry is free; brandy, saltpetre, and gunpowder

however, are monopolized for the advantage of the nation, and are administered by the Executive. 32. The right of association is guaranteed, but the establishment of conventual societies or of any kind of monastical institution is prohibited. 33. Salvadorean citizens have the right to aspire to all public employments, without more preference than each deserves, and with no conditions other than those determined by law. 34. A foreigner to be enabled to accept any public employment, excepting a professorship, must renounce his nationality, and make a request for naturalization as a Salvadorean. 35. No power, Tribunal, or authority may alter or violate any of the guarantees specified, and that which does so shall be held responsible, and tried in accordance with the title of this Constitution relating to responsibility, Nevertheless, in case of foreign invasion or internal commotion, such guarantees as might interfere with defensive measures, or with the preservation or re-establishment of order, may be temporarily suspended. In such cases the declaration shall be made by the Legislative Body, and, in the recess, by the Executive. Title IV. Of the Salvadoreans. 36. Salvadoreans are such either by birth or by naturalization. 37. Salvadoreans by birth are  (1.) All who are born in the territory of the Republic, except the children of Diplomatic Representatives or of foreigners who may be accidentally in the Republic; (2.) Children of a Salvadorean father or mother who are born abroad and who adopt the Salvadorean nationality, either by the wish of their parents during their minority, or of their own accord and in the proper manner when they arrive at their majority; also those who may be emancipated. 38. Salvadoreans by naturalization are- Those who, in conformity with anterior laws, have acquired that quality, or those who, in the future, obtain it according to the following rules:  (1.) Spanish-Americans settled in the Republic without expressly reserving their nationality; (2.) Other foreigners who may obtain certificates of naturalization from any governing authority. Title V. Of Foreigners. 39. Foreigners from the moment they find themselves in the territory of the Republic are strictly bound to respect the authorities and observe the laws, acquiring at the same time the protection of those laws. 40. Neither Salvadoreans nor foreigners shall in any case be enabled to claim from the Government any indemnity for damages or losses they may suffer in their persons or property by factious. 41. Foreigners may acquire real property in the nation, the said property not being exempt from the lawful charges which would affect it if it were in the hands of Salvadoreans. 42. The fact of a Salvadorean woman having married with a foreigner does not take away her character as a Salvadorean, nor is her property exempt from the charges and contributions to which that of natives is subject. Title VI. Of Citizenship. 43. A.11 Salvadoreans are citizens who are above 21 years of age, also those who are married or who have taken a literary degree, even if they have not arrived at that age. 44. All Salvadorean citizens possess the right of suffrage. The exercise of this right will be regulated by a Law. 45. The exercise of citizenship is suspended  (1.) For having submitted to judgment as a bankrupt; (2.) For having been proceeded against criminally with penal punishment; (3.) For being notoriously a vagrant, a professional gambler, or a habitual drunkard; (4.) For mental alienation; (5.) For judicial interdiction; (6.) For refusing to undertake, without sufficient cause, a duty imposed by popular election. 46. The rights of citizenship are lost  (1.) By judicial sentence which so orders it; (2.) By fraudulent bankruptcy, declared judicially; (3.) By obtaining or exercising citizenship in another State; (4.)By accepting from a foreign Government any employment whatsoever without permission of Congress. Title VII. Of the form of Government. 47. The Government of the Salvadorean nation is Republican, democratic, representative, and alternative. It is composed of three
distinct powers, independent of each other, viz., the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial. Title VIII. Of the Legislative Power. 48. The Legislative Power shall be exercised by two Chambers, one of Deputies, the other of Senators, which shall be independent of each other. 49. The Legislative Body shall ordinarily meet in the capital of the Republic, without it being necessary to convoke it, on the 15th January of each year; and extraordinarily whenever it may be convoked by the Executive Power. 50. The number of its ordinary sittings shall not exceed 40 ; and. that of its extraordinary sittings so many as may be necessary to dispose of the points expressed in the Minute of Convocation. 51. Three Representatives in each Chamber having met in preliminary Council shall have the faculty of considering immediately all such measures as they are agreed upon, in order to obtain the agreement of the others as soon as the assembly is complete. 52. A majority of the members of either Chamber will be sufficient to deliberate j but when there are present less than two-thirds of the full Chamber, the agreement of two-thirds of those present shall be necessary for every legislative resolution. 53. The two Chambers shall open and close their Sessions simultaneously; neither shall suspend or prorogue their Sessions or remove them to another place without the concurrence of the other. 54. The Chamber of Deputies shall be renewed every year; likewise the Chamber of Senators shall be renewed by thirds, every year, and its members shall be able to be re-elected. 55. To be a Senator it is necessary to be above 30 years of age, to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship without having lost them during the five years preceding the election, to be a native of the electing department or its vicinity, and to be of well-known honour and capability. 56. To be elected a Representative in the Chamber of Deputies it is necessary to be above 25 years of age, a Salvadorean citizen, of well-known honour and capability, without having lost the rights of citizenship during the five years preceding the election, and to be native of the department to which the electing district corresponds or of its neighbourhood. 57. The substitute Senators and Deputies have the same qualities as those in their own right. 58. The representatives of the nation in both Chambers are inviolable; consequently, no Deputy or Senator shall at any time

be held responsible for his opinions, whether expressed verbally or in writing. 69. From the day of the election until 15 days after the Legislative Body has adjourned, no civil action may be commenced or pursued against any Representative. Neither can he be tried, from the day of the election until 15 days after the recess, for crimes or offences which he may have committed, unless it be by his respective Chamber with the sole object of expelling the culprit, and of sending him before the ordinary Courts. 60. The dispositions of the two preceding Articles shall be extended to the constituent Congresses and Assemblies. 61. It belongs to each of the Chambers without the intervention of the other  (1.) To confirm the election of its members, approving or disapproving their credentials; (2.) To summon the substitutes in case of the death of the ordinary members, or their inability to attend; (3.) To accept resignations for reasons legally proved; (4.) To draw up its internal regulations;  (5.) To exact responsibility from its members as much for grave offences in the exercise of their functions as in the cases mentioned in Article 63, and to establish the process by which they ought to

be tried.
62. It belongs to the Legislative Power  (1.) To decree, interpret, reform, and abrogate the laws; (2.) To create jurisdictions, and to establish in them functionaries who shall, in the name of the Republic, take cognizance of, try, and pass sentences in all kinds of causes or matters, civil and criminal; (3.) To designate the attributes and jurisdiction of the different functionaries; (4.) To impose taxes and contributions on every kind of property and income in due proportion; and to decree forced loans in case of invasion or of war lawfully declared, if the ordinary public revenues are not sufficient, or if it is not possible to obtain voluntary loans; (5.) To authorize the Executive Power to contract voluntary loans outside the Republic whenever a grave and urgent necessity requires it, to the amount sufficient to meet that necessity; (6.) To fix and pass yearly the Estimates of the expenses of the Public Administration; (7.) To confer the rank from Brigadier inclusive upwards, according to the record of services of the favoured person. (8.) To decree the arms and flag of the Republic; to determine the alloy, weight, and pattern of the coinage; and to regulate the weights and measures;

892

(9.) To grant to persons or Corporations, titles, honourable distinctions, and rewards, consistent with the established system of government, for eminent services rendered to the country; (10.) To assign, augment, or reduce the emoluments of officials and functionaries; to create and suppress official posts; (11.) To decree rewards and concede temporary privileges to the authors of useful inventions, and to those who introduce industries of great utility; (12.) To declare war and to make peace in accordance with the grounds communicated by the Executive; (13.) To grant amnesties and pardons, the latter in view of instruction from the Court of Cassation ; (14.) To take into consideration, for the purpose of revision, the commutation of penalties imposed for serious offences whenever it may be refused by the Executive Power; (15.) To declare a state of siege in the cases and for the causes which shall be determined by a formal law; such state of siege being raised in accordance with the same law; (10.) To rehabilitate those who have lost the rights of citizenship j (17.) To approve or disapprove of the acts of the Executive; (18.) To decree laws for the recognition of the National Debt, and for the creation of funds necessary for its payment; (19.) To grant or refu3e permission to Salvadoreans, who solicit it, to accept employment by another nation, conformably with the system of government of Salvador; (20.) To exact responsibility from the superior officials, in every case exercising judgment, in accordance with this Constitution and the laws; (21.) To ratify, modify, or disapprove the various Treaties and negotiations entered into by the Executive with other Powers. 63. When the Chambers are convoked extraordinarily by the Executive, they can treat only of the matters expressed in the Minute contained in the Decree of Convocation. 64. The Senate may remain sitting after the close of the Sessions when it may have to investigate accusations referred to it by the law, for such time as may be necessary to dispose of them. 65. The two Chambers sitting together shall form the Congress or General Assembly; the attributes of which are  (1.) To open and close the Sessions of the Legislative Body, and to agree upon the terms in which the Message of the President of the Republic should be confirmed; (2.) To open the papers which contain the rotes for the President of the Republic, and to regulate and scrutinize the rotes by means of a Commission of its own members :

(3.) To declare the election of the aforesaid functionary according to the judgment of the Commission of Scrutiny, which shall express itself, moreover, as to the fitness of the elect, and the possession by him of the qualifications required by law ; (4.) To invest the President of the Republic with his authority, to receive his resignation, and to grant permission to him to absent himself, for a period longer than a month, from the territory of the Republic; (5.) To elect the Magistrates of the Court of Cassation and of the Courts of Appeal, and to accept their resignations; (6.) To receive Memorials from the Ministers of State, and to pass them through the Chambers in accordance with Article 62 (17); (7.) To designate the persons who should enter upon and exercise the Executive Power in the cases determined by law, taking care that such persons possess the same qualifications as are necessary in the case of the President of the Republic; (8.) To decide with regard to doubts which may arise or complaints which may be made of the incapacity of the President and of other officers who may have been elected by the same Assembly. G6. The faculties attributed to the Chambers, separately or united in General Assembly, which are the same as correspond to those of the Legislative. Power generally, cannot be discharged by deputy, excepting the investiture of the President of the Republic and the Magistrates of the Tribunals of Justice. Title IX. Of the Formation and Promulgation of the Law. 67. The initiative of the law remains reserved exclusively to the Deputies and Senators, to the President of the Republic, by means of the Ministers, and to the Court of Cassation. 68. Every project of law, after having been discussed and approved in one Chamber, shall be passed to the other to be discussed and approved if thought fit; if it is approved it will be passed on to the Executive Power, who, if holding no objections to it, shall sanction it and cause it to be published as law. The Decrees which may be drawn up approving or disapproving the Acts treated of in the Memorials of the Ministers of State do not require the sanction of the Executive, who, however, shall be obliged to publish them. 69. If the Chamber which examines the project should amend or modify it', the said project must be returned to the Chamber whence it originated in order that, with the amendments, additions, or modifications which have been made, it may be discussed anew; if it be then approved it shall be passed on to the Executive for such action as is determined by the preceding Article.

70. When the Executive considers it inconvenient to sanction the projects of law which have been passed on to him he may return them within 10 days to the Chamber whence they originated, specifying the reasons upon which he bases his decision for the negative; but if within the term aforesaid he shall make no objection, they shall be held to be sanctioned and shall be published as law. In case of the project being returned, the Chamber shall be able to reconsider .and ratify the project by the votes of two-thirds, but with the obligation of passing it on to the other Chamber to receive its assent by two-thirds of the votes if it shall be approved; and in this case the project shall be passed on to the Executive, who shall consider it as law to be executed and published. Should Congress issue a Law during the [last 10 days of its Sessions, and the Executive encounter difficulties in sanctioning it, he shall be obliged to give immediate notice to Congress in order that it may remain in Session until the expiration of the said term; if this be not done the Law shall not be held to have been sanctioned. 71. When a project of law has been rejected and not ratified it shall not be brought forward again in the same Session, nor until the Session of the following Legislature. Every project of law approved in the Chamber of its origin shall be drawn up in triplicate. 72. The Executive may not make any observations upon the Resolutions or Laws issued by Congress in exercise of its attributes, Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 5. 73. To interpret, modify, or abrogate the laws, the same procedure shall be observed as in their formation. Title X. The Executive Power 74. The Executive Power shall be exercised by a citizen who will receive the title of President of the Republic, with the respective Ministers. He shall be appointed directly by the Salvadorean people; but when no person is elected by an absolute majority of votes, the General Assembly shall elect him from amongst the three citizens who have obtained the highest number of votes. 75. In default of the President, one of the three citizens designated at the election of the President shall enter upon the exercise of the Executive Power during the recess of the Chambers. When the latter is incapacitated from being elected, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the citizens aforesaid, according to the order of their appointment. Should the Legislative Body be assembled when the difficulty occurs, it shall fill up the vacancy by electing the person who is to exercise the Executive Power,


In case of the absence or the temporary incapacity of the President of the Republic, the duties will devolve upon the Council of Ministers or upon any person designated by its choice. 76. The duration of the Presidential period shall be four years, and shall commence and conclude on the 1st February of the year of its renewal. 77. To be President of the Republic it is required to be a Salvadorean by birth, to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship without having lost them during the five years previous to the election, to be 30 years of age, and to be of well-known integrity and ability. 78. The citizen who exercises the Presidency of the Republic shall be Commander-General of the army; but when he is under the necessity of leaving the territory at the head of the army, the office shall devolve upon the Executive Power. 79. For the dispatch of public affairs, Ministers shall be created according to the law, amongst whom the President of the Republic shall distribute the different branches of the Administration as to him appears most convenient. 80. To be a Minister of State it is necessary to be a Salvadorean by birth, to be in The exercise of the rights of citizenship without having lost them during the five years previous to appointment, and to possess the necessary ability. 81. The Decrees, resolutions, and measures of the President of the Republic must be authorized by the Ministers in their respective branches. 82. The Ministers may take part in the debates in Congress or in either of the Chambers, but must withdraw before a division. They shall equally take part in the discussion whenever Congress or either of the Chambers shall call upon them to do so, and in the latter case, as in the former, they shall reply to the interpellations put to them. 88. The President of the Republic and his Ministers are collectively responsible, each as a head of the Executive, for the acts which they may authorize by their signatures, as also in respect of any matters discussed and authorized in the Council of Ministers, except in the case where any functionary may withhold his vote. 84. The duties of the Executive Power are (1.) To maintain intact the sovereignty and independence of the Republic and the integrity of its territory; (2.) To preserve internal peace and tranquillity;  (3.) To publish the law and to cause it to be executed; (4.) To present to the Legislative Body, by means of his Ministers, within eight days from the opening of the ordinary Sessions, a detailed, circumstantial, and vouched account of the

Public Administration for the year last past, together with the Estimates of expenses for the coming year, indicating the means of providing for them. If within the required term this obligation is not complied with the Minister at fault shall be suspended from his functions, which suspension shall be immediately notified to the Executive, in order that in the eight days following he may present through the Minister named for the purpose the account and Estimates above mentioned. If that should not be done, the President of the Republic shall be suspended, and the Executive Power: shall be assumed by such person as shall be designated by the General Assembly, and such person shall within 20 days fulfil the duty referred to. In this case the Legislative Power shall be able to prorogue its Sessions for the same term; (5.) To furnish to the Chambers the information they request; but if they should be on matters of reserve, he shall state that they are so, unless he shall deem it necessary to give an explanation of them; he shall not, however, be obliged to reveal plans of war, nor negotiations in the domain of higher politics, except in case the information may be required in order to ascertain his responsibility; then he cannot refuse them on any account, nor can he keep back the documents after having been impeached before the Senate by the Chamber of Deputies; (G.) To render to the public officers of the Judicial Power the help and assistance which may be required in order to make its measures effective. 85. The faculties of the Executive Power are  (1.) To appoint and remove the Ministers of State, the Governors of Departments, and the general and local Commandants, and to accept their resignations ; to appoint and remove the officers of the army from full Colonel downwards, and to permit them to retire; and to appoint or remove all officials of the administrative branch; (2.) To create the army of the Republic, and to confer the military ranks from Colonel downwards; (3.) To appoint and remove the Ministers and any other class of Diplomatic or Consular Agents; to receive the same class of Ministers and Agents from other nations; and to direct foreign affairs; (4.) To convoke the Chambers extraordinarily whenever great interests of the nation should demand it, summoning in such case the substitute Deputies and Senators in the place of those who may have died or who are legally impeded ; (5.) To signify before the assembling of the Legislative Body the place where it should meet, whenever the place designated by law may not possess sufficient security or liberty for deliberation;

(6.) To direct war and to organize the army of the State, with power to dispose of public money for the purpose; (7.) To conclude Treaties of Peace and other arrangements, submitting them to the Legislature for ratification ; (8.) To raise forces over and above the permanent force, in order to repel invasion or to stifle rebellion; (9.) To permit or refuse the transit of troops of other countries through the territory of the Republic; (10.) To open and close ports and to establish maritime and land custom-houses; to nationalize and register vessels; (11.) To suspend the execution of the death penalty in, any case until the assembling of the Legislative Body; and to grant commutations, notice having been given beforehand by the Court of Cassation; (12.) To make use of the veto according to law; (13.) To make use of the attributes numbered 11, 13, 14, 15, and 18 of the Legislative Power during its recess, with the obligation of giving to it a special account at its next meeting; (14.) To procure the spread of public instruction in all branches of human knowledge, decreeing adequate Statutes and measures; (15.) To decree the opening and improvement of ways of communication; (16.) To grant letters of naturalization, to foreigners who request them. 80. In the sanction and publication of the law the Executive Power shall proceed in the following manner: When the project of law is received, and encounters no objections, it shall be signed in duplicate, one copy being remitted to the respective Chamber, the other being reserved for the archives, and it shall then be promulgated as law in the form established and within the period of 10 days positively. Title XI. Of the Elections. 87. The elections of the supreme authorities, with the exception of that which is hereinafter prescribed, shall be direct, and the law shall regulate the manner in which they shall be subjected to verification. 88. The right to elect cannot be renounced, and the exercise of it is obligatory. 89. The basis of the electoral system is the population; the administrative division of the Republic into departments, districts, and cantons, serving for present purposes and until an exact census shall be taken. 90. For the present, each department shall elect a Senator in his

own right and a substitute; and when the census prescribed in the preceding Article shall have been taken, the Legislative Power shall put into effect the respective regulating law. 91. No official appointed by the Executive may be elected Senator or Deputy unless six months have elapsed after he shall have ceased to exercise his official functions. 92. Deputies and Senators may be admitted to employments in the nomination of the Executive, he having passed through the term of his inviolability, but for that purpose they must renounce their character as Representatives. 93. No minister of any religion may obtain an office by popular election. 94. A special Law shall regulate the method of carrying on the elections, the qualifications of the electors and of the persons offering themselves for election, and the registration of the citizens Title XII. Internal Government of the Republic. 95. The territory of the Republic for political administration is divided into departments, the number and limits of which shall be fixed by law. 96. In order to be a Governor in one's own right, or substitute, the following conditions are required  (1.) To be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship without having lost them during the two years preceding the appointment; (2.) To be over 25 years of age, and to be honourable and capable. 97. The local government of communities shall be carried on by Municipalities popularly and directly elected by the citizens inhabiting each locality. Each Municipality shall be composed of a Justice of the Peace (" Alcalde "), a Recorder (" Sindico"), and two or more Aldermen (" Regidores"), the latter in proportion to the population, in conformity with that which is determined by law. 98. The Municipal Councils shall administer the moneys provided by the community, rendering an account of their administration to the Tribunal established by law. 99. The attributes of Municipalities, which shall be purely financial and administrative, shall be determined by law, as also the conditions relating to the election of their members. 100. Besides the attributes conferred by law upon Municipalities, the Chief of a district shall have the power to commute, in conformity with the law, the penalties imposed for offences. 101. Municipalities in the exorcise of their functions are completely independent, but they shall be held responsible before the


899

law for their act, whether as judicial personages or individually; according to circumstances. 102. The police of security and order shall be civil, and shall be carried on by the local authorities. The appointment and renewal of its officials belong to the Municipalities, except in the capital of the Republic, where the Executive Power shall exercise the faculty, and shall have supreme control of that branch of service. A secondary Law will regulate it. Title XIII. The Judicial Power. 103. The Judicial Power shall be exercised by a Court of Cassation, by Courts of Appeal, and by the other Tribunals and Judges established by law. 104. The Court of Cassation shall be composed of five Magistrates, and the Courts of Appeal of two each. The Court of Cassation shall be held in the capital of the Republic, and the Courts of Appeal, one at San Miguel, another at Santa Ana, and two in the capital aforesaid. There shall be two substitute Magistrates for the Court of Cassation, two for the Court of Appeal at San Miguel, an equal number for that at Santa Ana, and three for those in the capital; the latter shall enter and employ themselves without distinction in place of those who hold in their .own right in such cases as shall be determined by law. 105. To be a Magistrate or substitute Magistrate in the Court of Cassation, or in the Courts of Appeal, it is necessary  (1.) To be a Salvadorean by birth; (2.) To be in the exercise of citizenship without having lost those rights during the four years preceding the election; (3.) To be above 80 years of age; (4.) To be a barrister of the Republic; (5.) To be of well-known capability and morality; (6.) To have exercised the profession of lawyer for the space of six years in Salvador, or to have served four years in a Court of First Instance. 106. The Magistrates and substitute Magistrates will continue in the exercise of their functions for four years, and may be re-elected. They will bte renewed by the retirement of half their number at the end of every two years. 107. The attributes of the Court of Cassation are  (1.) To hear motions of appeal according to law; (2.) To determine its internal regulations ; (3.) To nominate the Judges of First Instance, to receive from them the declaration established by this Constitution, to put them

into possession of their appointments, to accept their resignations and to grant the privileges they solicit; (4.) To inspect the Courts of Appeal by means of a Magistrate, in order to correct such abuses as may be detected in the administration of justice; (5.) To make use of the right of the initiative of making known to the Legislative Power the inconvenience of certain Laws, or the difficulties and defects which may have been noted in their application, and indicating the reforms of which they may be susceptible; (6.) To suspend Magistrates during the recess of the Senate for grave faults in the exercise of their functions, judicial note being taken of the cause ; and to grant to them the privileges they solicit in conformity with the law; (7.) To attend to the admission of barristers; and to suspend them from the exercise of their profession, and even to withdraw their titles, for venality, bribery, or fraud, judicial note being taken of the cause; (8.) To appoint co-Judges (" conjueces ")in the cases determined by law; (9.) To take cognizance of prize cases and any others not reserved for any other authority ; (10.) To watch vigilantly over the prompt and complete administration of justice; (11.) To adjust the differences which may arise between Tribunals and Judges, whatever may be their nature and origin. Further attributes of the Court of Caseation shall be determined by law. 108. The Courts of Appeal of the capital will take cognizance of all matters within their competency, and their jurisdiction will extend over the Departments of San Salvador, La Libertad, Cuscatlán, Cabanas, Chalatenango, San Vicente, and La Paz. That of San Miguel will take cognizance in appeal of all sentences passed in civil and criminal cases by Judges of First Instance in the Departments of San Miguel, Usulután, La Union, and Gotera, as well as of other applications within its competency, according to law. That of Santa Ana will take cognizance of sentences passed in civil and criminal cases by Judges of First Instance in the Departments of Santa Ana, Sonsonate, and Ahuachapán, as well as of other applications within its competency according to law. 109. It belongs to the Courts of Appeal to decree and carry into effect the guarantee of habeas corpus in opposition to any authority whatsoever, and to receive the accusations and complaints which may be made against the Judges of First Instance and the subordinate

officials of the judicial branch, but only in order to effect the examination of the person laying the information,, and to give account of it with the production of the person before the Court of Cassation. The other attributes of the Courts of Appeal shall be determined by law. 110. There shall be Judges of First Instance in their own right and substitutes in all the chief towns of the departments to hear and judge civil and criminal matters. The Court of Cassation, in agreement with the Executive, shall, moreover, have the power to establish them in districts wherever their creation shall be convenient to the good administration of justice. They will be appointed for a year, and may be re-elected. 111. To be Judge of First Instance it is necessary to be a citizen domiciled two years in Salvador, to be a lawyer of the Republic, to be of well-known morality and education, and not to have lost the rights of citizenship during the two years preceding the appointment. 112. Authorized juries shall be established wherever there may be Judges of First Instance for all kinds of offences within the competency of the latter. A secondary law shall regulate this institution. 113. There shall be Justices of the Peace in all towns of the Republic, who shall take cognizance of matters of minor importance and in offences qualified and punished as faults in the Penal Code, and in other cases such as may be determined by law. Their election, qualifications, and attributes shall be laid down by law. 114. Popular action against Magistrates and Judges must be based upon the following :-(1.) Prevarication; (2.) Bribery; (3.) Abridgment or omission of judicial forms; (4.) Illegal proceedings against individual guarantees. 115. The quality of Magistrate and Judge of First Instance is incompatible with employment in other branches of the Administration, but this disposition does not affect the substitutes when not in exercise of their functions. Title XIT. Of the National Treasure, 110. The public treasure of the nation consists of    (1.) All property, real and movable; (2.) All moneys owing; (3.) All dues, taxes, or contributions at present paid, or which may hereafter be paid by Salvadoreans and foreigners.
117. For the administration of the public funds there shall be a General Treasury for the collection of revenue and the issue of payments, and a superior Tribunal or principal Office for the audit of accounts, which shall explain all matters of interest in the administration of the public Exchequer. 118. The General Treasury shall publish each month the state of the funds administered by it, and the Audit Department each year shall publish a general account of the revenue. 119. No. moneys may be withdrawn from the Treasury, paid away, or subscribed, except for the purpose previously designated by law. Title XV. Of the Armed Force. 120. The armed force is instituted for the maintenance in safety and in its integrity of the Salvadorean territory, for the preservation and defence of national independence, for the execution of the laws, for the maintenance of public order, and for the carrying out of constitutional guarantees. 121. The armed force is essentially obedient, and has not the power to deliberate. 122. The army of the Republic is composed of the standing forces, the militia, and the national marine. The standing army shall, in time of peace, be fixed by the Legislature. 123. The members of the army of the Republic shall enjoy military jurisdiction provided they belong to an organized body, except in the cases established by law, and for infractions of police laws and regulations. Those who enjoy military jurisdiction shall be subject to the proceedings and penalties of the military Ordinances and Laws. 124. In case of invasion, of war legitimately declared, and of internal rebellion, all Salvadoreans between 18 and 60 years of age are soldiers. Title XVI. Responsibility of Public Functionaries. 125. Every public officer on taking possession of his office shall promise on his word of honour to be faithful to the Republic, to fulfil the Constitution and cause it to be fulfilled, and to hold to its text, whatever laws, decrees, orders, or resolutions there may be to the contrary, and shall promise besides to discharge his duties exactly and as well as he is able, holding himself responsible for any infraction in his person and property. 120. Any measure by which the President of the Republic dissolves the Legislative Body or impedes its meeting is a crime of high treason.

127. Every Salvadorean citizen possesses the right to impeach before the Chamber of Deputies the President of the Republic, the Magistrates of the Courts of Justice, the Ministers of State, and the Diplomatic and Consular Agents, for treason, venality, usurpation of power, serious default in the exercise of their functions, and for ordinary offences which do not admit of release on bail. The Chamber shall always receive this accusation and carry it before the Senate by means of one of its own officials nominated for the purpose. Those persons who may not come forward as accusers hold the right of complaint or denunciation in conformity with the law. The responsibility of the Governors shall be argued before the Executive Power. 128. The examination of the case and of the proceedings arising from it shall be proved collectively in the Senate or by a Commission of that body ; but the trial shall be carried on and the decision arrived at by the former, it being necessary that two-thirds of the votes shall concur in passing sentence. 129. The principal object of the sentence or decision of the Senate or of the Executive in this kind of case is to divest the accused of his office if there be reason for so doing; there must, however, be a declaration if the case deserves it, in order that the accused may be submitted to the ordinary proceedings before the regular Courts, in which case the matter shall be remitted to the proper Judge or Tribunal. 130. As soon as a declaration has been laid for the formation of a case, the accused is suspended from the exercise of his functions; he shall for no reason whatsoever remain in his employment without becoming answerable for the crime of usurpation, and no person shall obey him. 131. The decrees, acts, and sentences pronounced by the Senate in this kind of case shall be fulfilled and executed without any need for confirmation or sanction, and the official appointed shall take part in the case until the sentence is passed. 132. If the Executive, in the accounts rendered by his Ministers to the Legislative Power, should omit any items which, according to law, should be included therein, he shall be requested by the General Assembly to fulfil his duty in this respect. The approval in general of the respective accounts shall in no case remove the responsibility for the items omitted. Title XVII. Reform of the Constitution. 133. The reform of this Constitution can only be agreed to by two-thirds of the votes of the Representatives elected to each

904

Chamber, the Article or Articles which should be altered being specified. This resolution shall be published in the official journal, and shall be taken into consideration in the next Legislature. If it be ratified by that Legislature a Constituent Assembly shall be convoked in order to decree the reforms. 134. The present Constitution shall have the force of law from the day of its publication- in the official periodical, that issued on the 16th February, 1880, being annulled. To the Executive Power. Given at San Salvador, in the National Palace, December 4, 1888.
TEODOBO MOEENO. A. GUIEOLA, Vice-President.
Let it be complied with and published. RAPAEL ZALDIVAE. National Palace, San Salvador, December 6,1883.
SALVADOR GALLEGOS, Minister

of State for Foreign

Affairs. Minister of State for Finance, War, and Marine. ADAN MOEA, Minister for Some Department. ANTONIO J. CASTRO, Under-Secretary of State for Public Instruction.
PEDRO MELENDEZ,

