CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Salvador, reforming the Constitution of 16th of October, 1871. San Salvador, November 9, 1872. In the presence of God, Supreme Legislator of the Universe, and in the name of the Salvadorean nation, the National Constituent Congress decrees, sanctions, and proclaims the following Constitution, reforming that issued on the 16th of October, 1871. 

TITLE I.§ 1. Of the Nation. 
ART. I. The Salvadorean nation is sovereign, free, and independent. II . The sovereignty resides essentially in the universality of the citizens; and the exercise thereof is circumscribed to the act of making the elections in conformity with the law. 
III . All public authority emanates from the people. The functionaries are their delegates and agents and possess no other powers than those expressly conferred on them by the law ; by that they are entitled to obedience and respect, and in conformity with that they must render an account of their functions. 

2. Of the Territory. IV. The boundaries of the territory of Salvador are: to the east, the Gulf of Fonseca; to the north, the Republics of Guatemala and Honduras; to the west, the river Paz; and to the south, the Pacific Ocean. The special demarcation will be the subject of secondary laws. 
3. Form of Government. V. The Government of the Salvadorean nation is Republican, popular, representative; responsible and alternative in the persona who exercise it; it shall be composed of 3 Powers distinct from

and independent of each other, and they shall be denominated Legislative, Executive, and Judicial. 

4. Religion. VI. The Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Religion is the religion of the State, and the Government will protect it. The public worship of the Christian sects is tolerated in so far as it is not injurious to morality and to public order. 

TITLE II.1. Of the Salvadoreans, Native and Naturalised. VII. The native Salvadoreans are : 1. All who are born in the territory of Salvador, excepting the children of foreigners not naturalised ; 2. The children of a foreigner by a Salvadorean woman, or a Salvadorean by a foreign woman, born in the territory of the Republic; 3. The children of Salvadoreans born in a foreign country where their parents are not naturalised. VIII. The naturalised Salvadoreans are: those who have acquired this qualification in conformity with the previous laws, and those who shall obtain it hereafter in accordance with the following rules: 1. Those Spanish-Americans who, after proving that they have been domiciled for a year in the .Republic and have behaved well, obtain letters of naturalisation from the administrative authority, who is bound to grant them ; 2. Those other foreigners who apply for and obtain letters of naturalisation from any administrative authority, who will grant them on previous proof of good behaviour and domicilation for two years; 3. Those who obtain letters of naturalisation from the Legislative Body.

TITLE 2. Of the Citizens. IX. All Salvadoreans are citizens who are full 21 years of age and of good conduct, and who have besides any of the following qualifications: being father of a family or head of a house; being able to read and write; or having the means of living independently. Those who are full 18 years of age and obtain a literary degree are also citizens. X. The rights of citizenship are suspended: 1. By justified warrant of arrest in criminal proceedings which do not admit of release on bail; 2. For having been legally declared a fraudulent debtor; 3. For conduct notoriously corrupt, or habitual vagrancy; 4. By mental alienation; and 5. By judicial interdiction. 

XI. The following persons lose the character of citizens:
 
1. Those who are condemned for offences which do not admit of release on bail; 2. Those who, while residing in the Republic, accept employment from another nation without licence from the competent authority; and 3. Those who get themselves naturalised in a foreign country. 

3. Of the Foreigners. 
XII . The children of foreigners born in the Republic and emancipated according to the law are to declare, before the proper authority, within the year next following the emancipation, whether they accept the Salvadorean nationality or not; but if they fail to do this, they shall be considered ns naturalised. 

XIII . Foreigners residing in Salvador are bound to obey the laws and to pay the ordinary taxes the same as the Salvadoreans, and in case they are unduly molested in their persons and interests they shall have the same guarantees as the natives. XIV . When they have to plead any right against the nation, they shall have recourse to the tribunals appointed by the laws. XV. Foreigners may acquire landed property in the nation; but such property shall not be exonerated from the legal charges to which it would be liable if it were in the hands of Salvadoreans. XVI. The circumstance of a Salvadorean woman marrying a foreigner does not deprive her of her character as a Salvadorean, nor does it exempt her property from the taxes and charges to which the property of the natives is liable.
TITLE III. Sole §. Rights, Duties, and Guarantees of the Salvadoreans.

XVII . Salvador recognises rights anterior and superior to the positive laws; her principle is: liberty, equality, fraternity; and her bases: family, labour, property, and public order. XVIII . All the inhabitants of Salvador have incontestable rights to preserve and defend their life and their liberty, to acquire, possess, and dispose of their property, and to seek their happiness without injury to others. XIX . Every man in the Republic is free. He who enters its territory cannot be a slave; nor can be who traffics in slaves be a citizen. XX. The Republic is a sacred asylum for the foreigner who wishes to reside in its territory; except for those who have committed ordinary offences and are claimed by another nation in virtue of existing Treaties which stipulate their extradition. XXI . Every inhabitant in the territory of the Republic, free from responsibility, may emigrate wherever be pleases, without necessity for passport, and return whenever it suits him.

XXII. Every man, free from responsibility, may traverse the territory of the Republic, without necessity for passport, and no person can be compelled to change his residence, except in virtue of an executory sentence. XXIII. The Supreme Power is attained by constitutional means only; if any one should usurp it by means of force or sedition, he is guilty of the crime of usurpation, all he does shall be null, and things must return to the state in which they were, so soon as constitutional order is re-established. XXIV. Every man may freely express, write, print, and publish his thoughts, without previous examination or censure, under the sole responsibility of answering before the jury for the abuse of this liberty. Printed papers shall not be subjected to any tax or security. XXV. The Salvadoreans may likewise assemble publicly and peaceably to discuss matters of general convenience; but those who call the meeting are bound to give notice to the authority in charge of the police, of the place and hour at which the meeting is to take place. XXVI. Every inhabitant of the Republic has a right to address his petitions to the constituted authorities, who are bound to take them into consideration, provided that they are drawn up in a decorous manner, and according to the law. 

XXVII. The penalty of confiscation is abolished. No person can be deprived of his life, his liberty, his honour, or his property, without having been previously heard and defeated in trial, in accordance with the forms established by the laws; nor can he be indicted twice for the same offence. The authorities and persons who contravene this provision shall be answerable at all times, in person and property, for the reparation of the damage inflicted, and the confiscated things are imprescriptible. XXVIII. Every inhabitant of the Republic has the right of protection from inquisitions, searches, and constraints in bi3 person, his family, his house, his papers, and all his possessions. The law will arrange the manner for the visitation of suspected persons, the inspection of houses for proof of offences, and the apprehension of delinquents to bring them to trial. No person shall be tried in another jurisdiction than that in which the offence has been committed, except in the cases determined by the law, and by decision of the court of justice. XXIX. All men are equal before the law, whether it protect or chastise. XXX. The punishments must be proportionate to the nature and gravity of the offence; their real object is to correct, and not to exterminate men} consequently, any constraint that is not necessary to keep the person in safe custody is cruel, and ought not to be allowed. The punishment of death is abolished in political matters, and can only be inflicted for the crimes of assassination, of assault, and incendiarism if followed by death. XXXI. None but the tribunals previously established by the law can try and take cognizance of the civil and criminal causes of the Salvadoreans. Special commissions and tribunals are abolished, as contrary to the principle of equality of rights and conditions ; consequently all th9 inhabitants of the Republic are subject to the same order of proceedings as established by the law. XXXII. All causes, of whatever kind they may be, excepting the ecclesiastical, when it may not be possible, shall be concluded within the territory of Salvador; they cannot pass through more than 3 instances, and no person can withdraw the cognizance of his case from the authority appointed by the law. XXXIII. No inhabitant of the Republic can be illegally detained in custody; every one has the right of applying to the proper tribunal for the order to produce his person. The tribunal will decree this, and will provide for the execution of its orders by all legal means. If the President of the Republic should be the authority that illegally detains and resists the execution of the order for production, the said tribunal shall protest; if after this proceeding it shall not be obeyed, it shall publish its decisions, and, as a last resort, shall institute the respective accusation before the Legislative Power at its next meeting. XXXIV. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable, and cannot be intercepted, opened, or revealed; if intercepted or revealed, it shall not be taken as evidence in legal proceedings, or otherwise. XXXV. The person who gives bail, in cases wherein the law does not expressly prohibit it, shall neither be taken into nor kept in custody. XXXVI. No citizen or inhabitant of the Republic can be compelled to give evidence against himself in criminal matters. Neither shall any persons be allowed to depose against progenitors or descendants, nor against consorts, nor against brothers or brothers-in-law. And in all criminal proceedings every one shall have a right to produce any evidence that is in his favour; to be confronted with the witnesses if he desire it, and to conduct his defence himself or by means of his defender. XXXVII. The protective police can only be entrusted to the civil authorities. XXXVIII. The power of appointing arbitrators, and of coming to an arrangement at any stage of the suit, is inherent in every person, saving in the cases expressly excepted by the law. XXXIX. The same judges cannot act as such in two different 

instances, and no authority can call for pending cases from another to take cognizance of them, or re-open trials that have been concluded. XL. Property, whatever its nature is inviolable ; nevertheless, the State may require the sacrifice of property for a purpose of public utility, legally proved, and upon just and previous indemnification. All property is transmissible- in the form determined by the laws, consequently every kind of entail is prohibited. XLI. No one can be detained or arrested except in virtue of an order from the competent authority, issued in accordance with the prescriptions of the law, unless the delinquent be taken in the act, in which case he may be seized by any person, to be delivered up to the proper authority. XLII. All the inhabitants of the Republic are free to give or receive such instruction as they please, and they can obtain literary degrees in the national University, without other conditions than those of submitting to the previous examinations and the other requirements prescribed by the statutes thereof. Primary instruction in the Republic is gratuitous and obligatory. XLIII. All kinds of industry are free in the Republic; only the monopoly of brandy, saltpetre, and gunpowder is retained for the profit of the State, and for the exclusive administration of the Executive. XLIV. Association for any agricultural, commercial, industrial, or moral pursuit is free, only joint stock associations (asociaciones ononimas), must submit their deeds of foundation and their regulations to the approval of the authorities, and the prohibitions enacted by Article I, and paragraph 1 of Article IV, of Law I, title 5, Book 7, of the " Eecopilacion Patria," remain in full force and vigour. XLV. Labour and occupation are necessary as bases of morality and national progress, and are therefore obligatory. XLVI. The Salvadorean citizens have a right to compete for all public employments, merit being the only preference, and the only conditions those fixed by the law. XLVII. Neither the Legislative, nor the Executive, nor the Judicial Power, nor any tribunal or authority, can restrict, alter, or violate any of the guarantees enunciated; and any person of the high powers or authority who may infringe them shall be reputed as an usurper, and be individually responsible for the damage done, and he shall be tried in accordance with the title of responsibility in this Constitution. TITLE IV. Sole §. Of the Elections, 

XLVIII. The elections of the supreme authorities, saving the


exceptions hereinafter prescribed, shall be direct, and the law will regulate the manner of performing them. XLIX. The right of electing cannot be renounced. L. The population is the basis of the electoral system, the administrative division of the Republic into departments, districts, and cantons, serving as a rule at present, until an accurate census is taken. LI. Each department shall elect a principal Senator and a substitute, and each district a principal Deputy and a substitute. And at such time as the population shall form the basis of the electoral system, the territory of the Republic shall be divided into circles, districts, and cantons. The circle shall consist of 40,000 inhabitants, and shall elect a principal Senator and a substitute ; and the district of 20,000, and shall elect a principal Deputy and a substitute. LII. In each of the cantons a register of the citizens shall be formed, and only those inscribed therein shall have the right of voting. LIII. No functionary appointed by the Executive can be elected as Senator or Deputy unless he shall have ceased to act as such functionary for 6 months before the election. LTV. The Deputies and Senators may accept offices in the appointment of the Executive, after the expiration of their term of inviolability, but, in doing so, they renounce their character of representatives. LV. No clergyman can obtain a post by popular election. 

TITLE V.§ 1. Legislative Power audits Organization. 
LVI. The Legislative Power shall be exercised by two Chambers, one of Deputies and the other of Senators, which shall be independent of each other. LVII. The Legislative Body shall assemble in the capital of the Republic, without necessity for letters of convocation, from the 1st to the 15th of January every year; and it shall assemble extraordinarily when convoked by the Executive Power. LVIII. The number of its ordinary sittings shall not exceed 40, and that of the extraordinary sittings shall be such as may be necessary to decide the points expressed in the minute of their convocation letters. LIX. Three Representatives in each of the Chambers, assembled in preparatory council, have authority to take at once all the requisite measures to procure the attendance of the others until the complement is obtained. LX. The majority of the members of each Chamber shall be sufficient to pass resolutions; but when there are less than two-third of the elected, the consent of two third parts of those present shall be necessary for every legislative resolution. LXI. The two Chambers shall open and close their sessions at the same time; neither of them can suspend, prorogue, or remove the sittings to another place without the consent of the other. LXII. The Chamber of Deputies shall be renewed every year, and its members can be re-elected. The Chamber of Senators shall be renewed by thirds every year. § 2. Qualifications. LXIII. To be a Senator it is required to be full 30 years of age, to be exercising the rights of citizenship, and not to have lost them during the 5 years preceding the election; to be a native of or domiciled in the department which elects him, and to be of well-known integrity and ability. LXIV. To be elected as representative in the Chamber of Deputies it is required to be full 25 year of age, of well-known integrity, not to have lost the rights of citizenship during the o years preceding the election, and to be domiciled in the department to which the district that elects him belongs. LXV. The substitute Senators and Deputies must have the same qualifications as the principals. 

§ 3. Inviolability of the Representatives 
LXVI. The representatives of the nation in both Chambers are inviolable, therefore no Deputy or Senator shall be responsible at any time for his opinions, whether expressed by word of mouth or in writing. LXVII. From the day of the election until 15 days after the prorogation of the Legislative Body no civil proceedings can be commenced or carried on against the representatives; Nor can they be tried from the day of the election until 15 days after the prorogation for serious offences committed by them, unless it be by their respective Chamber for the sole purpose of discarding the accused and handing him over to the ordinary tribunals. 

§ 4. Faculties peculiar to each Chamber. LXVIII. It belongs to each of the Chambers without the intervention of the other: I. To verify the election of its members, approving or rejecting their credentials; 2. To summon the substitutes in case of the death of the regular members, or their inability to attend ; 3. To accept their resignations for causes legally proved; 4. To draw up its internal regulations; o. To call its members to account, both for serious faults in the exercise of their functions, and in the crises mentioned in Article LXVII, and to order their trial.

 
§ 5. General Attributions of the Legislative Power. LXIX. It belongs to the Legislative Power : 1. To enact, interpret, reform, and repeal the laws; 2. To create jurisdictions, and to establish functionaries therein, so that in the name of the Republic they may investigate, try, and pass sentence in all kinds of civil and criminal causes or matters ; 3. To specify the attributions and jurisdictions of the different functionaries; 4. To establish imposts and taxes on every kind of property and income in due proportion, and to decree forced loans in case of invasion or war legally declared, provided that the ordinary public revenues are not sufficient, or that voluntary loans cannot be obtained; 5. To authorise the Executive Porter to contract voluntary loans within the Republic or out of it, when serious and urgent necessity requires them, and to a sufficient amount to provide for the necessity; 6. To fix and pass yearly the estimates for the expenses of the public administration; 7. To create the army of the Republic, and to confer the ranks from Colonel inclusive upwards; 8. To promote the development of public instruction in all the branches of human knowledge; 9. To decree the arms and flag of the Republic; to determine the alloy, weight, and pattern of the coin; to regulate the weights and measures, and to decree the opening and improvement of the ways of communication; 10. To grant titles, honourable distinctions, and rewards, compatible with the established system of government, to persons or towns for eminent services rendered to the country; 11. To assign, increase, or diminish the salaries of the functionaries and persons in the public service; to create and suppress offices; 12, To decree rewards, or grant temporary privileges to the authors of useful inventions, and to those who introduce industrial occupations of great utility; 13. To declare war and to make peace on the information communicated by the Executive Power; 14. To grant amnesties, pardons, and commutations of punishments, on account, in the two latter cases, of a favourable report from the Supreme Tribunal of Justice; 15. To grant letters of naturalisation to the foreigners who apply for them; 16. To declare the state of siege in the cases and for the causes that will be determined by a constitutive law; 17. To reinstate those who have lost the rights of citizenship; 18. To grant or refuse permission to those Salvadoreans who solicit it in order to accept employments of another nation compatible with the government system of Salvador; 19. To require responsibly from the superior functionaries, following in each case the corresponding provisions according to this Constitution and the laws; 20. To ratify, modify, or disapprove the different Treaties and negotiations transacted by the Executive with other Powers, and the concordats adjusted with the Holy See.
LXX. When the Chambers are convoked extraordinarily by the Executive, they can only treat of the matters expressed in the minute set forth in the Decree of Convocation. LXXI. The Senate may continue its sittings after the close of the session, when it has to investigate accusations referred to it by the law, for as long as may be necessary to dispose of them. 

§ 6. General Assembly. LXXII. The two Chambers united form the General Assembly, of which the attributions are: 1. To open the sessions of the Legislative Body; 2. To open the packets containing the suffrages for President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to regulate or scrutinise the votes by means of a committee of its members ; 3. To declare the election of the aforesaid functionaries after the scrutinising committee has sent in its report, which must also state that the elected are fit and proper persons, because they have the qualifications required by the law; 4. To install the President and Vice-President, and to receive their constitutional oath; to take their resignations into consideration, as well as the licences which they solicit for vacation; 5. To elect the magistrates of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, to receive their respective oaths, and to consider their resignations; 6. To receive the detailed account with vouchers, which the Executive is to render through the Secretaries of State; 7. To define and acknowledge the national debt, and to specify the funds for its redemption; 8. To specify the Senators who are to undertake the exercise of the Executive Power in the cases determined by the law; 9. To decide respecting the doubts or denunciations of incapacity of the President, of the Vice-President, and of the other functionaries who are elected by the Assembly itself; 10. To close its sessions solemnly after the reading of the President's report, comprising a summary of the labours of the Legislative Body. LXXIII. The faculties attributed to the Chambers separately or united in Assembly, as well as those which belong to the Legislative Power in general, cannot be delegated, with the exception of that of swearing in the President, Vice-President, and magistrates of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice. 

§ 7. Formation, Publication, and Sanction of the Law. LXXIV. The initiative of the law is reserved exclusively for the Deputies and Senators, for the President of the Republic through the medium of his Secretaries, and for the Supreme Court of Justice. LXXV. Every project of law after it has been discussed and approved m one Chamber, shall pass to the other for discussion and

approval if it think fit; if the project be approved it shall be passed on to the Executive Power, who, if he has no objections to make to it, shall give it his sanction and cause it to be published as law. LXXVI, If the Chamber which examines the project should amend or modify it, the said project must return to the Chamber of its origin, in order that the latter may discuss it again with the amendments, additions, or modifications made ; and if it be approved it shall be passed on to the Executive, so that he may proceed as stated in the preceding Article. LXXYII. If the Executive should find it inexpedient to sanction the projects of law which are passed on to him, he may return them within 10 days to the Chamber of their origin, stating the reasons for his adverse opinion; if he should not object to them within the aforesaid term they shall be considered as sanctioned, and he shall publish them as laws. In the case of returning a project the Chamber may reconsider and ratify it by two-thirds of the votes, but the project must be passed to the other Chamber so that it may be assented to likewise by two-thirds of the votes, and then it is to be passed on to the Executive who will consider it as law, and will execute and fulfil it. When the Congress issues a law in the last 10 days of its sessions, and the Executive finds difficulties in sanctioning it, he is bound to give immediate notice to the Congress so that it may remain assembled until the expiration of the said term, and if this be not clone the law shall be held as sanctioned. LXXVIII. If a project of law should be rejected and not ratified it cannot be proposed again in the same sessions, nor until those of the next Legislature. When projects of law are returned by the Executive the voting of the Chambers to ratify them shall be by name, and mii3t be recorded in the minutes of the day. LXXIX. Every project of law approved in the Chamber of its origin shall be drawn out in triplicate, shall be circulated therein, and 3 copies signed by its President and Secretaries shall be passed to the other Chamber. If the latter shall approve it, also one copy shall be retained therein, and the others shall be passed on to the Executive with this formula, To the Executive Power; if the latter Chamber should not approve the project it shall be returned to the one that it came from. LXXX. When a project of law has been returned by the Executive, and ratified by the Chamber of its origin, if this be the Chamber of Deputies, its shall use the following formula, " Let it pass to the Senate;" and if it should be ratified by both Chambers the formula to be used shall be, "Let it pass to the Executive Power." If either Chamber do not ratify the project the formula to be used shall be this, " Let it return to the Chamber of Deputies (or to

that of Senators, as the case may be), for it has not obtained the Constitutional ratification." 

TITLE VI.§ 1. Executive Power and its Organisation. LXXXI. The Executive Power shall be exercised by a citizen who shall receive the title of President of the Republic, appointed directly by the Salvadorean nation; but when no one is elected by absolute majority of votes the General Assembly shall elect him from the 3 citizens who have obtained the greatest number of suffrages. LXXXII. There shall be a Vice-President, elected in the same manner and form as the President, to act in the absence of the latter. LXXXIII. In default of the President and Vice-President, one of the 3 Senators designated shall, at the choice of the President, undertake the exercise of the Executive Power during the recess of the Chambers. If the President be unable to select one, the Senators shall act according to the order of their appointment. If the Legislative Body should be assembled when the case of impediment occurs, it shall provide for the vacancy by selecting the Senator who is to exercise the Executive Power.

§ 2. Duration of the Presidential Period. LXXXIV. The duration of the Presidential period shall be 4 years without immediate re-election ; but only after the lapse of a like period which shall begin and shall end on the 1st of February of the year of the renewal, and the functions cannot be exercised one day more. § 3. Qualifications. LXXXV. To be President or Vice-President of the Republic it is required : to be a native of Salvador, to be 30 years of age, to be in exercise of a citizen's rights without having lost them during the 5 years preceding the election, and to be of well-known integrity and ability. The natives of the other Republics of Central America may be elected Presidents or Vice-Presidents of Salvador if they possess, besides the qualifications required in the natives, any of the following : 1. Domiciliation for 10 years, and being married to a Salvadorean woman ; 2. Domiciliation for 5 years and having rendered important services to the nation, or possessing a capital of 10,000 dollars in landed property situated within the Republic. § 4. Secretaries of Slate, and their Qualifications, LXXXVT. There shall be 4 Secretaries of State: for Foreign

Affairs, for Home Affairs, for finance and War, and for Public Instruction, amongst whom the President of the Republic shall distribute the other branches as may appear to him convenient. LXXXVIL To be Secretary of State it is required to be a native of Central America, of secular condition, 25 years of age, of well-known morality and abilities, and not to have lost the rights of a citizen for 5 years before his appointment. LXXXVIII. The decrees, resolutions, and directions of the President of the Republic must be authorised by the Secretaries of State in their respective branches. 
§ 5. Commander-in-Chief of the Army. LXXXIX. The citizen who exercises the Presidency of the Republic shall be Commander-in-Chief of the army. § 6. Duties of the Executive Power. XC. The duties of the Executive Power are: 1. To maintain intact the sovereignty and independence of the Republic, and the integrity of its territory; 2. To preserve internal peace and tranquillity ; 3. To publish the law and cause it to be executed; 4. To present to the Legislative Body united in General Assembly through his Secretaries, and within the 8 days following the opening of the ordinary sessions, a circumstantial detail and avouched account of all the acts of the public administration in the past year, and the estimate of the expenses for the year to come with the means of providing for them. If this duty be not performed within the aforesaid term, the Secretary who neglects it will by that fact be suspended from his functions, and this must be immediately notified to the Executive, so that he may in the 8 following days present the aforesaid report and estimate through the Secretary whom he appoints for the purpose, and if he should 'not do so the President of the Republic shall be suspended, and the Vice-President shall assume the Executive Power, or, in his default, the Senator nominated by the General Assembly-who shall fulfil the duty within 20 days. In this case the Legislative Power may prorogue its sittings for the like term; 5. To furnish the Chambers with the reports which they require of him ; but if they should be on matters of reserve he shall explain that they are so, unless the Chambers consider the statement of them necessary; but he is not bound to reveal plans of warfare or negotiations of high policy, unless such reports are required to define his responsibility ; in that case he cannot refuse them on any account, nor can he reserve the documents after he has been accused by the Chamber of Deputies before the Senate; 6. To give the public functionaries of the Judicial Power such aid and strength as they require to make their measures effectual.
§ 7. Faculties of the Executive Power. XCI. The faculties of the Executive Power are: 1. To appoint and remove the Secretaries of State, the principal and subordinate officers of the revenue, the general and local commandants, and to accept the resignations of the officers of the army from Acting Lieutenant-Colonel downwards, and to grant them their retirement, as well as to all the functionaries of the administrative branch; 2. To appoint and remove the Ministers and any other class of Diplomatic and Consular Agents accredited to other Governments. To receive the same class of Ministers and Agents from the other nations, and to conduct the foreign affairs; 3. To convoke the Chambers extraordinarily when the great interests of the nation require it, summoning, in such case, the substitutes of the Deputies and Senators who may be dead or legally impeded; 4. To specify before the installation of the Legislative Power, the place where it is to assemble, when there may not be sufficient security or freedom for deliberation in the place appointed by the law; 5. To conduct warfare and to organise the army of the State, with power to dispose of the public revenues for the purpose; 6. To conclude Treaties of Peace and to carry on any other negotiations and to submit them for the ratification of the Legislature ; 7. To command the army in person, in which case the Executive Power is to be entrusted to the proper person; 8. To raise the necessary troops beyond the permanent force, to repel invasions or to stifle rebellions; 9. To allow or refuse the transit of troops from other countries through the territory of the Republic; 10. To qualify and close ports, and to establish maritime and inland custom-houses, to nationalise and register vessels; 11. To exercise the right of patronage; 12. To furnish with the pass, if he think fit, the diplomas and appointments conferring ecclesiastical dignity, office, or benefice, without such pass the beneficiaries cannot enter into possession. Bulls, pontifical briefs or rescripts, conciliar decrees and other measures cannot be published until they obtain the pass of the Executive; but letters respecting dispensations for orders or marriages, and those issued by the Penitentiary are excepted from this formality ; 13. To suspend the execution of the punishment of death in any case until the appearance of the Legislative Body; 14. To exercise the veto in the form determined by the law; 15. To exercise the attributions 14 saving the faculty of granting pardons 15, 16, 17,18 of the Legislative Power, in its absence, and under obligation to give it a special account at its next meeting, § 8. Attributions of the Executive Power in the sanction and promulgation of the Law. XCIT. In the sanction and publication of the law the Executive

955

Power shall be restricted to the following rules: 1. When he receives a project of laws and does not find any objections to make to it, he shall sign the two copies and return one to the Chamber which has sent it to him, reserving the other in his archives, which he shall promulgate as law in the peremptory term of 10 days; 2. The publication of the law shall take place in the following form: " The President of the Republic of Salvador, to its inhabitants, take notice: that the Legislative Power has decreed (if it be a decree) or ordered (if it be an order) as follows:" (here the text to the signatures) wherefore, let it be executed, or let it be published (as the case may be). § 9. Political Government of the Departments. XCIII. For the political administration the territory of the Republic shall, be divided into Departments, the number and limits whereof shall be fixed by the law. XCIV. In each Department there shall be an actual and a deputy Governor, directly appointed by the President of the Republic, with the attributions and the salary which the law shall determine for them. XCV. To be an actual or deputy Governor the following conditions are required; 1. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights and not to have lost them in the two years preceding his appointment; 2. To be 25 years of age, and of well-known integrity and ability. § 10. Internal Government of the Towns. XCVI. The local government of the towns shall be in charge of the municipalities, popularly and directly elected by the citizen householders of each town. Each municipality shall be composed of an Alcalde, a Syndic, and two or more Rejidors in proportion to the population, as determined by the law. XCYII. The municipal councils shall administer their funds for the benefit of the community, rendering account of their administration to the tribunal established by the law. XCVIII. The attributions of the municipalities, which are to be purely economical and administrative, will be determined by the law, as well as the qualifications which their members must possess to be elected. XCIX. Besides the attributions which the law may confer on the municipalities, those of the chief town of a district have that of commuting, in conformity with the law, the punishments imposed by the justices of peace of the same district. TITLE VII. § 1. Judicial Power. C. The Judicial Power shall be exercised by a supreme court of

justice, tribunals, jury courts, and inferior magistrates established by this Constitution. The Supreme Court shall be composed of 11 persons with the title of magistrates, one of whom shall be President appointed like the rest in General Assembly. CI. To be an actual or deputy magistrate of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice it is required: 1. To be a native of the Republic or a Central-American naturalised therein; 2. To be in the exercise of citizenship; 3. To be 30 years of age; 4. To be an advocate of the Republic; 5. To be of well-known ability and morality ; 6. To have practised as an Advocate for the space of 4 years in Salvador, or to have acted as a magistrate or administered justice in first instance for two years. CII. The position of magistrate and of Judge of First Instance is incompatible with that of serving the other Powers. CIII. In the capital of the Republic there shall be a Chamber of Third Instance, consisting of the President of the Court and the two magistrates who follow him in the order of their appointment, and there shall be two Chambers of Second Instance each composed of two magistrates. The majority of the magistrates of whom these 3 Chambers are composed, is sufficient to form full Court. CIV. A Chamber of Second Instance is established in the city of San Miguel and another in that of Santa Ana, organized in the same manner as those preceding. CV. There shall be 7 deputy magistrates, 8 for the Chambers of the capital, and two for each of the others, who are to be elected like the principals, and to undertake the functions of the latter without distinction, when they are called upon by the respective Court or Chamber. CVI. The Chamber of Third Instance shall take cognisance of all the matters for which it is competent according to the law. The Chambers of Second Instance of the capital shall take cognisance of all the affairs within their competence, and their jurisdiction shall be restricted to the departments of San Salvador, La Libertad, Cuscatlan, Chalatenango, San Viceute, and La Paz. CVII. The Chamber of Second Instance of San Miguel shall take cognisance on appeal of all the civil and criminal cases decided by the Judges of First Instance of the departments of San Miguel, Usulutnn, and La Union, as well ns of the other appeals for which it is competent according to the law; and that of Santa Ana shall take cognizance of the civil and criminal cases decided by the Judges of First Instance of the departments of Santa Ana, Sonsonato, and Ahutiehnpnn, and of the other appeals for which it is competent according to the law. CVIII. The actual and deputy magistrates shall continue for 4 years in the exercise of their functions, and they may be re-elected. They shall be renewed by moiety every two years, 3 principals and two deputies going out by lob in the capital in the first term of two years; and one deputy in each of the Chambers of San Miguel and Santa Ana. CIX. The business of the full Court is: 1. To make the regulations for its internal government; 2. To appoint the Judges of First Instance, and to investigate their resignations; 3. To visit the tribunals and courts by means of a magistrate, in order to correct the abuses that are observed in the administration of justice; 4. To represent to the Legislative Power the inconveniences or difficulties that have been observed in the application of the laws, and to indicate the reforms of which they are susceptible; 5. To suspend the magistrates during the recess of the Senate, for serious defects in the exercise of their functions, after investigating the case, and to grant them leave of absence when applied for in accordance with the law; 6. To admit Advocates and Notaries, to suspend them, and even to withdraw their diplomas for bribery or fraud, after investigating the case; 7. To take cognisance of appeals from Ecclesiastical Judges; 8. To take cognisance of prize cases, and of all those which are not reserved for another authority; 9. To be incessantly on the watch to ensure the prompt and perfect administration of justice; 10. To settle the contentions which arise between the tribunals and judges of whatever jurisdiction or nature they may be; 11. To decree and effectuate the guarantee of habeas corpus against any authority whatever; 12. To receive the oaths of the Judges of First Instance upon installing them in their office, and of the co-judges who are appointed to form chamber in the cases established by the law; 13. To take cognisance in the cases of responsibility against the Judges of First Instance, and the subordinate functionaries of the judicial order, with power to suspend them and dismiss them after investigating the case, and in accordance with the legal prescriptions. The other attributions of the full court will be determined by

the law.
CX. The attributions contained in the Nos. 9, 10, 11, and 12 of the preceding Article are common to the Chambers of San Miguel and Santa Ana in their respective jurisdictions; they shall have besides the faculty of receiving the accusations or denunciations which are brought against the functionaries referred to in No. 13 of the same Article, for the sole purpose of drawing out the particulars of the case, and reporting thereon to the full Court. CXI. The power of judging and of causing execution of the judgment belongs exclusively to the Supreme Court of Justice and inferior tribunals.

§ 2. Judges of First Instance. CXIL There shall be Judges of First Instance, principals and deputies, in all the chief towns of departments to take cognizance of and to decide civil and criminal cases; the Court, in concurrence with the Executive, may also establish 'them in those of districts, provided it be thought expedient for the good administration of justice. They shall be appointed for two years, and their appointment may be extended for an equal term, if in the opinion of the Supreme Tribunal they are qualified to act with diligence and good effect. CXIII. To be Judge of "First Instance it is required to be 25 years of age, with domiciliation for two years in Salvador, Advocate of the Republic, of well-known morality and attainments, and not to have lost the rights of citizenship for two years before their appointment. § 3. Institution of the Jury. CXIV. The jury on evidence is established in the chief towns of departments for serious offences against person and property; and for abuses of the freedom of the press. A. constitutive law will regulate the said institution. § 4. Inferior Judges. CXV. There shall be justices of the peace in all the town of the Republic, who shall take cognisance in matters of minor importance, and in those which are defined as misdemeanours in the Penal Code. Their elections, qualifications, and attributions will be determined by the law. TITLE VIII. National Treasure. Revenues which constitute the Treasure. CXVI. The public treasure of the nation consists of: 1. All its property, moveable and landed. 2. All sums due to it. 3. All the duties, imposts, and taxes now paid or hereafter to be paid by Salvadoreans and foreigners.

§ 2. Administration. CXVII. For the administration of the public funds there shall be one general Treasury only, collecting and paying, and a superior tribunal or chief auditor's office of accounts, which shall annotate all the accounts of those who administer the interests of the public exchequer. CXVIII. The general Treasury shall publish a statement of the funds which it administers every month; and the chief auditor's office a general table of all the revenues every year.

CXIX. No sum can be withdrawn from the treasure, be paid, or put to account, unless it has been previously allotted by the law.
TITLE IX. Sole §. Armed Force,


CXX. The armed force is instituted to maintain the integrity of the Salvadorean territory intact; to preserve and defend the national autonomy; to enforce observance of the law, and to keep public order ; and to render the constitutional guarantees effectual. CXXI. The armed force is essentially obedient and cannot deliberate. CXXII. The army of the Republic consists of the national militia and navy. The number thereof shall be 6,000 men. The footing of the permanent force in time of peace shall be fixed annually by the Legislature. CXXIII. Persons belonging to the army of the Republic shall enjoy military rights, provided that they belong to an organised body; excepting in the cases of exclusion of right established by the law and for infractions of the police regulations and laws. CXXIV. In case of invasion, of war lawfully declared, and of internal rebellion, all Salvadoreans from 18 to 50 years of age are soldiers.
TITLE X. Sole §. Responsibility of the Public Functionaries.

CXXV. Every public functionary, on taking possession of his office, shall swear to be faithful to the Republic, to observe the Constitution and to cause it to be observed, any laws, decrees, ordinances, or resolutions that may be contrary to it notwithstanding ; and for any infraction thereof they shall be responsible in person and property. They shall also swear to discharge exactly the duties of the office conferred on them. CXXVI. The responsibility of the Secretaries of State shall be joint with that of the President, except in the cases wherein they have reserved their vote, and made note thereof in the proper book. CXXVII. Every measure by which the President of the Republic dissolves the Legislative Power or prevents its meeting, is a crime of high treason. CXXVIII. Every Salvadorean citizen has the right of accusing the President of the Republic, Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, Secretaries of State, Governors of Departments, and Diplomatic or Consular Agents, before the Chamber of Deputies, for treason, venality, usurpation of power, serious default in the exercise of their functions, and ordinary offences which do not admit of release on bail. The Chamber will always receive such accusation and will bring it before the Senate by means of an attorney appointed for the purpose from its own members. Persons
who cannot become accusers shall have the rights of complaint or denunciation in conformity with the law. CXXIX. The preparation of the case and the proceedings connected therewith shall take place in the Senate collectively, or shall be done by a committee of its members ; but the trial and decision shall take place in the former manner, and two-thirds of the votes are required for a sentence. CXXX. The principal purpose of the sentence or decision of the Senate in this kind of cases is to remove the accused from his office, if there be reason to do so; and it must, moreover, declare whether there are grounds for subjecting the delinquent to an ordinary process before the regular tribunals, and if so, the case is to be referred to the proper judge or tribunal. CXXXI. As soon as it is declared iu the Senate that there is ground for indictment the accused is suspended from the exercise of his functions, and on no account can he remain longer in his office without making himself responsible for the crime of usurpation, and no person must obey him. CXXXII. The decrees, acts, or sentences pronounced by the Senate in this class of cases are to be fulfilled and executed without necessity for confirmatory act; and the attorney appointed is to take part in the trial until sentence is passed. CXXXIII. If the Executive, in the accounts rendered by his Secretaries to the Legislative Power, should omit any of the proceedings which according to the law ought to be included therein, the Assembly shall call upon him to fulfil his duty in this respect. At no time shall the general approval of the respective reports prevent the exaction of the proper responsibility for the proceedings omitted therein.
TITLE XL Sole §. General Provisions.

CXXXIV. The Republic of Salvador respects foreign nationalities, and will never make war for purposes of annexation and conquest, nor will she employ her forces against the liberty of any people; but she will cause her autonomy, independence, and rights to be respected to the full extent of her power and faculties. CXXXV. For the purpose of facilitating the Central American Union complete equality of political rights is accorded for the natives of the other Republics, provided that reciprocity be established in their respective Constitutions. CXXXVI. Salvador retains the capacity of concurring with all or with any of the States of Central America in the organisation of a National Government, when circumstances may permit it and it may be consistent with her interests, and likewise of forming part of the great Latino-American Confederation.

TITLE

XII. Sole §. Revision and Reformation of the Constitution. CXXXVIL The reformation of this Constitution can only be agreed to by two-thirds of the rotes of the representatives elected to each Chamber. This resolution shall be published by the press, and shall be taken into consideration again in the nest Legislature. If it be ratified by the latter, a Constituent Assembly shall be convoked to decree the reforms. CXXXYIII. In these terms the Constitution of October 16, 1871, is reformed, and the Articles not included in the present one are annulled. The provisions of the existing codes, laws, and regulations, which are not contrary to the present Constitution, remain in force until they are legally repealed. Additional Transitory Article. All the functionaries of the High Powers, whether elected by popular vote or by the Legislative Body, who began to exercise their functions in the current year in conformity with the political Code of October 16,1871, shall continue to act until they have completed the period respectively assigned to them in this Constitution. To the Executive Power. Given at San Salvador, in the National Palace, on the 9th day of November, in the year 1872 of the Christian era, and the 52nd of our Independence. 

National Palace, San Salvador, November 12, 1872. Let this be fulfilled and published. S. GONZALES. G-REQORIO AEBIZU, Minister for Foreign Affairs. J. J. SAMAYOA, Minister for Finance and War. FABIO CASTILLO, Minister for Public Instruction in charge of the Home Department.

