PREAMBLE The people of Equatorial Guinea, in the exercise of their right of self-determination, conscious of their responsibility in the History, determined to establish a welfare State, in which the individual and collective liberties will enjoy full and true guarantees, resolved to join the comity of independent States and the United Nations Organisation and to maintain close solidarity with the African peoples, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the Organisation of African Unity, adopt the following:

CONSTITUTION I. The State and the Citizens The Republic of Equatorial Guinea formed by the provinces of Rio Muni and Fernando Po, is a State sovereign and indivisible, democratic and social. The Province of Rio Muni consists, besides the territory bearing that name, of the islands of Corisco, Elobey Grandee and Elobey Chio and adjacent islets. The Province of Fernando Po consists of the island of that name, that of Annobon and adjacent islets. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea guarantees the independence, integrity, and security of its territory and safeguards the autonomy of its Provinces, in accordance with what is stipulated in this Constitution. The national sovereignty belongs to the Guinean people, who exercise it in the form and within the limits of the Constitution. The election of their representatives shall be on the basis of universal suffrage. The national sovereignty can also be exercised directly through referendum. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea promotes the political, economic and social development of its people, guarantees equality before the law and secures justice to all her nationals without distinction of origin, race, sex or religion.
 Article 3 Article 2 Article I


The State recognises and guarantees the rights and liberties of the individual, as contained in the Universal. Declaration of Human Rights and proclaims respect for the freedom of thought and religion, association, assembly, expression, residence and domicile, right to property, to education and to suitable employment. The State promotes likewise the development of Syndicates and Cooperatives and assures the workers the safeguarding of their rights.
Article 4

All, acts of racial, ethnic and religious discrimination or those that threaten the internal or external security of the State, its territorial integrity, the constitutional guarantees given to the Provinces or individual or collective rights recognised in this Constitution, shall be punished by law.

Article 5

	

All adult citizens of Equatorial Guinea shall be eligible to vote as per conditions determined by law. The procedure for acquisition of citizenship of Equatorial Guinea shall be determined in accordance with customary law. The official language of the State is Spanish. The use of traditional languages shall be permitted. The capital of the State is the city of Santa Isabel.

Article 6	 	

Article 7

Article 8	

II. The Office of the Head of the State
Article 9

The President of Equatorial Guinea is elected by direct universal suffrage and secret ballot by a national electoral college. The candidate who obtains absolute majority of votes polled shall be declared elected to the Presidency. In case none of the candidates obtains absolute majority, a new election shall be held from among those who had , received the majority of votes. In cases of tie likewise there shall be a new election. The President shall assume charge of his high office within ten days from the date of announcement of the results of the election. The term of office of the. President of the Republic shall be five years.

The cases of physical or mental incapacity, as well as the Article 10 impeachment of the President shall be proclaimed by the Assembly, with its previous consent obtained by the majority of three fourth of its members, advised by the Council of the Republic and decided by the full bench of the Supreme Court. Such advice as well as the decision shall have to be announced by each one of them within the maximum duration of five days. The decision regarding impeachment of the President can be based only on a deliberate violation of the Constitution or on facts that can give rise to grave criminal liability. From the time of the advice by the Council till the decision by the Supreme Court about the existence of incapacity or grounds for impeachment of the President, the President shall not exercise his power of dissolving the Assembly. The President of the Republic directs the national policy, Article 11 and his authority extends to all things that pertain to the maintenance of public order inside the country and to the security of the State from external aggression, in conformity with the Constitution and the law and accordingly he (a) Represents Equatorial Guinea in all public functions and in international relations. (b) Is the Chief of the Armed Forces. (c) Confers honours and rewards of the State. (d) Promulgates the laws and guarantees the execution of the same. (e) Receives and accredits Ambassadors. (f) Exercises the right to grant pardon. The candidates for Presidency shall have to be nationals Article 12 of Equatorial Guinea and should be more than thirty years of age. The President of the Republic is the head of the government and freely selects, nominates and removes the. Ministers, who are the heads of their respective departments. At least one third of the Ministers shall hail from each of the Provinces.

2.0
Article 14

Thee Vice-President shall be a Minister nominated by the President from among those who hail from the Province different from the one from which he hails. He shall exercise such functions that the President of the Republic delegates and shall discharge temporarily the duties of the President in cases when his office is vacant or during his absence. In the case of vacancy caused by death, incapacity or impeachment of the President, the acting President shall convene new elections for Presidency within thirty days, unless not more than three years of the term of the earlier President had passed, in which case, he shall continue to discharge functions assumed temporarily till the completion of that term. The President so elected shall remain in office for the unexpired term of the previous President. In the case of, simultaneous or successive vacancies in the Presidency and Vice-Presidency, the President of the Assembly shall assume the Presidency of the Republic, under the same conditions as indicated in the second paragraph of this article.

Article 15

The decisions of the President of the Republic relating to the general policy of, the State, legislative matters, his rulemaking authority, power to appoint to posts in the State administration, and, in general, all acts that are regulated by decrees, in accordance with laws, shall be adopted with the previous consent of the Council of Ministers, and shall be referred to that person who is concerned with their execution.

III. Assembly of the Republic
Article 16

The Assembly of the Republic is composed of 35 deputies elected every five years through direct and universal franchise and by secret ballot. The deputies represent the Guinean people and should serve the nation for its welfare.

Article 17

The election of the deputies and, in general, the electoral system shall be regulated on the following basis: (1) The elections envisaged in this Constitution shall be held within the period prescribed in the electoral
law. The order for conducting the elections shall be issued by the President through a decree enacted in the Council of Ministers. (2) Rio Muni and Fernando Po respectively shall constitute electoral constituencies. The island of Annabon and the group of islands of Corisco, Elobey Grandee and Elobey Chio shall constitute two separate constituencies. (3) The electoral constituency of Fernando Po shall elect twelve deputies to the Assembly of the . Republic. The electoral constituency of Rio Muni shall elect nineteen deputies. The island of Annabon shall elect two deputies. The constituency comprising the islands of Corisco, Elobey Grandee and Elobey Chio shall also elect two deputies. The deputies elected by each one of these constituencies shall be the residents of the corresponding Provinces. (4) With the object of ensuring the representation of the minorities, the electoral system shall safeguard the proportionality among the votes to be polled and the seats to be provided to them. (5) In the constituencies of Fernando Po and Rio Muni the electoral system shall be on the basis of proportional representation with restriction against combination of candidature. The distribution of the others in each constituency shall be made according to the system of majority. In the constituency of Annabon, Corisco and Elobeys the electoral system shall be on the basis of simple majority and with restriction against combination of candidature. (6) The acceptance and admission of the candidates for contesting the elections, the orderliness of the elections and the tabulating of the results shall be guaranteed by an election commission.

244	
Article 18


No member of the Assembly shall be prosecuted, detained, arrested or sentenced for opinions expressed or votes cast in the course of their official duties. No member of the Assembly during the period of the sessions shall be prosecuted or detained for an offence without the previous authorisation of the President of the Assembly, except in cases of serious crimes. No member of the Assembly shall, even when the House is not in session, be detained without the previous authorisation of the President of the House, except for commission of serious crimes or conviction thereof. The detention of a member of the Assembly shall remain in suspense when the latter requires him.

Article 19

The Assembly of the Republic assumes full charge on the first working day after fifteen days have passed since the declaration of the electoral results. The Assembly ratifies its own rules and regulations and elects at the beginning of the new legislature, its President. The Assembly of the Republic meets in ordinary open sessions twice in a year: once in the month of February and the other in the month of October for a maximum period of two months per session. The Assembly can meet in extraordinary session, in order to discuss a matter particularly fixed therefor, at the request of the President of the Republic or ten of its members.

Article 20

Article 21

The Assembly of the Republic has the right to interpret the laws, discuss and approve the budget and control the actions of the government. The Assembly of the Republic shall have the competence to modify the character of customary law, besides the laws which are envisaged in this Constitution, concerning the following subject-matters: (1) The electoral system; (2) The development plans; (3) Local management; and (4) Emigration, immigration and policy relating to labour and employment.

Article 22

EQUATORIAL GUINEA	

245

The. Assembly of the Republic shall have legislative competence in respect of the following matters:— (1) Individual and collective rights of the citizens; (2) Civil rights of the persons; (3) The general principles of public administration, the appointment of officials of the State, their responsibilities and the principle of ensuring equitable representation of the provinces in the State services; (4) The general principles of national defence; (5) The determination of crimes and punishments; (6) The system of issue of currency, public debts—national or international, and the banking system; (7) Expropriation, nationalization of business and the transfer of ownership among the public and private sectors; (8) The fundamental principles of civil, administrative, mercantile, social and juridical rights; (9) Conflicts of jurisdiction between the departments of State. The financial system shall be determined by customary Article 24
law, in accordance with the following rules:

(a) There shall be one system of taxation for the whole country. The provinces shall make use of the funds which the State budget allots them. The municipalities shall spend the funds which the province allots them and the income arising from patrimonial resources, rates and special contributions, within the framework of the local law. (b) The Assembly of the Republic shall approve biennially the ordinary budget of income and expenditure and the budget of aid for development. The ordinary budget of income and expenditure shall be financed by taxes, rates, special contributions and patrimonial income. The budget of aid for development shall be financed by income arising from collection of public debts, credit operations, loans from international organisations, and external financing or aid.

246	



(c) The expenditure of ordinary budget shall be distributed in accordance with the following criteria: (1) In the first place it shall be determined that the eligibility for State expenditure is not on the basis of geographical attributes. (2) In the second place the credits for expenditure shall be determined, being within the competency of the State, to create a major benefit directly or indirectly to any of the provinces. (3) In the third place the global credit assigned to each of the provinces for expenditure under its exclusive control shall be determined. (4) The assigning of credits provided for separately in paragraphs (2) and (3) above, shall be made in proportion to the collections actually made by each province and, to this effect, the body which acts as the Tribunal of the National Accounts shall decide two years before the October session of the Assembly as envisaged in Article 32 the corresponding percentages to be deducted from the funds under utilisation of the last ordinary budget. These percentages shall apply to the biennial budget. (5) The provinces shall not agree by themselves either over special credits, or supplements of credit or advance credits. In cases of urgent and justifiable needs the provinces may request the Government for additional funds. Upon receipt of such a request the Government may propose the requisite bill in the Assembly of the Republic. The Assembly will, however, keep in view the order of priorities and the norms of distribution referred to in preceding paragraphs. When these operations result in an excess of expenditure of one Province in comparison to that of the other, according to the existing criteria of distribution the said excess shall be adjusted in the next ordinary budget. (d) The expenditure under the budget for development shall be distributed in accordance with the economic criteria of

EQUATORIAL GUINEA	

247

particular investments, as per the customary law of Development Plan. The interests and expenditure of amortization of the public debts, credits, loans of international organizations and other financial operations shall be chargeable under specific heads of expenditure of the provinces in proportion to the volume of the expenditure involved in each one of them. The subjects that fall within the jurisdiction of the State but do not clearly enjoy the status of law as per Articles 22 and 23 shall have the aspect of by-laws. The formulation of by-laws require the previous sanction of the Council of the Republic. The law-making initiative pertains to the President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers or to the deputies. The deputies and the Government can propose amendments. The propositions of law and the amendments suggested by the deputies which involve a decrease of the public income or an increase in the public expenditure shall not be subject to passage without the authorization of the Government. Neither the propositions of law nor related amendments which affect essentially the internal organisation of a province shall be admitted unless they are presented, at least by five deputies hailing from the affected province. If in the process of enactment of a law there arises a disagreement between Government and the Assembly over the admissibility of a plan, a proposition or an amendment in compliance with what is envisaged in Articles 22, 23, 24, 25 and 27 of this Constitution, the issue shall be decided within a period of 15 days by the Council of the Republic. The plans and initiatives of the Government shall have priority in the agenda of the day. The legislative proposals shall be adopted by a majority of votes of the deputies present. The legislative proposals which enjoy the customary status under this Constitution shall require votes of the, requisite majority of two-thirds plus one of the members of the Assembly of the Republic,
Article 28 Article Article 25

26

Article 27

Article 29

Article 30

248	
Article 31



On approval of a law by the Assembly, its President shall send it to the President of the Republic so that he may enforce it within a maximum period of thirty days. Within this period, the President of the Republic acting in the Council of Ministers, can send it back to the Assembly for reconsideration, after which it shall be deemed to have been approved if two thirds and one of the deputies of the Assembly cast their votes in its favour. The Government shall present biennially to the Assembly of the Republic the budget programme of the State, submitting it to the Assembly Secretariat, at least forty days before the beginning of the October session. Its consideration shall have top priority in the work of the Assembly, so that the Assembly gives out the result of its deliberations within the maximum period of thirty days. On the expiry of this period, if the Assembly has not given its decision, the Government shall promulgate it by a decree. If the budget is rejected by the Assembly it shall be deemed to have been adopted by its one twelfth part till the new programme to be presented by the Government is accepted by the Assembly within a period of three months. If the Government does not present the budget proposals, the previous one shall be deemed to have been adopted for a period of three months.

Article 32

Article 33

The Assembly of the Republic exercises its control over the Government by the following means: (a) Oral questions; (b) Written questions; (c) Discussions; (d) Investigating Commissions; and (e) Censure motions against the Ministers. IV. Relations between the Government and the Assembly of the Republic

Article 34

	

The President of the Republic can send messages to the Assembly and address the Nation. He shall acquaint the Assembly of the Republic, at least once a year, with the basic directives of the policy of his Government.

EQUATORIAL GUINEA	

249
Article 35

The Ministers of the Government shall have free access to the Assembly and may take the floor of the House in accordance with its rules. The Assembly may request the presence of the Ministers to give effect to what is envisaged in Article 33. The terms of the President of the Republic and of the Assembly shall be co-extensive. Nevertheless, the President of the Republic shall continue to play the role of the Head of the State till his successor takes the oath of office. The President of the Republic, acting in Council, may dissolve the Assembly, but shall hold the elections within a period of thirty days. In this case, elections for the Presidency of the Republic shall be understood to have been convened likewise. In case of necessity the President, in consultation with the Council of the Republic, may seek the Assembly's authorisation for regulating through decrees the matters reserved for legislation for a specified period of time. Decisions taken by the President in this connection shall be carried out in conformity with the aforesaid authorisation, and in no case shall affect the customary law. When the normal functioning of the institutions is threatened, the President of the Republic can suspend, for a maximum period of fifteen days, the individual and collective guarantees set out in the Constitution regarding rights of freedom of expression, meeting and association. Within the period referred to above the Assembly shall meet in full session so that the President gives the Assembly an account of the act of suspension and the reasons thereof. The prolongation of the said period, if the President deems it necessary, can only be accorded by the Assembly. The Assembly of the Republic can censure one or some of the Ministers of the Government. The motion for censure should be presented, at least by five Members of the Assembly and put to vote forty-eight hours after its presentation. For

Article 36

Article 37

Article 38

Article 39

Article 40

250	



its adoption, it shall be necessary that two-thirds of the members of the Assembly of the Republic support it. The motion for censure shall then be communicated to the President of the Republic for his affirmation if he deems it necessary. If six months have elapsed from the earlier censure motion, the Assembly by a majority of three-fourths of its members has to reiterate it against the same member or members of the Government, and at the same time the Assembly shall transmit a request to the President to substitute the impugned Ministers. V. Council of the Republic
Article 41

The Council of the Republic, whose term of office shall be four years, shall consist of six members, one of whom shall act as the President of the Council. The half of the Council members shall be freely elected by each one of the Provincial Councils from among the residents of each one of the Provinces who are neither members of the Provincial Councils nor of the Assembly of the Republic. The President of the Council of the Republic shall be elected by the Council members from among themselves. However, if no agreement is reached among them over this matter within seven days of the constitution of the Council , the Council members shall by turn discharge the functions of the Council President for a period of one year each, their turn being determined by the number of votes polled by them, beginning, however, with the one who is oldest among them. Decisions in the Council shall be taken by majority. If a decision is not reached at even after three consecutive votings, it shall mean that the Council has not given a verdict as of binding character. In the remaining cases, the tie shall be decided by the casting vote of the President.

Article 42

The functions of the Council of the Republic shall be as follows:— (1) To give opinion, before promulgation, over the constitutionality of the laws authorised as customary. (2) To give opinion, as of binding nature, over the constitutional legality of the development relating to the regulation of customary laws.

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

(3) To tender advice over the legality of the development relating to the regulation of other laws. (4) To give advice over the causes of incapacity or impeachment of the President of the Republic. ° (5) To decide questions of competency as contained in Article 28. (6) To decide over the conflicts of jurisdiction that might arise between the State and the Provinces concerning matters enumerated in Articles 43 and 44 of the Constitution. (7) To propose the names of three persons to the President of the Republic who may be appointed as judges of the Supreme Court. (8) To advice the Government on any question that may be referred to it. VI. The Jurisdiction of the State and the Provinces The State of Equatorial Guinea, through the institutions mentioned in the Constitution and in the laws, has competence in respect of the following matters :— (a) International relations; (b) Armed forces; (c) Nationality and civil rights of persons; (d) Protection and guarantee of the individ ual rights; (e) Civil law, criminal law and the system of penitentiary and of extradition, labour law, law regarding civil suits, electoral law and the organisation and administration of justice; (f) National property; (g) Monetary, fiscal, banking, financial systems and weights and measures, without prejudice to what is laid down in the Constitution about the distribution of fiscal resources; (h) Statistical survey, planning for national economic and social development, health and education, public works of national interest, exploitation of subsoil and the coordination and execution of the industrial projects of national interest;
Article 43

252	



(i) The general system of press, radio, television, postal services, telecommunications and transport which does not pertain to internal affairs of the provinces. (j) The public administration of the State, the organisation of the personnel and the services necessary for the army and matters enumerated above and the grant of professional titles; (k) The right of pardon and the conferring of honours and rewards; (1) The financing of the State services rendered for the provinces by the delegation of matters falling within the State's competence; and (m) All other inherent matters related to those enumerated above.
Article 44

The provinces shall have competence in respect of the following matters:— (a) Organisation and control of the provincial public services; (b) Provincial civil servants; (c) Local police service; (d) Teaching institutions within the State Education Plan; (e) Libraries, museums and analogous institutions; promotion of cultural activities and public entertainments; (f) Sports activities and institutions; (g) Establishment, maintenance and direction of sanitary institutions according to the State Health Plan; (h) Charitable institutions; (i) Provincial property; (j) Public water-works and hydro-electric works; (k) Communications and medium of internal transport in the provinces; (1) System of markets and fairs; (m) Game and river fishing; (n) Execution, transaction and grant of provincial works and services;

EQUATORIAL GUINEA	

253

(o) Creation, expansion or division of municipalities by the law of the local government; and (p) all other inherent matters relating to those enumerated above.

VII. Provinces and Municipalities The representative body of a Province is the Provincial Council. The Council of Fernando Po shall consist of eight councillors, one of whom being elected by the constituency of Annobon, and the Council of Rio Muni of twelve, one of whom being elected by Corisco. The councillors shall be elected on the basis of universal suffrage, and their term of office shall coincide with that of the Assembly of the Republic. To be a provincial councillor, one is required to be a Guinean national, major in age, native of a Province or a resident thereof for more than ten years. Each Provincial Council, upon being formed, shall proceed Article 46 to elect its president. The election of the president shall be communicated to the President of the Republic before whom he shall take an oath to serve the office well and faithfully. The president represents the Council, executes its resolutions and is the chief of the provincial administration. The term of the president of a Provincial Council shall be five years and he can only be relieved of his office by a resolution of the Provincial Council adopted by a majority of two thirds of its members. Each Provincial Council shall draw up its own rules and shall freely organise the administration for the interest of the province in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. The Provincial Council shall have competence to deliberate over any matter that falls within provincial jurisdiction, to safeguard the rights and interests of different communities and to control, through prayer, inquiry and debates, the actions of the president of the Provincial Council.
Article 47 Article 45

254



In particular, each Provincial Council shall be concerned with the taking of measures that concern the province and with the adoption of the provincial budget presented by its president.
Article 48

The President of the Republic is empowered to suspend the resolutions of the Provincial Councils and the acts ,of their presidents if he regards them as contrary to laws, rendering an account thereof immediately to the Supreme, Court which, by a full Bench, shall adjudicate upon the question of legality of

the same.
Article 49

The Provinces are divided administratively in townships, whose municipal governments shall be elected through universal suffrage. Their Mayors shall be elected by the councillors from among themselves. The law of local administration shall provide for the organisation, attributes and scope 'of jurisdiction of the municipal bodies and shall establish one integrated system for Annabon and Corisco, keeping in view the peculiarity and other special circumstances of these islands.
VIII. Administration of Justice

Article 50

The administration of justice shall be vested in a Supreme Court and other judicial bodies as may be created by law. The administration of justice shall be carried out in accordance with the principles of justice, fairness and reasonableness. The Supreme Court shall hear petitions relating to electoral matters and there shall also vest in it the budgetary control and accounting of the State, in the manner determined by law. The judges of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from among the members of judicial service or jurists of adequate competence who figure in the three names suggested by the . Council of the Republic to the President. The full bench of the Supreme Court shall elect its President (Chief Justice) by an absolute majority of its members.

Article 51

Article 52

Article 53

The President of the Republic, the Ministers, the President of the Assembly, the presidents of the Provincial Councils and the members of the Supreme Court shall be tried for their criminal acts by the full bench of the Supreme Court.

EQUATORIAL GUINEA	

255

The President of the Republic shall be tried for his criminal acts only after he has ceased to be in office. IX. International Relations Equatorial Guinea shall conduct affairs in its international relations according to the principles and intentions underlying the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of the Organisation of African Unity. The Guinean law shall be determined in accordance with the principle of universally binding legal norms. The , President of the Republic shall have the authority to negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements. However, the treaties and international, agreements which affect matters regulated by law or which involve a charge on the public treasury shall be ratified or approved by means of law. In the other cases, the President, acting in the Council of Ministers, is competent to approve the same. The treaties and agreements properly ratified and approved have, once promulgated, the force of law. Such treaties and agreements cannot be modified, annulled or suspended except in the manner provided therein or in conformity with the norms of the Law of Nations. X. Amendment of the Constitution The proposals for amendment of the Constitution shall be approved in the Assembly of the Republic by a Majority of two-thirds of the total members of the Assembly. The amendment of Articles 1, 13, 14, 17, 22, 24, 30, 38, 39, 41, 42, 44 and 58, after being approved by the Assembly of the Republic in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph, shall be implemented by a referendum, the results of which must have the agreement of the Provinces. Transitional Provisions 1. The law governing Guinean nationality, which will be laid down on the day of independence, shall grant Guinean nationality to all those persons of African ancestry who had been born in Equatorial Guinea and to their descendants, even though born outside, provided they possess Spanish nationality in one or the other case.
Article 58 Article 54

Article 55

Article 56

Article 57

256	



2. Laws in force in Guinea at the time of Independence, which do not contradict what is clearly stated in the Constitution, shall continue to be in force if they are not annulled or modified by competent Guinean authority. 3. The agreements for aid and technical assistance that the Guinean Government may conclude in future shall facilitate the progressive Africanisation in all the spheres of administration of the country.

Supplementary Provisions
The present Constitution shall be submitted to a referendum of the Guinean people and once approved shall come into force on the date that is fixed for Independence. The persons who are considered Guinean nationals under transitional provisions shall take part in the referendum on this Constitution and in the elections for constituting the institutions envisaged therein.

