Title: Date Adopted: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

Fundamental Law of Equatorial Guinea: 16 November 1991 11/16/1991 Equatorial Guinea Philadelphia Constitution Foundation, reproduced with permission Proprietary Sarah Campbell

FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF EQUATORIAL GUINEA Table of Contents PREAMBLE Title I-Fundamental Principles of the State Title II Section I-Powers and Organization of the State Section II-The President of the Republic Section III-The Council of Ministers Section IV-The Prime Minister Section V-The Chamber of People's Representatives Section VI-The Judicial Power Section VII-The Constitutional Court Title III-The Armed Forces, Forces of State Security, and National Defense Title IV-Local Corporations Title V-Revision of the Fundamental Law

PREAMBLE We, the people of Equatorial Guinea, conscious of our responsibility before God and history;

Motivated by the desire to safeguard our total independence and to organize and consolidate our national unity; Wishing to maintain the authentic, traditionally African spirit of family and communal organization, adapting it to new social structures and the legal demands of modern life; Conscious that the charismatic authority of the traditional family is the organizational basis of Equatoguinean society; Relying on principles of social justice and the solemn reaffirmation of the rights and liberties of mankind defined and consecrated by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948; By virtues of these principles and the self-determination of peoples, We adopt the following Fundamental Law of Equatorial Guinea. TITLE I FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF THE STATE Article 1 Equatorial Guinea is a sovereign, independent, republican, unitary, social and democratic state, in which the supreme values shall be unity, peace, justice, liberty and equality. Political pluralism shall be recognized. The official name shall be: Republic of Equatorial Guinea. Article 2 Sovereignty is vested in the people, who shall exercise it through universal suffrage. Political power is derived from the people and shall be exercised under the conditions determined by the Fundamental Law and other laws. No faction or individual may assume the exercise of national sovereignty. Article 3 The territory of Equatorial Guinea shall consist of the continental zone called Rio Muni and the islands of Biolo, Amnobon, Corisco, Elobey Grande, Elobey Chico, and adjacent islands, rivers, the maritime zone, the continental shelf determined by law, and the airspace covering them. The State shall have full sovereignty over its territory and shall have exclusive rights to explore and exploit all resources, mineral rights, and hydrocarbons.

The national territory shall be inalienable and irreducible. For administrative purposes, it shall be divided into regions, provinces, districts, and municipalities. The law shall determine the limits and the names of the regions, districts, and municipalities. The law shall also establish the space that each of these areas shall occupy. Article 4 The official language of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea shall be Spanish. Aboriginal languages shall be recognized as an integral part of national culture. The national flag shall have three horizontal bands, green, white, and red, of equal width, and a blue triangle on the end closest to the flagpole. The Seal of the Republic shall be engraved in the center of the flag. The Seal of the Republic shall be established by law. The motto of the Republic shall be: UNITY, PEACE, AND JUSTICE. The National Anthem shall be the hymn sung by the people on the day Independence was proclaimed, October 12, 1968. Article 5 The foundation of the Equatoguinean society shall be: a) Respect for the individual, his dignity, liberty, and fundamental rights; b) Protection of the family, the basic unit of the Equatoguinean society; c) Recognition of the equality of men and women; d) Protection of employment, through which the individual develops his personality and creates national wealth for the well-being of society; e) Promotion of the economic development of the Nation; f) Promotion of the social and cultural development of Equatoguinean citizens in order that the State’s highest values may be achieved in them. Article 6

The State shall encourage and promote culture, artistic creativity, scientific and technological research, and shall assure conservation of nature, the cultural inheritance, and the artistic and historical wealth of the Nation. Article 7 The State shall defend the sovereignty of the nation, reinforce its unity, and assure respect for fundamental human rights and the promotion of the economic, social, and cultural progress of citizens. Article 8 The Equatoguinean State respects the principles of International Law and reaffirms its adherence to the rights and obligations proceeding from the charters of the international organizations and agencies to which it belongs. Article 9 Political parties are organizations for persons who associate freely in order to participate in the political direction of the State. They constitute the expression of political pluralism and democracy; they shall cooperate in the formation and manifestation of the popular will, as fundamental instruments for political participation. The political parties of Equatorial Guinea may not have the same name as parties prior to October 12, 1968, and they must have national character and scope; they may not be based on tribe, ethnic group, region, district, municipality, province, sex, religion, social condition, profession, or occupation. Their creation and functioning shall be regulated by law. Article 10 The right to strike shall be recognized and exercised under conditions provided for by law. Article 11 Citizens, public powers, political parties, trade unions, associations, and other juridical bodies shall be subject to the Fundamental Law and judicial ordinance. Article 12 The regulation of nationality, citizenship, and the status of foreigners shall be determined by law. Article 13 All citizens shall enjoy the following rights and liberties:

(a) Respect for the person, life, integrity, dignity, and full national and moral development. The death penalty may be imposed only for crimes established by law. (b) Free expression of rights, ideas, and opinions. (c) Equality before the law. Women, whatever their status, shall have equal rights and opportunities with men in public, private, and family life, and in all civil, political, economic, social, and cultural matters. (d) Freedom of travel and residence. (e) Honor and good reputation. (f) Freedom of religion and worship. (g) Inviolability of the domicile and privacy in communication. (h) The right to present complaints and petitions to the authorities. (i) The right to habeas corpus and to legal representation. (j) Defense before tribunals and the right to a trial within the limits of respect for the law. (k) The right to free association, assembly, and demonstration. (l) Freedom of employment. (m) The right not to be deprived of liberty without a judicial procedure, except in the cases provided by law and in case of flagrante delicto. (n) The right to be informed of the cause or reasons for detention. (o) The presumption of innocence until legally proven guilty. (p) Freedom from the obligation to testify against oneself, one’s spouse, or relatives to the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity; one may not be compelled to testify under oath against oneself in matters which carry criminal penalties. (q) The right not to be tried or convicted twice for the same offense. (r) The right not to be convicted without a trial, or without the right of defense in whatever level of proceedings. (s) The right not to be punished for any act or omission which at the time it was committed was not punishable as a crime; no penalty may be imposed which is not provided for by law. In case of doubt, the law shall be applied in favor of the defendant.

Legislative provisions shall establish conditions under which these rights and liberties shall be exercised. Article 14 The enumeration of fundamental rights recognized in this document shall not exclude others guaranteed by the Fundamental Law nor others which are analogous and which are derived from human dignity, or the principle of sovereignty of the people, the social and democratic State, and the republic form of the State. Article 15 Any act of discrimination or corruption based on the tribe, ethnic group, sex, religion, social class, political status, or other similar bases, shall be punishable by law. Article 16 All Equatoguineans shall have the duty to honor the country, defend its sovereignty, territorial integrity, and national unity, to contribute to the preservation of peace and national security, and to protect national interests. Military service shall be compulsory and shall be regulated by law. Article 17 Every Equatoguinean shall have the right and the duty to live peacefully, to respect the rights of others, and to contribute to a just, fraternal, and cooperative society. Article 18 All inhabitants of the Republic must respect Equatorial Guinea, its national symbols, the Chief of State, the Government, and other legally constituted institutions. Article 19 Every citizen shall have the duty to support, proportionally to his capacity to contribute, the public expenses established by law. The revenue and expenses of the State and the Public Investment Program shall be established in each fiscal year in an annual budget in conformity with the applicable legislation. Article 20 Every citizen shall have the duty to respect, fulfill, and defend the Fundamental Law and judicial ordinances of the Nation.

Article 21 The State shall protect the family as the fundamental unit of society, assuring the moral, cultural, and economic conditions favorable to the achievement of its objectives. The State shall likewise protect all marriages performed according to the law, as well as motherhood and household property. Traditional family patrimony shall be considered free from seizure and an unalienable right, within legal limits and conditions. Article 22 The State shall protect all persons from conception and shall assist minors to develop normally and in security, to achieve moral, mental, and financial integrity, as well as assisting home life. The State shall encourage and promote attention to health as the cornerstone of this effort. Article 23 Education shall be a primary duty of the State. All citizens shall have the right to general basic education, which shall be compulsory, free, and guaranteed. The State shall guarantee to every person, private entity, and religious community the right to establish schools, provided they are in accordance with the official education program. Official teaching may include religious education, based on the freedom of conscience and religion assured by this Fundamental Law. Official teaching may not include partisan ideologies. Article 24 The State shall support responsible parenthood and appropriate education to benefit families. Article 25 Work shall be a right and a social duty. The State recognizes its constructive role in safeguarding and developing national resources. The State shall promote economic and social conditions to eliminate poverty and misery and shall guarantee to all citizens of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea the possibility of useful employment which allows them to avoid poverty.

The law shall define the conditions for exercising this right. Article 26 The economic system of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea shall be based on free market and free enterprise principles. The law shall regulate the exercise of these liberties in accordance with the demands of economic and social development. The State shall protect, guarantee, and supervise foreign investment contributing to the development of the country. Article 27 The economy of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea shall function through four basic sectors: (a) The public sector, including enterprises belonging exclusively to the State, comprising mainly the resources and services enumerated in Article 28 of this Fundamental Law, as well as any other economic activity. (b) The mixed sector, made up of enterprises of public capital in association with private capital. (c) The cooperative sector, in which property and management belong to the community of persons who work permanently in it. The State shall establish laws for the regulation and development of this sector. (d) The private sector, made up of enterprises whose property belongs to one or several private financial or juridical entities and, in general, enterprises not included in the previous sectors. Article 28 The following resources and services are reserved for the public sector: (a) Minerals and hydrocarbons; (b) Water and electricity; (c) Mail, telecommunications and transport; (d) Radio and television; (e) Other services determined by law.

The State may delegate, cede, or cooperate with private initiative for the development of any of the previously mentioned activities. Article 29 The State shall recognize public and private property. The right to property shall be guaranteed and protected with no limitations except those established by law. Property shall be inviolable; no one may be deprived of property or rights except for reasons of public utility with appropriate indemnity. The State shall guarantee to farmers the possession of their traditional lands. The Law shall establish judicial regulation of property in the public domain. TITLE II SECTION I POWERS AND ORGANIZATION OF THE STATE Article 30 The State shall exercise its functions through the President of the Republic, the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister, the Chamber of People’s Representatives, the Judicial Power, and other entities created in accordance with the Fundamental law and other laws. SECTION II THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Article 31 The President of the Republic shall be Chief of State, embodying national unity and representing the Nation. He shall be elected through universal direct suffrage, with a secret ballot, by a majority of the votes validly cast. The Law shall set the conditions for the electoral process. Article 32 The person of the Chief of State shall be inviolable during and after his term. This inviolability shall be regulated by law. Article 33

The President of the Republic must meet the following criteria: (a) He shall be a native Equatoguinean. (b) He shall possess the rights of citizenship. (c) He shall be not less than forty years of age nor more than seventy-five, except in the case of an incumbent. (d) He shall be able to interpret this Fundamental Law. (e) He shall have been a landowner in the country for ten years. (f) He shall be elected in accordance with this Fundamental Law. Article 34 The President of the Republic shall be elected for a period of seven years; he may be reelected once. Presidential elections shall take place in the seventh year of the term of the President of the Republic at a date established by decree in the Council of Ministers. The elections shall take place forty-five days before the expiration of the powers of the President in office or, at the latest, within sixty days of that date. Article 35 Within thirty days of the proclamation of the election results, the President who is elected shall swear an oath of loyalty to the Fundamental Law and shall assume office, before a Court of Honor consisting of the Executive Board of the Chamber of People’s Representatives and the full Supreme Court of Justice. After the Presidential elections, and in the event that a minority party candidate is the winner, the President of the Republic shall appoint a new Government. Article 36 The President of the Republic shall determine the nation’s policy, and his authority shall extend throughout the national territory. Article 37 The President of the Republic shall exercise regulatory power in the Council of Ministers. Article 38

The President of the Republic shall ratify and publish laws under conditions provided for in the Fundamental Law. He shall have the right of veto. Article 39 The President of the Republic shall also exercise the following powers: (a) He shall guarantee the strict application of this Fundamental Law, the functioning of public authorities, and the continuity of the State. (b) He shall convene and preside over the Council of Ministers. (c) He may issue decrees in the Council of Ministers in accordance with the provisions of this Fundamental Law. (d) He shall be the Supreme Chief of the National Armed Forces and State Security. The President of the Republic shall guarantee the security of the State in foreign affairs. (e) He shall declare war and conclude peace. (f) He shall appoint and dismiss the Prime Minister in accordance with this Fundamental Law. (g) He shall appoint and dismiss the other members of the Government upon nomination of the Prime Minister. (h) He shall appoint and dismiss other civil and military officials in accordance with the law; he may delegate this function to the Prime Minister. (i) He shall represent Equatorial Guinea in international relations, receiving and accrediting Ambassadors, and shall authorize Consuls in the performance of their duties. (j) He shall negotiate and ratify international agreements and treaties. (k) He shall confer State titles, honors, and decorations. (l) He shall have the right of pardon. (m) He shall call the general elections provided for in this Fundamental Law. (n) He may call for a referendum in accordance with this Fundamental Law. (o) He shall approve national development plans in the Council of Ministers. (p) He may order the dissolution of the Chamber of People’s Representatives in accordance with the provisions of this Fundamental Law.

(q) He shall exercise other duties and prerogatives conferred by law. Article 40 To assure territorial integrity and preserve public order, all National Armed Forces, Security Forces, and Forces of Public Order, with all their assets, shall be completely under the authority of the President of the Republic. Article 41 In the event of imminent danger, the President of the Republic may, for a period of four months, suspend the rights and guarantees established in this Fundamental Law and take exceptional measures to safeguard territorial integrity, national independence, national unity, State institutions, the regular functioning of public authorities and services; he shall inform the Nation by message. For that period, the actions of the Chamber of People’s Representatives shall be suspended. The stated period of four months may be extended until the causes of the suspension have been eliminated. Article 42 The President of the Republic, when circumstances require it, may declare a state of emergency in all or part of the national territory. Article 43 The duties of the President of the Republic shall cease in the event of: (a) Resignation; (b) Expiration of the term provided for in this Fundamental Law; (c) Permanent physical or mental disability; (d) Death. In the event of vacancy in the office for reasons (a), (c), and (d), the Prime Minister shall temporarily assume the duties of President of the Republic and shall, within forty-five days, call an election to fill the vacancy in the Presidency of the Republic, in which election the Prime Minister may not be a candidate. SECTION III THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS Article 44

In the exercise of his political and administrative duties, the President of the Republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers, composed also of the Prime Minister and other members of the Government. Article 45 The Council of Ministers is the body which shall carry out the general policy of the Nation, determined by the President of the Republic, shall assure the execution of laws, and shall assist the President of the Republic in political and administrative matters. The number of Ministers, their titles, and the authority assigned to each Minister shall be determined by law. Article 46 The administration and management of public services shall be conferred upon the Ministers in matters concerning their respective departments. Article 47 In addition to matters expressly defined in this Fundamental Law and determined by other laws, the Council of Ministers shall have the following duties: (a) To direct the general policy of the nation as determined by the President of the Republic, organizing and carrying out economic, cultural, scientific, and social activities. (b) To propose plans for the socio-economic development of the State and, with the approval of the Chamber of Peoples’ Representatives and the signature of the President, to organize, direct, and supervise their execution. (c) To formulate the General Budget of the State and, after approval by the Chamber of People’s Representatives and the President of the Republic, to assure its execution. (d) To determine monetary policy and to adopt means to protect and strengthen the monetary and financial regime of the Nation. (e) To draw up legislative bills and to submit them for the approval of the Chamber of People’s Representatives. (f) To grant territorial asylum. (g) To direct the Administration of the State, coordinating and funding the activities of the various departments. (h) To assure execution of laws, decrees, provisions, and orders signed by the President of the Republic or by the Prime Minister.

(i) To create the necessary commissions to carry out the duties conferred upon the Council. Article 48 All members of the Government shall be personally responsible to the President of the Republic and before the law for the acts committed in the exercise of their political and administrative duties. Article 49 The following shall be Members of the Government: (a) the Prime Minister; (b) the Assistant Prime Ministers; (c) Ministers of State; (d) Ministers; (e) Deputy Ministers; (f) Assistant Ministers; (g) Secretaries of State. Article 50 Before taking office, the Prime Minister and the other Members of the Government shall take an oath of loyalty, before the President of the Republic, to the President, and to this Fundamental Law. Article 51 The Council of Ministers as a whole, or the separate Ministers, may participate without a vote in the debates of the Chamber of People’s Representatives. They may also participate when invited to report to the Chamber. SECTION IV THE PRIME MINISTER Article 52 The Prime Minister shall be chosen from within the political party which has obtained a majority of the seat in the Chamber of People’s Representatives.

Article 53 The Prime Minister shall be the Head of Government, shall direct its actions, execute laws, and instruct the Government and Administration accordingly. Article 54 In accordance with Article 39(g), the President of the Republic shall request the Prime Minister to form a Government. In the event of disagreement, the President of the Republic shall request the majority party to designate a new candidate for the position of Prime Minister, or he may dissolve the Parliament and call new parliamentary elections. Article 55 In his capacity as Head of Government, the Prime Minister, aside from the other duties which may be delegated to him, shall coordinate Ministerial activities, supervise the functioning of public services, and assure the execution of Government programs. He shall convene and preside over the Interministerial Council, responsible for formulating matters to submit to the Council of Ministers, and shall present to the Chamber of People’s Representatives the bills adopted by the Government. Article 56 In exceptional circumstances, and by virtue of a specific delegation, the Prime Minister may take the place of the President of the Republic in presiding over the Council of Ministers, with a fixed agenda. Article 57 The duties of the Prime Minister shall cease for the following reasons: (a) Resignation; (b) Expiration of the term of the Chamber of People’s Representatives; (c) Permanent physical or mental disability; (d) Dissolution of the Chamber of People’s Representatives; (e) Death. Article 58

In the event of the resignation, permanent physical or mental disability, or death of the Prime Minister, the President of the Republic shall call new elections if the majority party has not designated a new candidate within seven working days. Article 59 The Prime Minister shall propose to the President of the Republic one or more nominations for Assistant Prime Minister, who may be designated by the President to replace the Prime Minister in case of absence or illness. SECTION V THE CHAMBER OF PEOPLE’S REPRESENTATIVES Article 60 Legislative power shall be vested in the People, who may delegate it through universal suffrage to the Chamber of People’s Representatives, to be exercised within the framework of the authorization set forth in this Fundamental Law. Article 61 The Chamber of People’s Representatives shall consist of eighty Representatives elected for five years by universal direct suffrage by means of a secret ballot in general elections which shall be held in a single day within sixty days of the expiration of the term. Administrative districts shall make up electoral constituencies. Seats shall be attributed to each list of candidates through the system of proportional representation. The number of seats for each electoral district, rules of ineligibility and incompatibility for the Chamber of People’s Representatives, and other aspects of the electoral process shall be determined by the Electoral Law. Article 62 Members of the Chamber of People’s Representatives may not be bound by any directed vote. Article 63 The People’s Representatives in the Chamber shall have the right to vote. The vote shall be personal. Article 64

The duties of the Chamber of People’s Representatives shall be the following: (a) To elect from among its members a President, Vice Presidents, and an Executive Board. (b) To set up its own internal regulations. (c) To approve the State budget. The State, through its tax law, based on equality, universality, and progressivity, shall set up taxes, charges, and levies, and establish the means to balance the budget. All persons and corporations, domestic and foreign, residing in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, shall have a legal obligation to pay taxes. (d) To pass legislation on tax matters, to abolish and create taxes and other charges as appropriate. (e) To pass legislation on weights and measures. (f) To draft the basic civil, mercantile, legal, penal, and labor law. (g) To establish fundamental rights and civil liberties. (h) To approve international treaties and submit them for ratification by the President of the Republic. (i) To authorize the President of the Republic to issue decrees between sessions; these decrees will take effect immediately upon publication and cannot be abolished except by law. The Government shall inform the Chamber of People’s Representatives of the content of these decrees. (j) To question Members of the Government on matters under their authority and to have them appear before the Chamber to explain general policy or a specific matter under the Member’s responsibility. (k) To appoint Commissions to investigate any matter which threatens the public interest. These Commissions shall have access to all departments of State Administration. (l) To perform other duties as conferred by law. Article 65 The President of the Republic, with the agreement of the Government and the Executive Board of the Chamber of People’s Representatives, may submit for referendum any question which in his opinion requires a referendum. The bill thus adopted shall be promulgated by the President of the Republic. Article 66

The President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers may dissolve the Chamber of People’s Representatives and order elections to be held. If the dissolution takes place during the last year of the members’ term, the election of People’s Representatives shall take place in accordance with the provisions of this Fundamental Law. Article 67 Vacancies which occur in the Chamber of People’s Representatives shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of the Electoral Law. Article 68 No representative may be prosecuted or detained for opinions expressed during and after the exercise of his duties in the Chamber. No jurisdiction may detain or prosecute a Representative in the Chamber without the prior permission of the Executive Board of the Chamber, except in case of flagrante delicto. Article 69 The Chamber of People’s Representatives shall meet on the first working day following a period of 30 days from the promulgation of the results of the general elections. The agenda of this first session shall be devoted exclusively to the election of its President and its Executive Board, unless the Government requests consideration of emergency matters. Article 70 The Chamber of People’s Representatives shall meet twice each year, once in March and once in September, for a period of not more than two months for each session. Both sessions shall begin on the second Monday of the respective month; or the following day if the assigned day is a holiday. Article 71 The Chamber of People’s Representatives may meet in extraordinary session with a set agenda at the request of the President of the Republic or by petition from three-fourths of its members. To be official, a session requires the presence of a majority of the People’s Representatives, and agreements shall be by a majority of those present. Article 72

The opening and closing of each session, ordinary and extraordinary, shall be declared by decree of the President of the Republic with the agreement of the Executive Board of the Chamber. Article 73 Debates in the Chamber of People’s Representatives shall be public. Article 74 When requested by the Government or three-fourths of the People’s Representatives, the Chamber may meet in closed session when necessary for confidentiality or security. Article 75 Legislative initiative shall be vested with the President of the Republic in the Council of Ministers and with the People’s Representatives in the Chamber. Bills originating with the People’s Representatives shall be given to the Executive Board of the Chamber in accordance with the Chamber’s By-Laws and then transmitted to the government for examination. Article 76 Aside from cases specifically provided for in other articles of this Fundamental Law, the following matters are reserved for law: (a) Regulation of the rights and duties of citizens. (b) Expropriation of resources in the public interest. (c) Nationality, the status and capacity of persons, regulation of marriage and inheritance. (d) Organization of the judiciary, creation of new jurisdictions, regulation of judges and prosecutors. (e) Penal regulation, amnesty, designation of crimes and applicable penalties. (f) Regulation of associations, political parties, and unions. (g) Regulation of the minting and circulation of money. (h) General administrative and financial organization. (i) Participation of the State in joint enterprises and their management.

(j) Regulation of national resources. (k) Regulation of individual liberty, property rights, concessions, and civil and commercial obligations. (l) The State’s financial credits and obligations. (m) Economic and social policy. (n) Fundamental principles of education, culture, labor, and social security. Article 77 The General Budget of the State, presented by the Government during the second session, shall be voted by the Chamber of People’s Representatives. In the event that the General Budget of the State has not been approved before the expiration of the current fiscal year, the President of the Republic may extend the budget from the preceding year until the new budget is adopted. Upon petition of the Government, the Chamber of People’s Representatives shall be convened within ten days to meet in extraordinary session for a new deliberation. In the event that the Budget is not accepted by the end of this session, the prior Budget, enacted by the President of the Republic, shall remain in effect. Article 78 If the Budget is not presented during the second ordinary session of the Chamber, the President of the Republic shall convene an extraordinary session for this purpose. Article 79 Before promulgation of a law, the President of the Republic may request a second or third reading of the bill by the Chamber of People’s Representatives. Article 80 The President of the Republic may appear in the Chamber of People’s Representatives and may send written messages. These communications may not give rise to any debate. Article 81 The agenda of the Chamber of People’s Representatives shall be set by the Executive Board. Article 82

The President of the Republic shall promulgate laws adopted by the Chamber of People’s Representatives. SECTION VI THE JUDICIAL POWER Article 83 The Judicial Power shall be independent of the Legislative and Executive Powers. It shall exercise the judicial function of the State. Article 84 Justice is derived from the people and shall be administered in the name of the Head of State. The Organic Law on the subject of the Judicial Power shall determine the organization and duties of tribunals necessary for the efficient functioning of justice. The same law shall regulate judges. Article 85 The exercise of jurisdiction in all types of trials, judgment, and executing judgment shall be vested exclusively with courts and tribunals established by law. Article 86 The Head of State shall be the Chief Judge of the Nation and shall guarantee the independence of the judicial function. Article 87 Judges and magistrates are subject only to provisions of law in the exercise of their duties. Article 88 The principle of judicial unity shall be the basis of the organization and functioning of the courts. Judicial regulations applicable to military justice shall be established by law. Article 89 Trials shall be public, except in cases specified by law, but tribunals shall deliberate in secret. Article 90

The Supreme Court of Justice shall be the highest judicial body in the nation except for the disposition of constitutional guarantees. Article 91 The President of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Members of the Court shall be appointed by the President of the Republic for a period of five years. Career magistrates and employees of the Administration of Justice shall be appointed and dismissed in accordance with the law. Article 92 The office of the Attorney General of the Republic shall have the principal mission of assuring strict adherence to the Fundamental Law, other laws, and legal provisions, by all State bodies, regions, provinces, districts, and municipalities, as well as all citizens and foreigners resident in the country. Article 93 The Attorney General of the Republic and associate Attorneys General shall be appointed and dismissed by the President of the Republic. The office of the Attorney General of the Republic shall be regulated by an organic statute. SECTION VII THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT Article 94 Within the Supreme Court of Justice, a Constitutional Court shall be created. The Constitutional Court shall be made up of the President of the Supreme Court of Justice, as president, and four members appointed by the President of the Republic, of which two shall be nominated by the Chamber of People’s Representatives. The term for members of the Constitutional Court shall be seven years. Article 95 The Constitutional Court shall have jurisdiction in the following matters: (a) The constitutionality of laws. (b) Determination of the respective limits of law and regulation.

(c) Protection from provisions and judicial acts which violate fundamental rights and liberties recognized in the Fundamental Law. (d) Other matters vested in it by the Organic Law. In addition, the Constitutional Court shall rule on the regularity of Presidential and legislative elections and referenda. Article 96 Members of the Constitutional Court may not be members of the Government, the Chamber of People’s Representatives, the judiciary or office of the Attorney General, nor any elective office. Article 97 An organic law shall regulate the functioning of the Constitutional Court, the regulation of its members, and the procedure for presenting cases before the Court. TITLE III THE ARMED FORCES, FORCES OF STATE SECURITY, AND NATIONAL DEFENSE Article 99 The Armed Forces and Forces of State Security shall be the national institution whose primary mission shall be to maintain national independence and territorial integrity, to defend national sovereignty, to conserve national unity, and to safeguard the security of the State, public order, and the normal functioning of public agencies in accordance with this Fundamental Law. The Armed Forces and Forces of State Security shall be governed by their own internal regulation. Article 100 National Defense shall be the organization in which all the forces, as well as the moral and material resources of the Nation, shall join together when circumstances require. An organic regulation shall govern National Defense. TITLE IV LOCAL CORPORATIONS Article 101 Local Corporation shall be legal institutions responsible for the government and administration of regions, provinces, districts, and municipalities. They shall promote

plans for economic and social development in their respective territories and in accordance with the law. Article 102 Local Corporations shall share in achieving State functions and goals established by the Fundamental Law, and they may not be created, modified, or eliminated except by law. The authority, functioning, jurisdiction, and composition of the Local Corporations shall be determined by law. TITLE V REVISION OF THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW Article 103 The President of the Republic may submit to referendum any bill to revise this Fundamental Law, either on his own initiative or as a consequence of a bill adopted by three-fourths of the members of the Chamber of People’s Representatives. Revision of the Constitution shall be final after adoption by means of referendum. Article 104 The republican and democratic foundation of the sovereign State of Equatorial Guinea, national unity, and territorial integrity shall not be subject to revision. TEMPORARY PROVISION Until the institutions provided for in this Fundamental Law are in force, the President of the Republic shall take all necessary measures for the normal functioning of public agencies and matters of State. ADDITIONAL PROVISION Whereas President of the Republic OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO ended the antidemocratic, dictatorial regime on the glorious day of August 3, 1979, restoring to the People of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea the rights and liberties of the individual and the citizen, Whereas President of the Republic OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO has led the country for twelve years with excellent achievements in political, economic, social, and cultural development, in an atmosphere of peace, justice, unity, tranquillity, order, harmony, fraternity, and national reconciliation,

Whereas President of the Republic OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO has introduced a multiparty system in the country, Therefore, we the People of Equatorial Guinea, possessors of national sovereignty, do guarantee constitutionally that the President of the Republic OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO may not be prosecuted, judged, nor called as a witness before, during, and after his term of office. REPEALING PROVISION Any provisions contrary to this Fundamental Law shall be repealed. FINAL PROVISION This Fundamental Law shall take effect following approval by referendum and promulgation by the President of the Republic. OBIANG NGUEME MBASOGA, President of the Republic.

