
DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MEN AND CITIZENS. 



T H E French people, convinced that forgetfulness of, and contempt for, the natural rights of men are the only causes of the misfortunes of the world have resolved to se forth, in a solemn Declaration, these sacred and inalienable rights, in order that all citizens, being able always to compare the acts of the government with the end of every social institution, may never suffer themselves to be oppressed and degraded by tyranny; and that the people may always have before their eyes the basis of their liberty and happiness; the Magistrate the rule of their duty ; and the Legislature the purpose of their commission

They acknowledge therefore and proclaim, in the presence of the Supreme Being, the following Declaration of the Rights of Men and of Citizens.


Article 1 The end of society is common happiness. Government is instituted to secure to man the enjoyment of his natural and imprescriptible rights 

2. these rights are Equality, Liberty, Safety, Property. 

3. All men are equal by Nature, and in the eye of the Law.

4. The Law is the free and solemn expression of the general will. It is the same for all, whether it protects or punishes. It cannot order but what is just and useful to society. It cannot forbid but what is hurtful. 

5. All Citizens are equally admissible to public employments. Free people know no other motives of preference in their elections than virtue and talents. 

6. Liberty is the power which belongs to a man, of doing every thing that does not hurt the rights of another : its principle is nature : its rule justice : its protection the law : and its moral limits are defined by this maxim, " Do not to another what you would " not which done to yourself.” 

7. The right of manifesting one's thoughts and opinions, either by the press, or in any other manner : the right of assembling peaceably, and the free exercise of religious worship, cannot be forbidden. 

The necessity of announcing these rights supposes either the presence or the recent remembrance of despotism. 

8. Safety consists in the protection granted by the society to each of its Members for the preservation of his person, his rights, and his property. 

9. The law ought to protect public and individual liberty against the oppression of those who govern. 

10. Mo person can be accused, arrested, or confined, but in cases determined by the law, and according to the forms which it prescribed. Every citizen summoned or seized by the authority of the law, ought immediately to obey : he renders himself culpable by refinance. 

11. Every act exercised against a man to which the cases in the law do not apply, and in which its forms are not observed, is arbitrary and tyrannical. Respect for the law forbids him to submit to such acts; and if attempts are made to execute them by violence, he has a right to repel them by force. 

12. Thole who shall solicit, dispatch, sign, execute, or cause to be executed, arbitrary acts, are culpable, and ought to be punished. 

13. Every man being supposed innocent until he has been declared guilty, if it is judged indefensible to arrest him, all severity not necessary to secure his person ought to be strictly repressed by the law.

14. No one ought to be tried and pushed until he has been legally heard or summoned, and in virtue of a law published previous to the commission of the crime. A law which mould punish crimes committed before it existed would be tyrannical. The retroactive effect given to a law would be a crime. 

15. The law ought not to decree any punishments but such as are strictly and evidently necessary: punishment ought to be proportioned to the crime, and useful to society. 

16. The right of property is that right which belong? to every citizen to enjoy and dispose of according to his pleasure, his property, revenues, labour and industry. 

17. No kind of labour, culture, or commerce, can be forbidden to the industrious citizen. 

18. Every man may engage his services and his time, but he cannot sell himself nor be fold — his person is not alienable property. The law does not acknowledge servitude — there can exist only an engagement of care and gratitude between the man who labors, and the man who employs him. 

19. No one can be deprived of the smallest portion of his property, without his consent, except when the public necessity, legally ascertained, requires it, and on condition of a just and previous indemnification. 

20. No contribution can be established but for general utility. Every citizen has a-right to concur in the establishment of contributions, to watch over the use made of them, and to call for a Statement of their expenditure. 

21. Public aids are a sacred debt. The society is obliged to provide for the subsistence of the unfortunate, either by procuring them work, or by securing the means of existence to those who are unable to labour. 

22. Instruction is the want of all. The society ought to favor, with all its powers, the progress of public reason; and to place instruction within the reach of every citizen. 

23. The social guarantee consists in the action of all, to secure to each the enjoyment and preservation of the rights.—This guarantee rests on the National Sovereigns. 

24. The social guarantee cannot exist if the mission of public functions are not clearly determined by the law, and if the responsibility of all public functionaries is not secured. 

25. The Sovereignty resides in the people: it is one and indivisible, imprescriptible and inalienable. 

26. No portion of the people can exercise the power of the whole: but each section of the Sovereign assembly ought to enjoy the right of expressing its will with entire freedom.

27. Every individual who arrogates to himself the Sovereignty, or who usurps the exercise of it, ought instantly to be put to death by free men. 

28. A people have always the right of revising, amending, and changing their Constitution. One generation cannot subject to its laws future generations. 

29 Every citizen has an equal right to participate in the formation of the law, and in the nomination of his mandatories or agents. 

30. Public functions are essentially temporary. They cannot be considered as distinctions or rewards, but as duties. 

31. Crimes committed by the Mandatories of the people and their agents, ought never to remain unpunished. No one has a right to pretend to be more inviolable than other citizens. 

32. The right of presenting petitions to the Depositories "of Public Authority belongs to every individual. The exercise of this right cannot, in any case, be forbidden, suspended, or limited. 

33. Resistance to oppression is the consequence of the other rights of man. 

34. Oppression is exercised against the social body, when even one of its members is oppressed. oppression is exercised against each member, when the social body is oppressed. 

35. When the Government violates the rights of the people, insurrection bis for the people and for each portion of the people the most sacred of rights and the most indispensable of duties


THE CONSTITUTIONAL ACT.


OF THE REPUBLIC  

Art, 1. The French Republic is one and indivisible. 

Of the Distribution of the People 

2. The French people is distributed, for the exercise of its sovereignty, into Primary assemblies of cantons. 

3. It is distributed, for administration and for justice, into departments, districts and municipalities. 

OF THE STATE OF CITIZENS  

4. Every man born or domiciled in France, of the age of twenty-one years complete; Every foreigner of the age of twenty-one years complete, who, domiciled in France for one year, Lives in it by his labour;
Or acquires a property ; 
Or marries a French woman; 
Or adopts a child ; 
Or maintains an aged person; 

Finally, every foreigner, who shall be judged by the Legislative Body to have deserved well of humanity; is admitted to the exercise of the rights of a French citizen. 


5. The exercise of the rights of a citizen is loft, 
By naturalization in a foreign country; 
By the acceptance of functions or favors flowing from a government not popular; 
By condemnation to dishonorable or corporal punishments, till reinstated in the former state. 

6. The exercise of the rights of a citizen is suspended, 
By the state of accusation; 
By a judgment of contumacy, as long as that judgment is not annulled.

OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE PEOPLE 

7. The sovereign people is the universality of French citizens. 

8. It nominates directly its Deputies. 

9. It delegates to Electors the choice of Administrators, of Public Arbitrators, of Criminal Judges, and Judges of Appeal. 

10. It deliberates on laws. 

OF THE PRIMARY ASSEMBLIES 

11. The Primary Assemblies are composed of the citizens domiciled for six months in each canton. 
12. They are composed of 200 citizens at the least 600 at the most, called to vote. 

13. They are constituted by the nomination of a President, Secretaries, and Scrutineers. 

14. Their police appertains to them. 

15. No person can appear in them armed. 

16. The elections are made by ballot, or open vote, at the option of each voter. 

17. A Primary assembly cannot, in any caae, prescribe an uniform mode of voting. 

18. The Scrutineers ascertain the votes of citizens, who cannot write and choose to vote by bailor 

19. The suffrages upon laws are given by yes or by no. 

20. The will of a Primary assembly is proclaimed thus : The citizens 'met in Primary Assembly of , to the number of voters, vote for, or vote against by a -majority of 

OF THE NATIONAL REPRESENTATION. 

21. Population is the sole basis of the National Representation. 

22. There is one Deputy for every 40,000 individuals. 

23. Each reunion of Primary assemblies resulting from a population of from 39,000 1041,000 souls, nominates directly one Deputy. 

24. The nomination is made by the absolute majority of suffrages.

25. Each Assembly calls up the suffrages, and fends a Commissioner for the general casting up to the place pointed out as the most central. 

26. If the first casting up does not give an absolute majority, a second vote is proceeded to, and the votes are taken for the two citizens who had the most voices. 

27. In case of equality of voices, the eldest has the preference, either to be on the ballot, or elected. In case of equality of age, lot decides. 

28. Every Frenchman, exercising the rights of citizen, is eligible through the whole of the Republic, 

29. Each Deputy belongs to the whole nation. 

30. In case of the non-acceptance, abdication, forfeiture, or death of a Deputy, he is replaced by the Primary assemblies who nominated him.

31. A Deputy who has given in his resignation cannot quit his post but after the admission of his successor. 

32. The French people assemble every year on the first of May for elections. 

33. It proceeds in them, whatever be the number of citizens present having a right to vote. 

34. Primary assemblies are formed on extraordinary occasions, on the demand of a fifth of the citizens, who have a right to vote in them. 

35. The Convocation is made, in this case, by the Municipality of the ordinary place of meeting. 

36. these extraordinary assemblies do not deliberate but when one more than the half of the citizens who have a right to vote in them are present. 

OF THE ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES 

37. The citizens met, in Primary assemblies, nominate one elector for every 200 citizens, present or not, two for from 201 to 400, and three for from 401 to 600. 

38. The holding of the Electoral assemblies, and the mode of elections, are the same as in the Primary assemblies.

OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY 

39. The legislative Body is one, indivisible and permanent.

40. Its session is for a year. 

41. It meets the first of July. 

42. The National assembly cannot be constituted if it do not consist of one more than the half of the Deputies. 

43. The Deputies cannot be examined, accused, or tried at any time, for the opinions they have delivered in the legislative Body. 

44. They may, for a criminal act, be seized, in flagrant deceit; but a warrant of arrest, or a warrant summoning to appear, cannot be granted against them unless authorized by the legislative Body. 

MODE OF PROCEDURE OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY

45. The sittings of the National assembly are public. 

46. The debates of the sittings are printed. 

47. It cannot deliberate, if it be not composed of 200 members at the least. 

48. It cannot refuse to hear its Members speak in the order in which they have demanded to be heard. 

49. It deliberates by a majority of the Members present. 

50. Fifty Members have a right to require a call by names 

51. It has the right of censure on the conduct of its Members within itself. 

52. The police appertains to it in the place of its sittings and in the external circuit which it has determined. 

OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY

53. The legislative Body proposes laws and issues decrees. 

54. Under the general name of Laws are comprehended the acts of the legislative Body concerning:
The legislation civil and criminal; 
The general administration of the revenues, and of the ordinary expenses of the Republic;
The national domains;
The title, the weight, the impression, and the denomination of money;
The nature, the amount, and the collection of contributions;
The declaration of war;
Every new general distribution of the French territory;The public -instruction;
The public honors to the memory of great men

55. Under the particular name of Decrees, are included the acts of the legislative Body, concerning:
The annual establishment of the land and sea forces; 
The permission or the prohibition of the passage of foreign troops through the French territory; 
The introduction of foreign naval forces into the ports of the Republic; 
The measures of general safety and tranquillity; 
The annual and occasional distribution of public works. The orders for the fabrication of money of every kind; The unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; 
The measures local and particular to an administration, a commune, or a kind of public works; 
The defense of the territory; 
The ratification of treaties; 
The nomination and the removal of commanders in chief of armies; 
The prosecution of the responsibility of Members of the Council, and the public functionaries; 
The accusation of persons charged with plots against the general safety of the Republic; All change in the partial distribution of the French territory; the national rewards. 

OF THE FORMATION OF THE LAWS 

56. The plans of Law are preceded by a report. 

57. The discussion cannot be opened, and the law cannot be provisionally resolved upon till fifteen days after the report.

58. The plan is printed and sent to all the Communes of the Republic, under this title : Law proposed 

59. Forty days after the fending of the law proposed, if in one more than hair of the Departments, the tenth of the Primary Assemblies of each, regularly formed, have not objected to it, the plan is accepted and becomes law. 

60. If there be an objection, the Legislative Body convokes the Primary Assemblies. Of the Entitling of Laws and Decrees. 

61. Laws, decrees, judgments, and all public acts are entitled: In the name of the French people, in the year of the French Republic. 

OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL. 

62. There is one Executive Council composed of twenty-four Members. 

63. The Electoral assembly of each Department nominates one candidate. The Legislative body chooses the Members of the Council from the general lift.

64. One half of it is renewed by each legislature in the last month of the session. 

65. The Council is charged with the direction and superintendence of the general Administration. It cannot 2ft but in execution of the laws and decrees of the Legislative Body. 

66. It nominates, not of its own body, the Agents in chief of the general Administration of the Republic. 

67. The Legislative Body determines the number, and the functions, of these Agents. 

68. these Agents do not form a Council. They are separated, without any immediate correspondence between them; they exercise no personal authority. 

69. The Council nominates, not of its own body, the external Agents of the Republic. 

70. It negotiates treaties. 

71. The Members of Council, in case of violation, are accused by the Legislative Body. 

72. The Council is responsible for the non-execution of laws and decrees, and for abuses which it does not denounce. 

73. It recalls and replaces the Agents in its nomination. 

74. Ir is bound to denounce them, if there be occasion, before the Judicial Authorities. 



OF THE CONNECTION OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL WITH  THE LEGISLATIVE BODY 

75. The Executive Council resides near the legislative Body. It has admittance and a separate feat in the place of fittings. 

76. It is heard as often as it has an account to give. 

77. The Legislative Body calls it into the place of its fittings, in whole or in part, when it thinks fit. 

OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND MUNICIPAL BODIES

78. There is a Municipal Administration in each commune of the Republic ; In each district an intermediate Administration; In each department a central Administration. 

79. The Municipal Officers are elected by the Assemblies of the Commune. 

80. The Administrators are nominated by the Electoral Assemblies of department and district. 

81. The Municipalities and the Administrations are renewed, one half, every year. 

82. The Administrators and Municipal Officers have no character of representation ; They cannot, in any case, modify the acts of the legislative Body, or suspend the execution of them. 

83. The legislative Body determines the functions of the Municipal Officers and Administrators, the rules of their subordination, and the penalties they may incur. 

84. The fittings of Municipalities and Administrations are public, Of Civil justice. 

85. The code of civil and criminal laws is uniform for all the Republic. 

86. No infringement can be made of the right which citizens have to cause their differences to be pronounced upon by arbitrators of their choice. 

87. The decision of these arbitrators is final, if the citizens have not reserved the right of objecting to them, ' 

88. There are justices of Peace elected by the citizens in circuits determined by the law. 

89. They conciliate and judge without expense. 

90. Their number and their competence are regulated by the Legislative Body. 

91. There are public Arbitrators elected by the Electoral Assemblies. 

92. Their number and their circuits are fixed by the Legislative Body. 

93. They take cognizance of disputes which have not been finally terminated by the private Arbitrators or the justices of Peace. 

94. They deliberate in public; They give their opinions aloud ; 

They pronounce, in the last resort, on verbal defenses, or Simple memorials, without procedures, and without expense ; They assign the reasons of their decisions. 

95. The justices of Peace and the Public Arbitrators are elected every year. 


OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE 

96. In criminal cases, no citizen can be tried, but on an accusation received by a Jury, or decreed by the Legislative Body; 

The accused have Counsel chosen by themselves, or nominated officially; The process is public; The fadts and the intention are declared by a jury of judgment; The punishment is applied by a criminal tribunal. 

97. The Criminal Judges are elected every year by the Electoral Assemblies. Of the Tribunal of Appeal, 

98. There is one Tribunal of Appeal for all the Republic.

99. This Tribunal does not take cognizance of the merits of the case ; It pronounces on the violation of forms, and on express contravention of the law. 

100. The Members of this Tribunal arc nominated every year by the Electoral assemblies. Of Public Contributions 

101. No citizen is exempted from the honorable obligation of contributing to the public charges. 

OF THE NATIONAL TRASURY


102. The National Treafury.is the central point of the receipts and expenses of the Republic. 

103. It is administercd by accountable agents, nominated by the Executive Council. 

104. these Agents are superintended by Commissioners nominated by the Legislative Body, not of its own members, and responsible for abuses which they do not denounce. 

OF ACCOUNTABILITY 

105. The accounts of the Agents of the national treasury and the Administrators of the public money are given in annually to responsible Commissioners, nominated by the Executive Council. 

106. these verifications are superintended by Commissioners in the nomination of the Legislative Body, not of its own members, and responsible for errors and abuses which they do not denounce; The Legislative Body passes the accounts. 

 
OF THE FORCES OF THE REPUBLIC 


107. The general force of the Republic is composed of the whole people. 

108. The Republic maintains in its pay, even in time of peace, an armed force, by sea and land. 

109. All the French are soldiers; they are all exercised in the use of arms. 

110. There is no Generalissimo. 

111. Difference of ranks, their distinctive marks and subordination, subsist only with relation to service, and during its continuance.

112 . The public force employed for maintaining order and peace in the interior, does not aft but on the requisition in writing, of the constituted authorities 

113. The public force employed against enemies from without, acts under the orders of the Executive Council. 

114. N o armed body can deliberate. 


OF NATIONAL CONVENTIONS  

115. If in one more than the half of the Departments, the tenth of the Primary Assemblies of each, regularly formed, demand the revision of the Constitutional Aft, or the change of some of its articles, the Legislative Body is bound to convoke all the Primary Assemblies of the Republic, to know if there be Ground for a National Convention. 

116. The National Convention is formed in the fame manner as the legislatures, and unites in itself their powers. 

117. It employs itself, with respect to the Constitution, only on the objects which were the cause of its convocation. Of the Correspondence of the French Republic with foreign Nations. 

118. The French people is the friend and the natural ally of every free people. 

119. It does not interfere in the Government of other nations. It does not suffer other nations to interfere with its own. 

120. It gives an asylum to foreigners, banished from their country for the cause of liberty; It refuses it to tyrants. 

121. It does not make peace with an enemy, that occupies its territory. 


OF THE GUARANTEE OF RIGHTS. 

122. The Constitution guarantees to all the French, equality, liberty, safety, property, the public debt, the free exercise of worship, a common instruction, public assistance, the indefinite liberty of the prefs, the right of petition, the right of meeting in popular Societies, the enjoyment of all the rights of man. 123. The French Republic honors loyalty, courage, age, filial piety, misfortune. It puts the deposit of its Constitution under the guard of all the virtues. 

124. The Declaration of Rights and the Constitutional shall be engraved on tables, in the midst of the legislative Body, and in the public places. 


(Signed)COLLOT D'HERBOIS,

President.

D U R A N D - M A I L L A N E , DUCOS, M E A U L L E , C H . DELACROIX, GOSSUIN, P. A. L A LOY Secretaries


