THE BEGINNING OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL ERA A Bicentennial Comparative Analysis of the First Modern Constitutions
RETT R. LUDWIKOWSKI AND WILLIAM F. FOX, JR.

THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF AMERICA PRESS
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Copyright © 1993 The Catholic University of America Press All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National Standards for Information Science—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Ludwikowski, Rett R. The beginning of the constitutional era : a bicentennial comparative analysis of the first modern constitutions / Rett R. Ludwikowski and William E Fox, Jr. cm. p.	 Includes bibliographical references and index. 1. United States—Constitutional history. a. France—Constitutional history. 3. Poland— Constitutional history. 4. United States—Politics and government-1783-1809. 5. France—Politics and government-1789-1815. 6. Poland—Politics and government-1763-1796. I. Fox, William F u. Title. KF4 5 54•L83 1993 342_73'029 —dczo
ISBN

b47.302.29) 0-813z-0776-a (alk. paper)

91-34679

The Constitution of the Year VIII 13 December, 1799 (22 Frimaire, Year VIII)

TITLE I OF THE EXERCISE OF THE RIGHTS OF CITIZENSHIP 1. The French Republic is one and indivisible. Its European territory is divided into departments and communal arrondissements. z. Every man fully twenty-one years of age, born and resident in France, who has had himself enrolled upon the civic register of his communal arrondissement, and has since lived for one year on the territory of the Republic, is a French citizen. 3. A foreigner may become a French citizen when, after having attained the age of fully twenty-one years and having declared his intention of settling in France, he has resided there for ten consecutive years. 4. French citizenship shall be lost: By naturalization in a foreign country; By acceptance of appointments or pensions tendered by a foreign government; By affiliation with any foreign corporation which implies distinctions of birth; By condemnation to corporal or ignominious penalties. 5. The exercise of the rights of French citizenship shall be suspended in the case of insolvent debtor or of immediate heir, holder by gratuitous title, of the total or partial inheritance of a bankrupt; In the case of wage-earning domestics in personal or household service; In the case of judicial interdiction, indictment, or contempt of court. 6. The exercise of the rights of citizenship in a communal arrondissement shall be dependent upon acquisition of domicile therein by one year's residence, upon condition that such domicile has not been forfeited by a year's absence. 7. The citizens of every communal arrondissement shall designate by vote those among them whom they believe to be most suited to administer public affairs. A list of trustworthy persons, containing the names of one-tenth of the number of citizens who have the right to co-operate therein, will result from such vote. The public functionaries of the arrondissement are to be selected from such first communal list. 8. Likewise the citizens included in the communal lists of a department shall designate one-tenth of their number. A second, or departmental, list, from
2.93

294

	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

which the public functionaries of the department are to be taken, will result from such vote. 9 . Likewise the citizens named in the departmental list shall designate one-tenth of their number. A third list, comprising the citizens of the department who are eligible to national public office, will result from such vote. 10. The citizens who have the right to co-operate in the formation of one of the lists mentioned in the three preceding articles shall be summoned every three years, to provide for the replacement of those who have died or are absent for any reason other than the performance of a public duty. At the same time, they may remove from the list those whom they deem unfit, and they may replace them with others in whom they have greater confidence. z. No one may be removed from a list except by the vote of an absolute majority of the citizens who have the right to co-operate in the formation thereof. 13. No one may be removed from a list of eligibles merely because he is not retained on another list of inferior or superior degree. 14. Enrollment on a list of eligibles is necessary only with regard to those public offices for which such condition is expressly required by the Constitution or by law. The lists of eligibles shall be constituted for the first time during the course of the Year IX. Citizens selected for the initial formation of the established authorities shall constitute a necessary part of the first list of eligibles. TITLE II OF THE CONSERVATIVE SENATE 15. The Conservative Senate shall be composed of eighty members, at least forty years of age, irremovable, and holding office for life. For the formation of the Senate sixty members shall be chosen first; said number shall be increased to sixty-two during the course of the Year VIII, to sixty-four in the Year IX, and it shall thus be increased gradually to eighty by the addition of two members annually for the first ten years. 16. Appointment to the position of senator shall be made by the Senate, which shall choose from among three candidates presented by the Legislative Body, the Tribunate, and the First Consul respectively. It shall choose between only two candidates if one of them is proposed by two of the three presenting authorities; it shall be required to admit a candidate proposed by the three authorities at one and the same time. 17. The First Consul, upon resigning or upon retiring from office at the expiration of his term, automatically becomes a senator. The other two consuls may take seats in the Senate during the month following the expiration of their terms; but they shall not be obliged to make use of such right. They shall not enjoy said right if they resign their consular duties. i8. A senator shall always be ineligible for other public office.

The Constitution of the Year VIII

29 5

1 9 . All the lists drawn up in the departments by virtue of article 9 shall be directed to the Senate; they shall constitute the national list. 20. From said list the Senate shall choose the legislators, tribunes, consuls, judges of caseation, and commissioners of accounting. 21. It shall sustain or annul all acts referred to it as unconstitutional by the Tribunate or the Government; the lists of eligibles shall be included among such acts. 22. Revenues from certain national domains shall be set apart for the expenses of the Senate. The annual stipend of each of its members shall be drawn from said revenues, and shall equal one-twentieth of that of the First Consul. z 3 . The sessions of the Senate shall not be public. 24. Citizens Sieyes and Roger Ducos, retiring consuls, shall be appointed members of the Conservative Senate; they shall meet with the second and third Consuls appointed by the present Constitution. Said four citizens shall appoint the majority of the Senate, which then shall complete itself and shall proceed to the elections entrusted to it. TITLE III OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER 25. New laws shall be promulgated only when the draft thereof has been proposed by the Government, communicated to the Tribunate, and decreed by the Legislative Body. 2.6. Projects proposed by the Government shall be drawn up in articles. In any stage of the discussion of such projects, the Government may withdraw them; it may reproduce them in modified form. 27 . The Tribunate shall be composed of one hundred members, at least twenty-five years of age; they shall be renewed annually by one-fifth, and shall be re-eligible indefinitely so long as they remain on the national list. z8. The Tribunate shall discuss drafts of laws; it shall vote the adoption or rejection thereof. It shall send three orators, taken from its own membership, who shall set forth and defend before the Legislative Body its motives concerning each of said projects. It shall refer the lists of eligibles and acts of the Legislative Body and the Government to the Senate on grounds of unconstitutionality alone. 29. It shall express its will concerning laws made or to be made, abuses to be corrected, and improvements to be undertaken in all branches of the public administration, but never upon civil or criminal matters brought before the courts. The wishes it manifests by virtue of the present article shall have no necessary consequence, and may not oblige any constituted authority to deliberate. 3o. When the Tribunate adjourns, it may appoint a commission of from ten to fifteen of its members, which shall be responsible for convoking it if it deems it expedient. 31. The Legislative Body shall be composed of three hundred members, at least thirty years of age; they shall be renewed annually by one-fifth.

296	

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

It must always include at least one citizen from each and every department of the Republic. 32. A member retiring from the Legislative Body may not re-enter it until after an interval of one year; but he may be elected immediately to any other public office, including that of tribune, if he is otherwise eligible thereto. 33. The session of the Legislative Body shall begin annually on 1 Frimaire, and shall continue for only four months; it may be convoked in special session by the Government during the other eight months. 34. The Legislative Body shall make laws by secret ballot, and without any discussion on the part of its members, on the basis of drafts of laws argued before it by the orators of the Tribunate and the Government. 35. The sessions of the Tribunate and those of the Legislative Body shall be public; the number of spectators at either of them may not exceed two hundred. 36. The annual stipend of a tribune is 1 5 ,000 francs; that of a legislator, o,000 francs. 37. Every decree of the Legislative Body shall be promulgated by the First Consul on the tenth day after its issuance, unless, within such period, recourse has been had to the Senate on grounds of unconstitutionality. Such recourse may not be had against promulgated laws. 38. The first renewal of the Legislative Body and the Tribunate shall take place only during the course of the Year X. TITLE IV OF THE GOVERNMENT 39. The Government shall be entrusted to three Consuls, appointed for ten years and indefinitely re-eligible. Each Consul shall be chosen individually with the distinct title of First, Second, or Third Consul. The Constitution appoints as First Consul citizen Bonaparte, former provisional Consul; as Second Consul, citizen Cambaceres, former Minister of Justice; and as Third Consul, citizen Lebrun, former member of the commission of the Council of Elders. The present appointment of Third Consul shall be for only five years' duration. 4o. The First Consul shall have special functions and prerogatives in which he may be replaced temporarily by one of his colleagues when necessary. 41. The First Consul shall promulgate laws; he shall appoint and dismiss at will the members of the Council of State, the ministers, the ambassadors and other external agents in chief, the officers of the army and navy, the members of the local administrations, and the commissioners of the Government at the courts. He shall appoint all criminal and civil judges, other than justices of the peace and judges of cassation, without power to remove them. 4 z. In other acts of the government, the Second and Third Consuls shall have consultative voice; they shall sign the register of such acts in order to attest their presence, and if they wish they may record their opinions therein; after which the decision of the First Consul shall suffice.

The Constitution of the Year VIII

	

2.97

43. The stipend of the First Consul shall be 5 oo,000 francs in the Year VIII. That of each of the other two Consuls shall equal three-tenths of that of the First Consul. 44. The Government shall propose laws and make regulations necessary for assuring their execution. 45. The Government shall direct the receipts and expenditures of the State, in conformity with the annual law determining the amount thereof; it shall superintend the manufacture of monies, of which the law alone shall order the issuance and determine the denomination, weight, and standard. 46. If the Government is informed that some conspiracy is being plotted against the State, it may issue warrants of apprehension and arrest against the persons who are assumed to be the authors or accomplices thereof; but if they are not set at liberty or brought to trial within a period of ten days after their arrest, the minister who signed the warrant shall be deemed guilty of the crime of arbitrary imprisonment. 47. The Government shall provide for the internal security and the external defence of the State; it shall dispose the land and sea forces and regulate the administration thereof. 48. The National Guard on active service shall be subject to regulations of the public administration; the resident National Guard shall be subject only to the law. 49. The Government shall maintain external political relations, conduct negotiations, make preliminary stipulations, sign, have signed, and conclude all treaties of peace, alliance, truce, neutrality, commerce, and other conventions. 5 o. Declarations of war and treaties of peace, alliance, and commerce shall be proposed, discussed, decreed, and promulgated as are laws. Discussions and deliberations on such matters, however, in the Tribunate as well as in the Legislative Body, shall take place in private session when the Government demands it. 51. The secret articles of a treaty may not be detrimental to the open articles. 52. Under the direction of the Consuls, a Council of State shall be charged with drafting projects of law and regulations for public administration, and with solving difficulties which may arise in administrative matters. 53. The orators responsible for speaking before the Legislative Body in the name of the Government shall always be chosen from among the members of the Council of State. Never more than three of said orators may be sent in the defence of one and the same proposed law. 54. The ministers shall procure the execution of laws and regulations for public administration. 55. No act of the Government may have effect unless signed by a minister. 56. One of the ministers shall be specially charged with the administration of the Public Treasury; he shall guarantee the receipts, and order movements of funds and the payments authorized by law. He may not make any payment except by virtue of: 1st, a law, and up to the amount of the funds it has determined for one kind of expenditure; 2nd, an order of the Government; 3 rd, a mandate signed by a minister.

298

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

57. The detailed accounts of the expenditures of each and every minister, signed and certified by same, shall be made public. 58. The Government may elect or retain as Councilors of State and as Ministers only those citizens whose names are registered on the national list. 59. The local administration established either for communal arrondissements or for more extensive areas shall be subordinated to the ministers. No one may become or remain a member of said administrations unless he is placed or maintained on one of the lists mentioned in articles 7 and 8. TITLE V OF THE COURTS 6o. Each and every communal arrondissement shall have one or more justices of the peace, elected directly by the citizens for three years. Their principal duty shall consist of conciliating parties whom they shall urge, in case of nonconciliation, to obtain judgment through arbitrators. 61. In civil matters there shall be courts of first instance and courts of appeal. The law shall determine their organization, their competence, and the territory constituting their jurisdictions. 6z. In the case of crimes entailing corporal or ignominious penalties, a first jury shall admit or reject the indictment; if it be admitted, a second jury shall take cognizance of the facts, and the judges, forming a criminal court, shall apply the penalty. Their decision shall not be subject to appeal. 63. The duties of public prosecutor before a criminal court shall be performed by the commissioner of the Government. 64. Crimes not entailing corporal or ignominious penalties shall be tried by courts of correctional police, subject to appeal to the criminal courts. 65. For the entire Republic there shall be one Court of Cassation, to pronounce upon appeals in cassation from judgements in the last resort rendered by the courts, upon appeals for changes of venue on grounds of legitimate suspicion or for public security, and upon suits against an entire court. 66. The Court of Cassation shall not have cognizance of the grounds of suits; but it may quash judgments rendered upon proceedings in which forms have been violated, or which contain some express contravention of the law; and it shall refer the grounds of the suit to the court which has cognizance thereof. 67. The judges composing courts of first instance, and the commissioners of the Government assigned to such courts, shall be chosen from either the communal or the departmental list. The judges composing courts of appeal, and the commissioners assigned thereto, shall be chosen from the departmental list. The judges composing the Court of Cassation, and the commissioners assigned thereto, shall be chosen from the national list. 68. Judges, other than justices of the peace, shall hold office for life, unless condemned for neglect of duty, or not maintained upon the list of eligibles.

The Constitution of the Year VIII
TITLE VI OF THE RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC FUNCTIONARIES

	

299

69. The functions of the members of the Senate, the Legislative Body, and the Tribunate, and those of the Consuls and the Councilors of State entail no responsibility 7o. Personal offences entailing corporal or ignominious penalties, committed by a member of the Senate, the Tribunate, the Legislative Body, or the Council of State, shall be prosecuted before the ordinary courts, after a deliberation of the body to which the accused belongs has authorized such prosecution. 71. Ministers accused of private offences entailing corporal or ignominious penalties shall receive the same treatment as members of the Council of State. 7z. The Ministers shall be responsible: 1st, for every act of the Government signed by them and declared unconstitutional by the Senate; znd, for nonexecution of laws and regulations for public administration; 3rd, for special orders given by them, if such orders are contrary to the Constitution, laws, or regulations. 73. In the case of the preceding article, the Tribunate shall denounce the Minister by an instrument upon which the Legislative Body shall deliberate in the usual forms, after having heard or summoned the accused. The Minister placed on trial by a decree of the Legislative Body shall be tried by a High Court, without appeal and without recourse to cassation. The High Court shall be composed of judges and jurors. The judges shall be chosen by the Court of Cassation from its own membership, the jurors from the national list, all according to the forms determined by law. 74. For offences pertaining to their duties, civil and criminal judges shall be prosecuted before the courts to which the Court of Cassation refers them after having rescinded their proceedings. 75. Agents of the Government other than the Ministers may not be prosecuted for acts pertaining to their duties except by virtue of a decision of the Council of State; in such case, the prosecution shall take place before the ordinary courts. TITLE VII GENERAL PROVISIONS 76. The house of every person dwelling upon French territory is an inviolable sanctuary. During the night no one shall have the right to enter therein except in case of fire, flood, or a request from inside the house. During the day it may be entered for a special purpose determined either by law or by an order issued by a public authority. 77. In order that the warrant ordering the arrest of a person may be executed, it is necessary: 1st, that it express explicitly the grounds for the arrest and the law in execution of which it has been ordered; znd, that it be issued by an official who is formally provided by law with such power; 3rd, that it be

300

THE FRENCH CONSTITUTIONS

made known to the person arrested, and that he be provided with a copy thereof. 78. A warden or a jailer may receive or detain a person only after having transcribed upon his register the instrument ordering the arrest; such instrument must be a warrant, issued in the forms prescribed by the preceding article, or an order of arrest, a writ of indictment, or a judgment. 79. Every warden or jailer shall be required, all orders to the contrary notwithstanding, to present the imprisoned person to the civil official in charge of the prison whenever so requested by said official. 80. The production of the imprisoned person may not be refused to his kinsmen and friends bearing an order from the civil official, who shall always be required to grant same unless the warden or jailer presents an order of the judge to hold the person incommunicado. 81. All those who, not possessing the legal power to make arrest, give, sign, or effect the arrest of any person whomsoever; all those who, even in the case of an arrest authorized by law, receive or detain the arrested person in a place of detention not publicly and legally designated as such; and all wardens or jailers who contravene the provisions of the three preceding articles shall be guilty of the crime of arbitrary imprisonment. 8z. All severities, other than those authorized by law, which are employed in arrests, imprisonments, or executions shall be crimes. 83. Every person shall have the right to address individual petitions to any constituted authority, and especially to the Tribunate. 84. The public force is essentially obedient; no armed body may deliberate. 85. Military offences shall be submitted to special courts and forms of trial. 86. The French nation declares that pensions shall be granted to all soldiers wounded in the defence of the Patrie, as well as to widows and children of soldiers who die on the field of battle or as a consequence of wounds. 87. National rewards shall be conferred upon warriors who have rendered distinguished services in fighting for the Republic. 88. A National Institute shall be responsible for collecting discoveries and perfecting the arts and sciences. 89. A commission of national accounting shall regulate and verify the accounts of the receipts and expenditures of the Republic. Said commission shall be composed of seven members chosen by the Senate from the national list. 90. A constituted body may deliberate only when at least two-thirds of its members are present at the session. 91. The government of the French colonies shall be determined by special laws. 9z. In case of armed revolt or disturbances threatening the security of the State, the law may suspend the authority of the Constitution wherever and for whatever length of time it determines. Said suspension may be declared provisionally in such cases by an order of the Government when the Legislative Body is in recess, provided that said body be convoked as soon as possible by an article of said same order. 93. The French nation declares that under no circumstances will it permit the return of Frenchmen who, having abandoned their Patrie since 1 4 July,

The Constitution of the Year VIII	

301

1 7 8 9 , are not included in the exceptions provided by laws rendered against émigrés; it forbids any new exception in such connection. The property of emigres shall be acquired irrevocably for the benefit of the Republic. 94. The French nation declares that, after a legally consummated sale of national property, irrespective of origin, the lawful purchaser may not be dispossessed thereof; reserving to third party claimants, if need be, indemnification by the Public Treasury. 95. The present Constitution shall be presented subsequently for acceptance by the French people.

