CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

GABON
by MATTHEW JODZIEWICZ

Issued October 1976

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

CONSTITUTION TRANSLATED

BY

ROXANN E. HENRY

© Copyright 1976 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION

GABON CONSTITUTION OF THE GABONESE REPUBLIC May 1975

PREAMBLE The Gabonese people, conscious of their responsibility before God, moved by a determination to safeguard their independence and national unity and to order community life according to the principles of social justice, reaffirm solemnly the rights and liberties of man defined in 1789 and consacrated by the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man in 1948. By virtue of these principles and that of the self-determination of peoples, the Gabonese people adopt this Constitution. PRELIMINARY TITLE Article 1. The Gabonese people proclaim, in addition, their adherence to the following principles: 1. Each individual has a right to the free development of his personality, while respecting the rights of others and public order. 2. Liberty of conscience and the free practice of religion shall be guaranteed to all, provided that public order is maintained. 3. Privacy of correspondence and of postal, telegraphic and telephonic communications shall be inviolable. No restriction of this inviolability may be ordered except in application of the law. 4. Each individual has the duty to work and the right to obtain employment. No one may be

1

hindered in his work by reason of his sex, origins, religious beliefs or opinions. 5. The State, within its possibilities, shall guarantee to everyone, especially to children, to mothers and to older workers, health protection, material security, rest and leisure. 6. Every person, alone as well as collectively, shall have the right to property. 7. The domicile shall be inviolable. Searches may be ordered only by a Judge or other authorities designated by law. Searches may be executed only in the forms prescribed by law. Measures threatening the inviolability of the domicile or restricting it may be taken only to ward off collective dangers or to protect persons in danger of death. These measures may also be taken in application of the law to protect public order against imminent threats: among other things, to fight against risks of epidemic or to protect youth in danger. 8. The right to form associations or societies, establishments in the social interest, and religious communities shall be guaranteed to everyone, within the conditions established by law. Religious minister their reservation of al sovereignty communities shall regulate and adaffairs independently, with the respecting the principles of nationand public order.

Associations or Societies whose goals or activities are contrary to the penal laws and the harmony of ethnic groups shall be forbidden. All acts of racial, ethnic or religious discrimination, as well as all regionalist propaganda capable of threatening the internal security of the State or the territorial integrity of the Republic shall be punished by law. 9. Marriage and the family form the natural base of society. They shall be placed under the special protection of the State. 10. The care to be given to children and their

2

education shall constitute, for parents, a natural right and a duty which they shall exercise under the surveillance and with the assistance of the State and public collectivities. Parents have the right, within the framework of the scholastic obligation, to decide the education of their children. Children born outside marriage have the same rights as legitimate children regarding assistance as well as their physical, intellectual and moral development. 11. The protection of youth from exploitation and from moral, intellectual and physical abandonment shall be an obligation for the State and the public collectivities. 12. The State shall guarantee equal access for the child and the adult to education, professional training and culture. The State shall have the duty to organize public education on a free, religiously neutral basis. The right to found private schools shall be guaranteed to every person, religious community and legally constituted association which accepts submission to the pedagogical supervision of the State and to the laws in force. Conditions for participation in the State, and in public collectives in charge of finances for private educational establishments that the State recognizes to be of public utility shall be determined by law. In public educational establishments, in a manner determined by rules, religious instruction for students may be dispensed with at the request of their parents. 13. The Nation declares the solidarity and equality of all in obligations resulting from national calamities.

3

Each individual must share in public obligations in proportion to his resources. TITLE I THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC AND SOVEREIGNTY Article 2. Gabon is an indivisible, democratic and social Republic. It affirms the separation of religions from the State. The Gabonese Republic shall ensure equality before the law of all citizens without distinction of origin, race or religion. It shall respect all religious beliefs. The national emblem shall be the tricolor flag, green, yellow and blue, with three horizontal bands of equal dimension. The national hymn shall be "Concorde." The motto of the Republic shall be: "Union, Work, Justice." The seal of the Republic shall be a nursing mother. Its principle shall be: "Government of the people, by the people and for the people." The Gabonese Republic shall adopt French as the official language. Its capital shall be Libreville. It may not be transferred except by virtue of a law. Article 3. National sovereignty emanates from the people who shall exercise it directly by election and referendum and indirectly by organs vested with legislative, executive and judicial powers. No faction of the people nor any individual may assume the exercise of sovereignty. Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret. It may be direct or indirect under conditions 4

provided by the Constitution or by law. All Gabonese nationals of both sexes, 21 years of age, possessing their civil and political rights, shall be electors under conditions determined by law. This age may be lowered to 18 in cases determined by law. Foreign nationals residing in Gabon may be granted the right to vote, as well as other rights reserved to Gabonese nationals, in the conditions and cases provided for by law. The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of the operations of referenda and shall declare the results thereof. Article 4. The Gabonese Democratic Party shall assure the free expression of suffrage. It shall guarantee national unity and work to promote the country's economy and society. It shall establish the necessary liason between the government and the Gabonese people. Article 5. The Gabonese Republic shall be organized according to the principle of the distinction of legislative, executive and judicial powers. TITLE II THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC AND THE GOVERNMENT Article 6. The President of the Republic shall be the Chief of State; he shall be the embodiment of national unity. He shall ensure that the constitution is respected, and he shall ensure the regular functioning of public powers as well as the continuity of the State. He shall be responsible for national independence, territorial integrity, and respect for agreements and treaties.

5

He shall determine and conduct national policy. He shall be vested with exclusive executive power. Article 7. The President of the Republic shall be elected for seven years by universal direct suffrage. He shall be eligible for reelection. On the mandate of the President of the Republic, at a date fixed by decree in the Council of Ministers the presidential election will compulsorily take place each seventh year. Elections shall take place not later than 50 days and not earlier than 20 days before the expiration of the powers of the President in office. The mode of election, conditions of eligibility, presentation of candidates, the conduct of the voting, the counting of votes, and declaration of the results, shall be determined by law. The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of these operations. Article 8. In case of a temporary impediment duly confirmed by the Supreme Court, the functions of the President of the Republic, except those covered by articles 15, 16, 17 and 18, shall be provisionally exercised by a college composed of the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly and a member of the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party elected by the aforesaid bureau. The three-person college shall make unanimous decisions; if unanimity is not reached, decisions shall be made by majority vote in which case the Prime Minister and the representative of the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party shall have each of their votes count for two. Article 9. In the event of definitive vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic, for whatever reason, declared by the Supreme Court at the request of the Government, the National Assembly or the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party, the functions of the President of the Republic shall be taken over by the college alluded to in article 8 above until the election by 6

universal direct suffrage of the new President of the Republic, which must take place not later than two months after the declaration of vacancy. Article 10. At the time of his assuming office, the President of the Republic shall solemnly swear, before the National Assembly, the following oath: "I swear to consacrate my strength for the good of the Gabonese people, in order to increase their well-being and preserve them from all harm, to respect and defend the Constitution, to conscientiously fulfill the duties of my office and to be just to all." Article 11. The President of the Republic shall promulgate laws within 15 days following the transmittal to the Government of a law definitively voted. This time limit shall be reduced to five days in an emergency declared by the National Assembly. The President of the Republic may, during the period of promulgation, ask for a second reading of the law or of certain of its articles. This second reading is compulsory. If the text thus submitted to a second reading is adopted by a two-thirds majority of the deputies, either in its initial form or after modification, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it within the time limits set above. In the absence of promulgation of the law by the President of the Republic under the above conditions and time limits, promulgation shall be provided by the President of the National Assembly. Article 12. The President of the Republic shall ensure the execution of laws and judicial decisions. He shall have regulatory power. He shall sign ordinances and decrees. Acts of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those provided for in Articles 15, 7

16, 20, 32 and 34, shall be co-signed by the Prime Minister and the Ministers concerned. Article 13. The President of the Republic shall accredit ambassadors and envoys extraordinary to foreign powers. Foreign ambassadors and envoys extraordinary shall be accredited to him. Article 14. The President of the Republic shall have the power to grant pardons under conditions determined by law. Article 15. The President of the Republic after consultation of the Council of Ministers, the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party and the Bureau of the National Assembly, may submit to referendum any question which in his opinion requires direct consultation of the people. If the referendum has concluded by adopting the bill, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it, in conformity with the article above. Article 16. If necessary, the President of the Republic, after consultation with the Council of Ministers, the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party and the President of the National Assembly, may declare the dissolution of the National Assembly. In the event of anticipated dissolution, an election of a new National Assembly shall be initiated not earlier than 20 days and not later than 40 days after its dissolution. The convocation of electors shall be by decree in the Council of Ministers. Article 17. When circumstances require, the President of the Republic may, after consulting with the Prime Minister and the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party, by decree, declare martial law or a state of alert which confer upon him special powers under conditions established by law. Article 18. Whenever the institutions of the Republic, the independence or higher interests of

8

the Nation, its territorial integrity or the execution of its international commitments are threatened in a serious, imminent manner or whenever the regular functioning of public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic shall take measures required by these circumstances, after consultation with the Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly. He shall inform the Nation by message. Article 19. The President of the Republic shall be Chierof the armies and all security forces. He shall be Chief of the civil and military administrations. He shall have at his disposal all of the public forces. He shall appoint civil and military employees of the State. The law shall determine the higher offices of the State provided for by decree of the Council of Ministers, as well as the conditions in which the power of appointment of the President of the Republic may be delegated by him to be exercised in his name. Article 20. The President of the Republic, Chief of Government, shall be assisted by a Prime Minister who shall be responsible to him and whom he shall appoint and discharge after consultation with the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party. The Chief of State after consultation with the Prime Minister shall appoint the other members of the Government and shall determine their powers and limit their functions. The Prime Minister shall be President of the National Advisory Council. He shall assure execution of the laws and administrative coordination and shall look after the proper functioning of public services. He shall preside over interministerial councils or committees, especially those charged with investigating matters submitted to the Council of Ministers. He shall present to the National

9

Assembly bills adopted by the Government. The Prime Minister may, by express delegation for a determined agenda, preside over the Council of Ministers in place of the President of the Republic. The Prime Minister shall be assisted by a VicePrime Minister appointed by the President of the Republic. The Vice-Prime Minister shall replace the Prime Minister in case of disability. The functions of Prime Minister shall be incompatible with the exercise of all electoral commissions, all functions of professional representation, all professional activities and all public employment, except employment and activities done for the Gabonese Democratic Party. Before assuming office, the Prime Minister and the other members of the Government shall take an oath before the Chief of State accompanied by members of the Political Bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party and the president and members of the Supreme Court.
Article 21. The President of the Republic, Chief of Government, shall be equally the Minister of Defense and may also have direct responsibility for one or more ministerial secteurs. In his ministerial functions, the President of the Republic may be assisted by a Deputy Minister or a Secretary of State.

Members of the Government must be at least 25 years old and must possess their civil and political rights. They shall be chosen from among the members of the National Assembly or from outside of its ranks. Members of the Government shall carry the titles of Prime Minister, Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of State, Deputy Minister, Minister or Secretary of State. They shall be responsible to the Chief of State. They shall be legally responsible for crimes and misdemeanors committed in the exercise of their duties.

10

Compensation for members of the Government and activities incompatible with their duties shall be determined by law. Article 22. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers. He shall establish and preserve records of meetings. Aside from cases expressly provided for in other articles of this Constitution, the Council of Ministers must consider: - decisions concerning the general policy of the Republic; - agreements with foreign powers; - Government bills and private bills; - ordinances and regulatory decrees; alert. - declaration of martial law and states of

Article 23. Before being submitted to the Council of Ministers, Government bills, ordinances and regulatory decrees may be examined by the Supreme Court for an opinion. Article 24. The President of the Republic may delegate his powers to members of the Government, with the exception of those specified in Articles 15, 16 and 18. Article 25. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the National Assembly either directly or by messages that he has read. These communications may not give rise to any debate. When the National Assembly is not in session, it may meet specially for this purpose.

11

TITLE III THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 26. The Parliament of the Gabonese Republic shall consist of a single Assembly, to be called the National Assembly. Members of the National Assembly shall have the title of deputies. They shall be elected by universal direct suffrage and with the reservation in article 16, for the same duration as the President of the Republic. Elections for the National Assembly shall take place the same day as the presidential election. Voting shall take place according to the same list and regulations as the presidential election. In the situation provided for in article 9, it shall be preceded by reelection of the National Assembly. The National Assembly shall vote the law, authorize taxes and supervise the action of the Government under the conditions provided by the Constitution. Article 27. The number of deputies, the conditions of their election, rulings on ineligibilities and incompatibilities, as well as their compensation, shall be determined by law. In case of empty seats, conditions for the election of persons called to be replacements for deputies until a general reelection of the National Assembly shall also be determined by law. Article 28. The National Assembly shall rule on the validity of the election of its members. In the event of dispute, the Supreme Court, at the request of a candidate, shall rule on the eligibility of deputies and the regularity of their election. Article 29. No deputy may be prosecuted, arrested, detained or judged for his opinions or votes 12

in the exercise of his duties. For the duration of sessions, no deputy may be prosecuted or arrested in a criminal matter except with the authorization of the National Assembly. When the Assembly is not in session, no deputy may be arrested without the authorization of the Bureau of the National Assembly, except in cases of flagrante delicto, authorized prosecutions or definitive condemnations. The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the National Assembly so requests. Article 30. All imperative mandates shall be null and void. The deputies' right to vote shall be personal. The internal rules of the National Assembly may authorize, exceptionally, a delegation of vote in specified cases. No one may receive the delegation of more than one mandate. Article 31. The National Assembly shall meet on the first working day following the fifteenth day after its election. Aside from urgent questions submitted to it by the President of the Republic, its agenda shall then consist exclusively of the designation of its President and its Bureau. The President and the Bureau of the National Assembly shall be elected for the duration of the legislature. Article 32. The National Assembly shall meet each year in two ordinary sessions. The first session shall open the third Tuesday in April; its duration may not exceed 50 days. The second session shall open the first Tuesday in October and shall end not later than the third Friday in December. The opening of the session shall be postponed 13

to the following day if the established day is a holiday. Ordinary sessions shall be ended by decree of the President of the Republic after agreement of the Bureau of the National Assembly. Article 33. The National Assembly shall meet during a period of martial law and in the cases provided for in Articles 8, 9, and 18. In these cases it may not then be dissolved. Article 34. The National Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session upon convocation of its President, with a fixed agenda, at the request either of the President of the Republic or of half of the members making up the National Assembly. As soon as the agenda is covered or not later than two weeks after the opening of the session, cloture shall be declared by decree of the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic, on his own, may ask for a new session within the month following cloture of the extraordinary session. Article 35. Meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. A complete report shall be published in the Journal des Débats. The National Assembly may sit in closed session at the request of the President of the Republic or of one-third of its members. Article 36. The National Assembly shall vote its internal rules. However, these may take effect only after having been recognized by the Supreme Court to be in agreement with the Constitution. TITLE IV RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ASSEMBLY AND THE GOVERNMENT Article 37. Besides cases expressly provided for in the other articles of the Constitution, the law shall establish rules concerning: 14

- the exercise of the rights and duties of citizens; - obligations imposed on the Gabonese people, on their person and property, with regard to the public interest and especially national defense; - nationality, the status and capacity of persons; regulation of marriage; inheritance and gifts; - the organization of civil status; - the regulations of elections to the National Assembly and assemblies of the territorial units; - the organization and functioning of the territorial units; - judicial organization; the creation of new orders of jurisdiction and the statute of magistrates; - the organization of the office of public prosecutor; the profession of public prosecutor; - the determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the applicable penalties; penal procedure; regulation of penitentiaries; amnesty and the right of pardon; - martial law, states of alert and preparedness; - the regulation of associations; - the base, rate and means of collection of taxes of all kinds; regulation of the issuance of currency; - the general status of public office; - nationalizations of companies and transfers of the property of companies from the public sector to the private sector;

15

- the creation or discontinuance of autonomous establishments and public services for which the Government alone has the initiative; - general administrative and financial organization; - conditions of State participation in the activity of certain societies and of State supervision of the management of these societies; - regulation of national property, land, forests and mines; - regulation of property, property rights and civil and commercial obligations; State; - loans and financial commitments of the - economic and social planning; - conditions under which finance laws are introduced and voted and the accounts of the Nation are regulated. In addition, the law shall determine the fundamental principles of: - education, - the right to work, - Social Security, - union rights, including the conditions of exercise of the right to strike, - mutual aid societies and savings, - the general organization of defense. The law shall delegate to the President of the Republic the power to specify and complete these provisions by decree, if necessary, after a

16

Supreme Court opinion. The President of the Republic shall take by decree any measure necessary for the application of the law. The provisions of this article may be specified, revised or completed by law with the agreement of the Government and after a Supreme Court opinion. Article 38. All revenue and expenditures of the Republic must, for each financial year, be evaluated and registered in the budget. Presented by the Government immediately after the opening of the second ordinary session and not later than November 15, the budget shall be decreed by a law, to be called the financial law, before the beginning of the new financial year. This law may include only provisions of a strictly financial nature. If, at the end of the budgetary session, the National Assembly adjourns without having voted a balanced budget, the President of the Republic shall establish it automatically on a temporary basis by ordinances, taking as a base the budget of the preceding year and the tax table voted by the National Assembly. Nevertheless, these ordinances may, if necessary, provide for any reduction of expenses or increase in fiscal or other receipts. At the request of the President of the Republic, the National Assembly shall be convened in extraordinary session within two weeks for reconsideration. If the National Assembly has not voted a balanced budget at the end of this extraordinary session, the budget shall be established definitively by ordinance of the President of the Republic. New receipts which may thus be created, if they are direct taxes or category taxes, shall be collected beginning January 1. Article 39. The National Assembly shall be authorized to declare war. 17

Article 40. Extension of martial law beyond two weeks may only be authorized by the National Assembly. Article 41. Matters other than those which are in the sphere of law shall have a regulatory character. They shall be the subject of decrees by the President of the Republic. For the application of these decrees by the Prime Minister or by the delegation of the President of the Republic, these matters may be the subject of arretes made by the Ministers responsible or by any other administrative authority entitled to do so. Legislative texts in matters which are in the regulatory sphere may be modified by decree of the President of the Republic. Article 42. The President of the Republic, for the implementation of his program, may ask the National Assembly for authorization to take by ordinance, for a limited period of time, measures which are normally in the sphere of law. These ordinances shall be made after Supreme Court opinion. They shall take effect immediately after their publication. At the expiration of the time period mentioned in the first paragraph of this article, these ordinances may not be modified except by law in the matters which are in the legislative sphere. Article 43. The initiative of laws shall be vested concurrently in the President of the Republic and the Deputies. Private bills emanating from deputies shall be presented to the Bureau of the National Assembly and transmitted to the Government for its opinion. The Government shall be required to give its opinion not later than the session which follows 18

the date of presentation. In the event of an unfavorable Government opinion, if the private bill is not struck down by the provisions of Articles 45 and 46, its author may ask the National Assembly directly for an examination of his text during the session. Article 44. Discussion of Government bills shall relate to the text of the Government, at its request; that of private bills shall relate to the text of the commission. In the event of a counter-bill, the discussion shall relate first to the Government text. Article 45. Deputies shall have the right of amendment. Private bills or amendments presented by deputies are inadmissible if their adoption would entail either a reduction of revenue or the creation or increase of a public debt, unless corresponding receipts are released. Article 46. If it appears in the course of the legislative process that a private bill or amendment is not in the sphere of law or is contrary to a delegation accorded by virtue of Article 42, the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly may declare the inadmissibility. In the event of disagreement, the Supreme Court, at the request of the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly, shall rule within one week. If necessary, the time period for promulgation shall be suspended as long as the Supreme Court has not ruled. Article 47. The Government shall be informed of the working agenda of the Assembly and the commissions. The Prime Minister and members of the Government shall have access to the National Assembly; they shall participate in debates and may be assisted by commissioners of the Government.

19

The Prime Minister, ministers and secretaries of State shall have access to the commissions of the Assembly; they shall have the right to speak at their request and at the request of the commissions. Article 48. The working agenda of the National Assembly shall include, by priority and in the order set by the Government, discussion of bills presented by the Government and private bills which it has accepted. Article 49. The emergency voting of a law may be requested by the Government or by the deputies. When it is requested by the Government, it is compulsory. When it is requested by the deputies, the Assembly shall rule on this emergency. Article 50. The means of Assembly supervision of the Government are: - written questions; - oral questions without debate; - investigative commissions. One session per week, by priority, shall be reserved for deputies' questions and the Government's responses. The conditions of the organization and functioning of the investigative commissions shall be determined by law. TITLE V TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS Article 51. The President of the Republic shall conduct international negotiations. He shall sign and ratify treaties and international agreements.

20

Article 52. Peace treaties, trade agreements, treaties relating to international organization, treaties which commit the finances of the State, those which modify legislative provisions or relate to the status of persons or which include cession, exchange or annexation of territory, may be ratified only by virtue of a law. They shall take effect only after having been regularly ratified. No cession, exchange or annexation of territory shall be valid without the prior consent of the populations concerned. Sometimes this consultation will be unnecessary in the situation of cession or exchange of uninhabited or unexplored territories. Article 53. If the Supreme Court, at the request of the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly, has declared that an international obligation includes a clause contrary to the Constitution, authorization to ratify it may occur only after revision of the Constitution. Article 54. As soon as they are published, treaties or agreements regularly ratified shall prevail over laws, provided, for each agreement or treaty, that it is applied by the other party.
TITLE VI THE

JUDICIARY POWER

Article 55. Justice shall be rendered in the territory of the State in the name of the Gabonese people. Article 56. The judiciary power shall be independent. In the exercise of their duties, judges shall be subject only to the authority of law. Magistrates shall hold their appointment for life, under conditions determined by law. 21

Article 57. The President of the Republic shall guarantee the independence of the judiciary power. He shall be assisted in this purpose by the Superior Council of Magistrates over which he shall preside. The organization and duties of the Superior Council of Magistrates shall be determined by law. Article 58. No one may be arbitrarily detained. Every arrested person shall be presumed innocent until his guilt has been established following a procedure offering him the guarantee indispensable to his defense. The judiciary power, guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure that these principles are respected, under the conditions provided by law. TITLE VII THE SUPREME COURT Article 59. A Supreme Court shall be instituted which shall include four Chambers: - the Constitutional Chamber; - the Judiciary Chamber; - the Administrative Chamber; - the Accounting Chamber. The law shall determine the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and of each of its Chambers, as well as their composition and organization, their working rules and the procedures to be applied before them. Article 60. Jurisdictional decisions of the Supreme Court are subject to no recourse. They shall prevail over public powers and all jurisdictional and administrative authorities. 22

A provision declared unconstitutional may not be promulgated or applied. Article 61. The Supreme Court shall exercise consultative duties in the cases provided for by the Constitution or by law. It shall give its opinion on all juridical and administrative questions that the Government submits to it. It may also, on its own initiative, draw the attention of the Government to reforms of a legislative or regulatory nature which seem to be in agreement with the general interest. TITLE VIII THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE Article 62. A High Court of Justice shall be instituted, made up of members elected by the National Assembly from its ranks after each new general election of the Assembly. The law shall determine its composition, working rules and the procedure to be applied before it. Article 63. The High Court of Justice shall judge the President of the Republic only in the event of high treason. The President of the Republic may be arraigned by the High Court of Justice only by a two-thirds majority of the members of the National Assembly ruling in secret ballot. The National Assembly may only be convened by the political bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party and at least one-third of the deputies. The High Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the determination of penalties resulting from the penal laws in force at the time the acts were committed.

23

TITLE IX THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL Article 64. At the request of the Government, the Economic and Social Council shall give its opinion on all problems of an economic and social nature. All economic and social plans or planning bills, as well as all provisions of a fiscal nature, shall be submitted to it for an opinion. At the request of the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly, the Economic and Social Council may designate one of its members to present before the Assembly the opinion of the Council on government or private bills which have been submitted to it. Article 65. The law shall determine the composition of the Economic and Social Council, its organization and working rules. Article 66. Upon an opinion of the political bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party, foreigners may belong to the Economic and Social Council under conditions determined by law. TITLE X TERRITORIAL UNITS Article 67. Territorial units of the Republic shall be created by law. They may be modified or eliminated only after the opinion of the Councils concerned and under conditions determined by law. They shall administer themselves by elected Councils, under conditions provided by law, especially regarding their jurisdictions and their revenue. In the territorial districts the principal responsibility of the Government delegate shall be the national interest, the maintenance of pub24

lic order, administrative supervision and respect for the laws. TITLE XI ASSOCIATION AND COOPERATION AGREEMENTS Article 68. The Gabonese Republic may conclude cooperation and association agreements with other States. it agrees to create with them international organisms of common management for coordination and free cooperation. TITLE XII REVISION Article Constitution President of ters and the 69. Initiative for revision of the shall be vested concurrently in the the Republic, the Council of Minisdeputies.

In order to be considered, a revision bill must be approved by the political bureau of the Gabonese Democratic Party and must be brought by at least half of the deputies making up the National Assembly. Revision shall be definitive after approval by referendum, unless the modification in question has been approved by a two-thirds majority of the members of the National Assembly. Article 70. No procedure for revision may be engaged in or pursued if it damages the integrity of the territory. The republican and democratic form of the State may not be the object of a revision.

25

