6trinanu's Tonstitutions of
1871 ad 1819

TEXTS
With Notes and Introductions

BY

OTIS H. FISK

1924 The. Court Index Press Cincinnati, Ohio

30	

Germany's Constitutions

under IV of the treaty with Bavaria of the 23d of November, 1870 (Federal Gazette of 1871, pp. 21 ff.), are not affected by this statute.' This statute—called by the Germans an "Einfiihrungsgesetz," e., a statute which is supplementary to a larger statutory enactment, and which is a sort of "introduction" (Einfiihrung) of the latter, in the sense of starting it on its way, usually with temporary or transitional details—was enacted April 16, 1871, which is the date of the "Constitution of the German Empire." The Constitution of the North German Confederation, under which the "Constitution of the German Empire"' was adopted, or, rather, enacted, contained the following provision, in Article 3: "The' Federal statutes receive their binding force through their promulgation on behalf of the Confederation, which takes place by means of a Federal Gazette. So far as another beginning of its effectiveness is not provided in the published statute, its effectiveness begins with the fourteenth day after the lapse of the day on which the particular number of the Federal Gazette is issued at Berlin." The Einfiihrun,gsgesetz embodying and enacting the Constitution of 1871 was promulgated in the Federal Gazette at Berlin on April 20, 1871. As the Constitution and the Einfiihrungsgesets are both silent as to the beginning of the effectiveness of the Constitution, and the Constitution was a statute or statutory enactment, or was a part of a statute, the inference is that the Constitution became effective with the fourteenth day after April 20, 1871, namely May 4, 1871; but the writer recalls no judicial holding to that effect. The Germans call it the Constitution of April 16, 1871, the date on which it was adopted or enacted. CONSTITUTION OF THE GERMAN EMPIRE
OF

APRIL 16, 1871
AS AMENDED.*

PREAMBLE.
His Majesty the King of Prussia in the name of the North
* Not all informal amendments, by way of custom, practice, annexation, etc., are here mentioned. The formal amendments of the text are given, and some of the informal ones are mentioned in the Notes.

Constitution of 1871 German Confederation, His Majesty the King of Bavaria, His Majesty the King of Wiirttemberg, His Royal Highness the Grand Duke of Baden and His Royal Highness the Grand Duke of Hesse and Rhenish Hesse for the parts of the Grand Duchy of Hesse lying north of the Main, form a perpetual Federation for the protection of the Federation's territory and of the law in force within the same, and also for the fostering of the welfare of the German People. This Federation shall bear the name German Empire, and shall have the following

CONSTITUTION.
I. FEDERAL TERRITORY. Annual 1. The Federal territory consists of the States of Prussia (with Lauenburg), Bavaria, Saxony, Wurttemberg, Baden, Hesse, Mecklenburg-Schwerin, Saxe-Weimar, Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Oldenburg, Brunswick, Saxe-Meinigen, Saxe-Altenburg, Saxe-Coburg,Gutha, Anhalt, Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt, Schwarzburg-Sondershausen, Waldeck, Reuss of the Elder Line, Reuss of the Younger Line, Schaumburg-Lippe, Lippe, Lubeck, Bremen and Hamburg.
NOTE —Throughout this Constitution the word Bund is very frequently used. It was the name applied to the North German Confederation (Norddeutscher Bund). To translate it here "Confederation" would be confusing, because the name "Empire" succeeded the name "Confederation". To translate it "Union" would not comport with historical and legal usage, for we do not find a German Bund designated "Union" in history or constitutional law. For convenience in avoiding conflict, it is here translated, as an adjective, "Federal", and as a noun, "Federation". For instance, Bundesgehiet is translated "Federal territory", and Bundesstaat (the name given to the States making up the Empire) is translated "member of the Federation". In German law Bundesstaat is used in a generic sense of Federal State, as contrasted with Staaten. bund, which is used generically for a League of States. But in this Constitution Bundesstaat means one of the States making up the Empire. In adopting "Federal" and "Federation" the translator does not here mean to give any expression to his opinion as to whether the German Empire of 1871-1918 was a Bundesstaat or a ∎ staatenbund. He here merely finds them convenient in avoiding conflict with historical and legal usage, which would be better served were Bund translated "Union". The temptation to translate it "Union" here is very strong, because "union" is without color in the language of disputatious legal institutions. To the territory of the Empire under the Constitution of 1871 were added Alsace-Lorraine in 1871 (as a result of the Franco-Prussian War) and Heligoland in 1890 (by cession from Great Britain). By an Imperial statute enacted in 1873 the Constitution of the Empire was extended to Alsace-Lorraine, beginning with January 1, 1874. Heligoland became an integral part of Prussia in 1891.

32	

Germany's Constitutions

In passing, we might call attention to the following from Brunet (pp. 69-70): "Formerly when one spoke of the German Constitution the question was, 'Is the German Empire a federal state or a confederation of states?' Today when speaking of the Constitution of Weimar the question is asked, 'Is the Reich a federal state or a single state?' "Nearly all the German jurists have attempted to answer this question and are almost equally divided in the answer." Brunet then gives the arguments of the German publicists on both sides of the question, and also expresses his view of the whole controversy, which is to the effect that: "Actually * * * it is difficult to understand the interest in this question. What difference does it make whether the states are states t or provinces, so long as their powers and obligations are strictly defined by the Constitution? From their names alone we can deduce nothing practically informative about their nature. It is an academic question which has not progressed one step in three generations, which one studies but does nothing about, for there is no reality in it." (p. 71.) Bornhak says that Germany, under the Constitution of 1919, is a single state, and not a federal state. Stier-Somlo says it is a federal state, and not a single state.

II. IMPERIAL LEGISLATION.
ARTICLE 2.

Within this Federal territory the Empire exercises the right of legislation in accordance with the contents of this Constitution and with the effect that the Imperial statutes supersede State statutes. The Imperial statutes receive their binding force through their promulgation on behalf of the Empire, which takes place by means of an Imperial Gazette. So far as another beginning of its effectiveness is not provided in the published statute, its effectiveness begins with the fourteenth day after the lapse of the day on which the particular number of the Imperial Gazette is issued at Berlin.
NOTE—The word translated "Imperial Gazette" is Reichsgesetzlb(latt. The Gazette was issued by the Imperial Department of the Interior.

Amax 3. For all of Germany there exists a common denizenship with the effect that a member (subject, citizen) of each member of the Federation is to be treated in every other member of the Federation as a native and accordingly is entitled to permanent residence, pursuit of business, public offices, acquirement of land, obtaining of citizenship, and enjoyment of all other civil rights under the same conditions as a native, and is also to be treated like the latter in the matter of the, administration of justice and the protection of the law. No German may be restricted in the enjoyment of this right by the authorities of his home or by the authorities of any other member of the Federation.

Constitution, of 1871	

33

Those provisions which apply to the care •of paupers and the admission into a local communal association are not affected by the principle enumerated in the first paragraph. Likewise remain in force until further disposition the treaties which exist between the several members of the Federation concerning the taking over •of persons who are to be banished or deported, the care of sick citizens, and the burial •of deceased citizens. As to the fulfilment of military duty in relation to the home state, the necessary regulations will be made by way of Imperial legislation. Over against foreign countries all Germans uniformly have a claim to the protection of the Empire. NOTE—The word translated "denizenship" is Indigenat. Anricm 4. The following matters are subject to supervision at the hands of the Empire and to the legislation thereof: 1. The regulations concerning freedom of travel, relationships of domicile and settlement, citizenship, passports and police supervision of foreigners and stran gers, and concerning pursuit of business, including insurance, in so far as these items are not already disposed of by Article 3 'of this Constitution, in Bavaria, however, with the exception of the relationships of domicile and settlement; and also concerning colonization and emigration to non-German countries. 2. Customs and trade legislation, and taxes to be used for purposes 'of the Empire. 3. The regulation of the systems of measures, coinage and weights, together with determination of the principles controlling the issue of funded and unfunded paper money. 4. The general regulations concerning the banking system. 5. Patents. a 6. The protection of intellectual property. 	 a 7. 'Organization of a common protection of German trade abroad,1 of German navigation and its flag upon the sea, and establishment of common consular representation, which shall be maintained by the Empire. 8. Railroads, with the reservation in Bavaria of the provision, In Article 46; and the establishment of roads and waterways in th Interest of the defence of the country and 'of general traffic. 9. Rafting and navigation on waterways common to several Ht,ates, and the condition of the waterways, and also tolls and other water charges; likewise the sea-navigation marks (beacons, lights' buoys and other day-marks). 10. Posts and telegraphs; in Bavaria and 'Wurttemberg, how over, only in accordance with the provision in Article 62.

34	

Germany's Constitutions

11. Regulations concerning the mutual execution of judgments in civil cases, and satisfaction of requisitions in general; and also concerning 12. The authentication of public •documents. 13. The common legislation concerning the whole civil law, criminal law and court procedure. 14. The military system of the Empire, and the navy. 15. Medical and veterinary police regulations. 16. The regulation concerning the press and societies.
NOTE—No. 9 is given as amended in 1873. Originally it was as here given, up to the semi-colon. No. 13 is given as amended in 1873. Originally it was: "The common legislation concerning the law of contracts, criminal law, law of commerce and negotiable instruments, and court procedure." See Articles 11, 48 of this Constitution.

Annan 5,
The imperial legislative power is exercised by the Bundesrat and the Reichstag. The concurrence of the majority votes of both bodies is necessary and sufficient for an Imperial statate. In cases of bills concerning the military system, the navy, and the revenues mentioned in Article 35, if a disagreement exists in the Bundesrat, the vote of the presiding officer * shall decide the matter, if such vote is for the maintenance of the existing order of things.
NOTE—See Articles 7, 48, of this Constitution. * Normally that meant Prussia. See Article 15 of this Constitution, and the note thereunder.

III. BUNDESRAT.
ARTICLE 6.

The Bundesrat consists of the representatives of the •members of the Federation, among whom the votes are allotted as follows: Prussia (with the former votes of Hanover, Kurhesse, Holstein, Nassau and Frankfort) 	 1? Bavaria 6 Saxony 4 4 Wiirttemberg 3 Baden 3 Hesse 2 Mecklinburg-Schwerin. 1 Saxe-Weimar 1 Meeklinburg-Strelitz 1 Oldenburg 2 Brunswick

Constitution of 1871	
Saxe-Meiningen	 Saxe-Altenburg	 Saxe-Coburg-Gotha	 Anhalt	 Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt	 Schwarzburg-Sondershausen	 Waldeck	 Reuss of the Elder Line	 Reuss of the Younger Line	 Schaumburg-Lippe	 Lippe	 Lubeck	 Bremen	 Hamburg	 Total	 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 58

35

Every member of the Federation can appoint as many representatives to the Bundesrat as it has votes, but the total of the votes allowed it can be east only as a unit.
NOTE—See Article 6a of this Constitution. The members of the Bundesrat were subject to, and bound by, instructions from their respective States. They partook of the nature of diplomatic representatives or ambassadors. See Articles 7 and 10 of this Constitution.

Amax 6a. Alsace-Lorraine has three votes in the Bundesrat, as long as the provisions of Article II, §1, §2, Paragraphs 1 and 3, of the statute concerning the Constitution of Alsace-Lorraine, of May 31, 1911, are In force. The votes of Alsace-Lorraine are not counted if the vote of the presiding officer, only by the addition of these votes, would make a majority or would be the deciding vote in the sense of Article 7, Paragraph 3, Sentence 3. The same applies to a vote on amendments of the Constitution. Alsace-Lorraine is a member of the Federation in the sense Article 6, Paragraph 2, and of Articles 7 and 8.
NOTE—This Article was added in 1911, when Alsace-Lorraine was given a new Constitution. ARTICLE

a

7.

The Bundesrat passes upon: 3.. Bills to be proposed to the Reichstag, and measures passed by the latter.

36	

Germany's Constitutions

2. The general administrative provisions and regulations necessary for the execution of the Imperial statutes, so far as is not otherwise provided by Imperial statute. 3. Defects which develop in the execution of the Imperial statutes or the above-mentioned provisions or regulations. Every member of the Federation is authorized to make proposals and to bring them up for discussion, and the presiding officer is obliged to present them for consideration. Action is had, with the reservation of the provisions in Articles 5, 37 and 78, by a simple majority vote. Votes not represented or not instructed are not counted. In case of a tie vote the vote of the presiding officer is decisive. In acting upon a matter that, according to the provisions of this Constitution, is not common to the whole Empire, the votes of only those members of the Federation are counted, to which the matter is common.
NOTE—See Article 6a of this Constitution. ARTICLE 8.

The Bundesrat .shall form from its members Standing Committees: 1. On the Land Forces and the Fortresses. 2. •On Maritime Affairs. 3. On Customs and Taxes. 4. On Trade and Commerce. 5. On Railroads, Posts and Telegraphs. 6. On the Administration of Justice. 7. On the System of Accounting. In each of these Committees at least four members of the Federation shall be represented, in addition to the presiding officer, and on them each State shall have only one vote. On the Committee on the Land Forces and the Fortresses Bavaria shall have a permanent seat, and the other members of it and also the members of the Committee on Maritime Affairs shall be appointed by the Emperor; the members of the other Committees shall be selected by the Bundesrat. The appointment of these Committees is had for each session of the Bundesrat, e., every year, and the retiring members are eligible for re-appointment. In addition, in the Bundesrat a Committee on Foreign Affairs shall be formed, consisting of the representatives of the Kingdoms of Bavaria, Saxony and Wurttemberg, and of two other representatives of other members of the Federation, to be selected annually by the Bundesrat, in which Committee Bavaria shall have the chairmanship. At the disposition of the Committees shall be placed the officials necessary to their work.
NOTE—See Article 6a of this Constitution.

Constitution of 1871	
ARTICLE 9.

37

Every member of the Bundesrat has the right to appear in the Reichstag and must be heard there at any time upon request, in order to represent the views of his Government, even when these views have not been adopted by the majority of the Bundesrat. No one can be a member of the Bundesrat and of the Reichstag at the same time.
NOTE—Under statute enacted October 28, 1918, not only the Imperial Chancellor, but also his Proxies must be heard in the Reichstag at any time upon request. Thus the Proxies, although not members of the Bundesrat and therefore not within the above Article 9, became entitled to be heard in the Reichstag. That was a part of the enactments of October 28, 1918, whose object was to introduce the parliamentary system of government, with ministerial responsibility, into the Constitution of the Empire. The ink on the enactments was hardly dry when Revolution Day upset that Constitution. For the other enactments of October 28, 1918, see under Articles 11, 15, 17, 21, 53, 64, 66 of this Constitution. ARTICLE 10.

It is the duty of the Emperor to accord to the members of the Bundesrat the usual diplomatic protection. IV. PRESIDING OFFICE
ARTICLE 11.

The Presiding Office of the Federation appertains to the King of Prussia, who bears the name German, Emperor. The Emperor has to represent the Empire in the Law of Nations, in the name of the Empire to declare war and conclude peace, to enter into alliances and other treaties with foreign states, to accredit and to receive ambassadors. For a declaration of war in the name of the Empire the consent of the Bundesrat is required, except in case of an attack upon the territory of the Empire or its coasts.] * [In so far as the treaties with foreign states relate to such matters as, according to Article 4, belong in the domain of the Imperial legislation, the concurrence of the Bundesrat is required for their conclusion and the approval of the Reichstag is required for their validity.] *
NOTE-The word translated "Presiding Office" is "Erlisidlum”. • The portions in brackets were amended October 28, 1918, to read follows: "For a declaration of war in the name of the Empire the consent of the Bundesrat and the Reichstag is required. Treaties of peace, and also those treaties with foreign states which

38	

Germany's Constitutions

relate to matters of Imperial legislation, need the consent of the Bundesrat and the Reichstag." For other enactments of October 28, 1918, see under Articles 9, 15, 17, 21, 53, 64, 66 of this Constitution.
ARTICLE.

12.

The Emperor summons, opens, prorogues and closes the Bundesrat and the Reichstag.
ARTICLE 13.

The summoning of the Bundesrat and of the Reichstag shall take place annually, and the Bundesrat can be summoned, for the prepara tion of business, without the Reichstag, but not the latter without the Bundesrat.
NOTE—It became the practice for the Bundesrat to sit continuously or uninterruptedly.
ARTICLE.

14.

The summoning of the Bundesrat must take place as soon as it is demanded by a third of the number of votes. AgricLE 15. The presiding chair in the Bundesrat and the conduct of business appertain to the Imperial Chancellor, who is to be appointed by the Emperor. The Imperial Chancellor can let himself be represented, by virtue of written substitution, by any other member of the Bundesrat.*
NOTE—One of the conditions of Bavaria's joining the North German Confederation (later called "Empire") was that Bavaria should preside in the Bundesrat in case of the prevention of Prussia's so doing. * By amendment of October 28, 1918, the following was added to this Article: "The Imperial Chancellor needs for the conduct of his office the confidence of the Reichstag. The Imperial Chancellor bears the responsibility for all acts of political significance, which the Emperor undertakes to do in the exercise of the powers granted him by the Constitution. The Imperial Chancellor and his Proxies are responsible to the Bundesrat and the Reichstag for the conduct of their offices." That was part of the eleventh-hour introduction of the parliamentary system of government. See under Articles 9, 11, 17, 21, 53, 64, 66 of this Constitution, for other amendments of October 28, 1918. Meyer-Anschiltz says: "Of these constitutional amendments two groups are especially important; first, those relating to Article 15; and, second, those relating to Articles 53, 64 and 66. The first group, above all the clause that the Imperial Chancellor needs the confidence of the Reichstag for the conduct of his office, means the introduction of the parliamentary system

Constitution of 1871	

39

of government. But the second, by subjecting the entire military system—not only the military administration, but also the command of the army * * *—to ministerial responsibility, and thereby to the influence of the Reichstag, accomplishes the subordination of the military power to the civil power, and thereby removes some 'militarism', which belongs to the peculiarities of Prusso-German constitutional law and undoubtedly had stood in contradiction to the principles of the constitutional state." (Page 1030.) See, further, under Article 18 of this Constitution.
ARTICLE

16.

The necessary bills shall, in accordance with the resolutions of the Bundesrat, be introduced, in the name of the Emperor, in the Reichstag, where they shall be represented by members of the Bundesrat or by special commissioners to be appointed by the Bundesrat.
ARTICLE 17.

To the Emperor appertain the verification and promulgation of the Imperial statutes, and the supervision of the execution of the same. The decrees and ordinances of the Emperor shall be issued in the name of the Empire and need for their validity the countersignature of the Imperial Chancellor [who thereby assumes the responsibility].*
NOTE—Under an Imperial statute enacted in 1878, Proxies for the Imperial Chancellor could be appointed by the Emperor, upon nomination by the Chancellor. The Proxy could be for all the activities of the Chancellor, or for any branch thereof, and could "countersign". But the Chancellor could himself act in any matter that was in the hands of a Proxy. This statute of 1878 was amended October 28, 1918. See under Article 9 of this Constitution. The word here translated "verification" is Ausfertigung, which means, literally, to draw up in the final shape or draft for promulgation, but is interpreted to mean Beurkundung, e., verification or authentication. This duty is said to include the ascertainment of the correctness of the text of the statutes and the ascertainment whether or not the statuess were constitutionally enacted. stricken amendment of October 28, 1918, the portions in brackets were * !Sy out of this Article. At the same time a general responsibility of the imperial Chancellor was introduced. See under Article 15 of this r Constitution. Compare also Articles 9, 11, 21, 53, 64, 66 of this

Constiu
ARTICLE

18.

theEmproainsIelfca,usthmobe Etasndw,imhoecrpyf stidmal. oThfeicalsnmjybrotheFdaincloImper ,	
lation , so far as not otherwise provided by way of Imperial legisshot!. entrance into the IMPerial service, as opposed to

40	

Germany's Constitutions

the Empire those rights which are accorded them in their home State by virtue of their official position.
NOTE—The Imperial Chancellor stood at, the head of the administrative authorities of the Empire. The chiefs of the different Departments were subordinate to him. In the name of the Emperor, he superintended the execution of the Imperial statutes, conducted the administration and supervision of affairs assigned to the Empire by the Constitution, and countersigned the decrees and ordinances of the Emperor. There was no cabinet or ministry in the ordinary sense of the words. And there was no system of responsible ministerial government, subject to the confidence of the Reichstag or Bundesrat. The Imperial Chancellor was not a "Prime Minister". He was responsible to no one but the Emperor. He was a sort of alter ego of the Emperor, and was subject to appointment and dismissal by the Emperor at the latter's whim. In practice he was a go-between between the Bundesrat and the Reichstag, or the Emperor and the Bundesrat, or the Emperor and the Reichstag. The heads or chiefs of the Departments were officially called State Secretaries, but are often mentioned as Ministers. Such was the condition of affairs until just before Revolution Day, 1918. See under Article 15 of this Constitution. ARTICLE

19.

If members of the Federation do not fulfil their constitutional Federal duties, they can be held thereto by way of Execution. This Execution is to be decided upon by the Bundesrat, and is to be carried out by the Emperor.

V. REICHSTAG.
ARTICLE 20.

The Reichstag shall proceed from universal and direct elections with secret voting. Until the statutory regulation which is reserved in §t5 of the Election Statute of May 31, 1869 (Federal Gazette, 1869, page 145), there shall be elected in Bavaria 48, in Wurttemberg 17, in Baden 14, in Hesse South of the Main 6, in Alsace-Lorraine 15 deputies, and accordingly the total number of deputies shall be 397.
NOTE—This Article was given this form when the Imperial Constitution was extended to Alsace-Lorraine by the Imperial Statute of 1873. The original number of deputies was 382, to which the 15 of Alsace-Lorraine were added, making the 397, which includes, of course, the deputies from the States not mentioned by name in this Article 20. The Election Statute of May 31, 1869, became an Imperial statute of the Empire. It contained detailed provisions concerning the active and passive rights of election and the conduct of elections. As a rule, elector was every German male who had completed the twenty-fifth Year of his life. The basin of representation was one deputy to every 100,000 of the population of 1867. The adherence to the census of 1867 caused in the course of time much inequality in the representation of cities and industrial areas, where the population increased rapidly.

Constitution of 1871	

41

This condition of affairs was the ground of much complaint, and was not remedied until the enactment of an Imperial statute on August 24, 1918, which increased the membership of the Reichstag from 397 to 441, the 44 new mandates being distributed among said places that were not fairly represented. ARTICLE 21.

Officials need no leave of absence for entrance into the Reichstag. [If a member of the Reichstag accepts a salaried Imperial office, or accepts a salaried State office in a member of the Federation, or enters upon an office in the Imperial or State service with which a higher rank or a higher salary is connected, he thereby loses seat and vote in the Reichstag and can re-acquire his office therein only by a new election.]*
• The paragraph in brackets was abrogated by amendment of October 28, 1918. That was to carry out in part the introduction of the parliamentary system of government, by allowing members of the Reichstag to enter the Government or Ministry without losing their mandates. See under Articles 9, 11, 15, 17, 53, 64, 66 of this Constitution. ARTICLE 22.

The proceedings of the Reichstag shall be public. Accurate reports of the proceedings in the public sittings of the Reichstag shall remain free from any and all liability.
ARTICLE 23.

The Reichstag has the right, within the competency of the Empire, to propose statutes, and to refer to the Bundesrat or the Imperial Chancellor petitions directed to it.
ARTICLE 24.

The legislative period of the Reichstag lasts five years. For the tituselution of the Reichstag during this period a resolution of the NBundesrat ote-Th with the concurrence of the Emperor is required.
legislative period was made five years by an amend-ment of the Constitution in 1888. Until then it was three years. Under the C onstitution of 1919 it is four years. ARTICLE 25. ocIadislutnfheRcagvotrsmube as-embldWithnprofsxydather,nRicstag apaseriomdblfnwthy edisolun.

42	

Germo/ny's Constitutions
ARTICLE 26.

Without the consent of the Reichstag the proroguing thereof may not exceed a period of thirty days, nor be repeated during the same session.
ARTICLE 27.

The Reichstag examines into the legality of the election of its members and passes judgment upon the same. It regulates its procedure and its discipline by Standing Rules, and elects its President, Vice-Presidents and Secretaries.
NOTE—The word translated "Standing Rules" is Geschtliftsordnung. ARTICLE 28,

The Reichstag acts with an absolute majority vote. For the validity of its action the presence of a majority of the legal number of the members is required.
NOTE—A second paragraph of this Article was abolished in 1873. It read: "In acting upon a matter which, according to the provisions of this Constitution, is not common to the whole Empire, only the votes of those members are counted who are elected in the members of the Federation, to which the matter is common." ARTICLE 29.

The members of the Reichstag are representatives of the whole people and are not bound by commissions and instructions.
ARTICLE 30.

No member of the Reichstag may at any time, because of his vote or because of any utterances made in the exercise of his office, be prosecuted by court or disciplinary proceeding or otherwise called to account outside the assembly.
ARTICLE 31.

Without the consent of the Reichstag no member thereof can be held for examination or arrested during the session period because of a penal offence, except when he is taken in the commission of the act or in the course of the next following day. Like consent is required for imprisonment for debt. Upon demand of the Reichstag any criminal proceeding against a member thereof and any arrest for examination or civil arrest shall be suspended for the duration of the session period.

Constitution, of 1871	
ARTICLE. 32.

4.3

The members of the Reichstag may as such receive no stipend. They shall receive an indemnity according to statute.
NOTE—This Article received this wording by an enactment of 1906. Up to then it read: "The members of the Reichstag may as such receive no stipend or indemnity."

VI. CUSTOMS AND TRADE.
ARTICLE 33.

Germany constitutes a customs and trade area, surrounded by a common customs frontier. Excluded remain the several territorial parts which, because of their situation, are not adapted to inclusion within the customs frontier. All articles which are in the free commerce of a member of the Federation can be imported into any other member of the Federation and can be subjected to a charge in the latter only in so far as therein like domestic products are subject to a domestic tax. Asnom 34, The Hanseatic Cities of Bremen and Hamburg, together with a strip of their own or the surrounding territory suitable for the purpose, remain as Free Ports outside the common customs frontier, until they request their admission into the same.
NOTE—Hamburg entered the customs area in 1882, and Bremen did
the same in 1885.

ARTICLE 35.

The Empire exclusively has the right of legislation concerning the entire customs system, concerning the taxation of salt and tobacco Produced in the Federal territory, of prepared spirituous liquors and hoer, and sugar and syrup produced from beets or other domestic products, concerning the mutual protection against fraud connected with the excises levied in the several members of the Federation, and also concerning the regulations which are required in the customs-exclusions for the security of the common customs frontier. in Bavaria, Württemberg and Baden the taxation of domestic spirituous liquors and beer is reserved to the State legislation. The members of the Federation shall, however, direct their efforts to-wardpucingfmtyolesaincrgthxo of those articles too.
NOTE-See Article 5 of this Constitution.

Germany's Constitutions
ARTICLE 36.

The collection and administration of the customs-duties and excises (Article 35) are left to each member of the Federation within its territory, so far as it has heretofore exercised those rights. The Emperor shall supervise the compliance with the statutory procedure, through Imperial officials, whom he shall appoint as assistants to the customs and tax offices and the directive authorities of the several States, after hearing the Committee of the Bundesrat on Customs and Taxes. The reports by these officials of defects in the execution of the common legislation (Article 315) shall be laid before the Bundesrat for action.
ARTICLE 37.

In taking action on the administrative rules and regulations applied to the execution of the common legislation (Article 35) the vote of the presiding officer shall decide the matter when it is in favor of the continuance of the existing rule or regulation.
NOTE—See Article 5 of this Constitution, and the Note thereunder. See Article 7 of this Constitution. ARTICLE 38.

The proceeds of the customs-duties and the other revenues mentioned in Article 35 (the latter so far as they are subject to Imperial legislation) flow into the Imperial treasury. These proceeds consist of the total receipts from the customsduties and the other revenues after deduction: 1. Of the tax rebates and reductions resting upon statutes or general administrative regulations. 2. Of restitutions because of wrongful collections. 3. Of the costs of collection and of administration, namely: In case of the customs-duties: the costs which are required (a) along the borders on foreign countries and in the frontier district for the protection and the collection of the customs-duties. (b) In the ease of the salt tax: the costs incurred in paying the salaries of the officials entrusted at the salt works with the collection and control of this tax. (c) In the case of the beet-sugar tax and the tobacco tax: the allowance which is to be made, according to the resolutions of the Bundesrat from time to time, to the several State governments for the costs of the administration of these taxes. (d) In the case of the other taxes: fifteen per cent. of the total receipts.

Constitution of 1871	

45

The districts lying outside the common customs frontier shall contribute to the expenses of the Empire •by paying an aversum. Bavaria, Wurttemberg and Baden shall not share in the proceeds of the taxes on spirituous liquors and beer that flow into the Imperial treasury and in the portion of the aforesaid aversion corresponding to these proceeds.
NOTE—The aversum was an amount fixed or agreed upon as fair under all the circumstances. As to Imperial finances, see Division XII of this Constitution, especially Article 70. ARTICLE 39. The quarterly statements to be made •by the tax-collection authorities of the members of the Federation after the lapse of every quarter, and the final statement, to be made •at the closing of the year and the books, covering the receipts, from the customsduties and the excises flowing into the Imperial treasury under Article 38, that have become due during the quarter or the fiscalyear, respectively, shall be cast by the directive authorities of the members of the Federation, after previous examination, into general summaries, in , which each tax is to •be indicated separately, and these summaries shall be sent in to the Committee of the Bundesrat on the System of Accounting. This Committee shall determine, upon the basis of these summaries, provisionally every three months, the amount due the Imperial treasury from the treasury of each member of the Federation, and shall inform the Bundesrat and the members of the Federation of this determination, and also lay before the Bundesrat annually the final determination of those amounts, with its remarks. The Bundesrat shall act upon this determination. ARTICLE 40.

The provisions of the Customs-Union Treaty of July 8, 1867, re- , main in force, so far as •they are not altered by the provisions of the Constitution, and as long as they are not altered in the way designated I in Article 7 or 78. VII. RAILROADS. Railroads ARTICLE 41. which are deemed necessary in the interest of the defence of Germany or in the interest of the common traffic can, virtue of an Imperial statute, even against the objection of the members of the Federation whose territory the railroads 'traverse,

46	

Germany's Constitutions

without prejudice to the State •prerogatives, be built at the expense of the Empire, or granted to private contractors by way of concession for construction, and be endowed with the right of expropriation. Every existing railroad administration is obliged to allow a connection with newly constructed railroads at the expense of the latter. The statutory provisions which grant to existing railroad enterprises a right to oppose the construction of parallel or competing lines, are, without prejudice to existing vested rights, hereby abolished for the whole Empire. Such a right of opposition can also not be included in the concessions to be granted in the future.
ARTICLE 42.

The State governments obligate themselves to administer the German railroads in the interest of the general traffic as a unified network, and, to this end, also to cause roads that are to be newly built to be constructed and equipped according to uniform standards.
ARTICLE 43.

Accordingly, uniform operating arrangements are to be made with as much expedition as practicable, particularly uniform railroad police-regulations. The Empire has to take care that the railroad administrations keep the roads at all times in a condition of construction securing the necessary safety, and so to furnish them with equipment as the need of traffic demands.
ARTICLE 44.

The railroad administrations are obliged to furnish the passenger trains necessary far through service and for the establishment of harmonizing timetables, with suitable speed, likewise the freight trains necessary for the handling of the freight traffic, also direct dispatch in passenger and freight traffic, with allowance of the transfer of rolling stock from one road to another, upon payment of the usual rates.
ARTICLE 45.

To the Empire belongs the control of the system of tariffs. The same shall be exercised to the end: 1. That as soon as possible uniform operating regulations be introduced on all German railroads.

Constitution of 1871	

47

2. That the greatest possible uniformity and reduction of the tariffs be accomplished, especially that there be introduced for long distances in the transportation of coal, coke, wood, ores, stone salt, pig-iron, fertilizers and similar articles a reduced tariff COT responding to the needs of agriculture and industry, and in the first instance as far as practicable the one-pfennig tariff.

ARTICLE

46.

In cases of distress, especially of unusual high cost of the nec essaries of life, the railroad administrations are obliged to intro duce for transportation, •particularly of grain, flour, legumes and potatoes, from time to time a low special tariff, corresponding ti the need, to be fixed by the Emperor upon recommendation of the particular Committee of the Bundesrat, which tariff, however, ma; not be lower than the lowest for raw materials on the particular road. The foregoing and also the provisions in Articles 42 to 45 d not apply to Bavaria.

However, as opposed to Bavaria also, the Empire has the right to set up by way of legislation uniform standards for the construe tion and equipment of the railroads important for the defence o the country.
ARTICLE

47.

All railroad administrations have to comply unhesitatingly wit the demands of the authorities of the Empire in connection with the use of the railroads for the defence of Germany. Especially the military forces and war material to be transported at u form, reduced rates. VIII. POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS. ARTICLE 48. The posts and telegraphs shall be organized and administer as a unified state means of communication for the whole territory of I he German Empire. The legislation of the Empire in matters of •the posts and t ,ghprovidefanAtcl4,soexndth thingswoerula,cdingtoherlpciswh applied In the North-German postalx and telegraphic taodregmiulnvs toradminvec.

48	

Germany's Constitutions
ARTICLE 49.

The receipts of the posts and telegraphs are common for the whole Empire. The expenses are met out of the common receipts. The surpluses flow into the Imperial treasury (Division XII).
NOTE—Articles 49-52 did not become, effective for Baden until January 1, 1872. As to Imperial finances, see Division XII of this Constitution, especially Article 70.

ARTICLE 50. To the Emperor belongs the supreme conduct of the postal and telegraphic administration. The authorities• established by him have the duty, and the right to take care that uniformity in the organization of the administration and in carrying on the service and also in the qualification of the officials is established and maintained. To the Emperor appertains the issuance of the regulative determinations and general administrative decrees, and also the exclusive charge of the relations to other postal and telegraphic administrations. All officials of the postal and telegraphic administration are obliged to comply with the decrees of the Emperor. This obligation is to be incorporated in the oath of office. The appointment of the necessary superior officials connected with the administrative authorities of •the posts and the telegraphs in the different districts (e. g., the Directors, Councillors, Chief Inspectors), furthermore, the appointment of the postal and telegraphic officials acting as organs of the said authorities in handling the supervising service, etc., in the several districts (e. g., Inspectors, Controllers) proceed for the whole •territory of the Empire from the Emperor, to whom these officials render the oath of office. For State confirmation and publication, timely notice shall be given to the several State governments of the appointments in question, so far as they affect their territories. The other officials needed in the administrative authorities of the posts and telegraphs and also all officials employed for the local and technical service, including those acting in the actual operating offices, etc., shall be appointed by the respective State governments. Where an independent State postal or telegraphic administration does not exist, the provisions of the special treaties are decisive.
ARTICLE 51. In turning over the surplus of the postal administration for general Imperial purposes (Article 49) there is, in view of the hith-

Constitution, of 1871	

49

erto existing differences in the net receipts acquired by the State postal administrations of the several districts, to be followed, for the purpose of a suitable equalization, the following procedure during the transitional period hereinafter mentioned: From the postal surpluses which have accrued in the several postal districts during the five years 1861 to 1865 an average annual surplus shall be calculated, and the share which each separate postal district has had in the postal surplus resulting thereby for the whole territory of the Empire shall be fixed on a percentage basis. In accordance with the proportion fixed in this way, there shall be credited to the several States, during the eight years following their entrance into the Imperial postal administration, on account of their other contributions to Imperial purposes, the quotas resulting for them from the postal surpluses accruing in the Empire. After the lapse of the eight years that discrimination shall cease, and the postal surpluses flow into the Imperial treasury in undivided reckoning, according to the principle contained in Article 49. Of the quota of the postal surplus accruing to the Hanseatic Cities during the aforesaid eight years one-half shall be placed annually and at once at the disposition of the Emperor for the purpose of meeting therefrom first of all the cost of the establishment of normal postal institutions in the Hanseatic Cities.
ARTICLE 52.

The provisions of the foregoing Articles 48 to 51 shall not be applied to Bavaria and Wurttemberg. In place thereof the following provisions shall apply to these two members of the Federation: To the Empire exclusively appertains the legislation concerning the privileges of the posts and telegraphs, concerning the legal relations of both institutions to the public, concerning the franking privilege and concerning postal rates, exclusive, however, of the regulative and rate provisions for the domestic service within Bavaria and Wurttemberg,respectively, and also, with like restriction, concerning the fixing of rates for telegraphic correspondence. There also appertains to the Empire the regulation of the Postal and telegraphic intercourse with foreign countries, except Bavaria's and Wfirttemberg's own immediate intercourse with their neighboring states not belonging to the Empire, the regulation of which is governed by the provision of Article 49 of the Postal Treaty of November 23, 1867. In the receipts of the posts and telegraphs flowing into the Imperial treasury Bavaria and 'Wurttemberg shall have no share

50	

Germany's Constitutions
IX. NAVY AND NAVIGATION. Alrricrx 53.

The navy of the Empire is a unified one, under the supreme command of the Emperor. The organization and composition thereof appertain to the Emperor, who appoints the officers and officials of the navy, and for whom the same, together with the seaman, are to be sworn into service.* The harbors of Kiel and Jande are Imperial naval stations. The necessary expense of forming and maintaining the navy and the establishments connected therewith shall be met out of the Imperial treasury. The entire seafaring population of the Empire, including the machinery personnel and the ship mechanics, is free from service in the land forces, but is liable to service in the Imperial navy.
NOTE—The word translated "navy" is Kriegsmarine. The naval station of Jande is better known as that of Wilhelmshaven, which is on the west side of Jande Bay. There was originally a fifth paragraph to Article 53. It was abrogated in 1893. It read as follows: "The apportionment of requisitions to supply the ranks of the navy is had according to the existing seafaring population, and the quota furnished by each State in this connection is deducted from the number required for the land forces." • The following was added here, by amendment of October 28, 1918: "The appointment, transfer, advancement and dismissal of the officers and officials of the navy, take place under the countersignature of the Imperial Chancellor." As to the significance of this amendment, see under Articles 9, 11, 15, 17, 21, 64, 66 of this Constitution."

ARTICLE 54.

The merchant ships of all the members of the Federation form a unified merchant marine. The Empire has to determine the procedure for ascertaining the tonnage of sea-going vessels, to regulate the issuance of bills of tonnage, and also ship registers, and to fix the conditions upon which the license to navigate a sea-going vessel is dependent. In the seaports and upon all natural and artificial waterways of the several members of the Federation the merchant ships of all the members •of the Federation shall be admitted and treated alike. The tolls which are collected in the seaports from the sea-going vessels or their cargoes for the use of the navigation facilities may not exceed the costs required for the maintenance and usual construction of these facilities.

Constitution of 1871	

51

On all natural waterways tolls can be collected for only the use of special means which are designed for facilitating traffic. These tolls, and also the charges for navigating such artificial waterways as are state property, may not exceed the costs required for the maintenance and usual construction of the facilities and works. These provisions apply to rafting in so far as it is pursued on navigable waterways. To lay upon foreign ships or their cargoes •other or higher tolls than are to be paid •by the ships of the members of the Federation or their cargoes is a right of no individual State, but of the Empire alone.
NOTE—The word translated "merchant marine" in the first paragraph is Handelsmarine. ARTICLE 55.

The flag of the navy and merchant marine is black-white-red. X. CONSULAR AFFAIRS.
ARTICLE 56.

The entire consular system of the German Empire is under the supervision of the Emperor, who appoints the consuls after hearing the Committee of the Bundesrat on Trade and Commerce. In the districts of the German consuls new State consulates may not be established. The German consuls discharge for the members of the Federation not represented in their district the functions of a State consul. All existing State consulates shall be abolished as soon as the organization of the German consulates is so perfected that the representation of the separate interests of all the members of the Federation is recognized by the Bundesrat as secured by the German consulates. XI. IMPERIAL MILITARY Affairs. Article 57. Every German is liable to military service and cannot let be represented in the exercise of this duty.
ARTICLE 58.

him

The expenses and burdens of the entire military system of Empire are to be borne by all members of the Federation and their subjects equally, so that neither preferences nor overburdenIntel of the several States or classes are fundamentally allowable: where the equal distribution of the burdens cannot be made in
t the

52	

Germany's Constitutions

natura without detriment to the public welfare, the equalization is

to be had according to the principles of justice, by way of legislation.
ARTICLE 59.

Every German capable of bearing arms belongs to the standing army for seven years, as a rule from the completed twentieth to the beginning of the twenty-eighth year of his life, and to the Landwehr of the first call for the next five years of his life, and then to the Landwehr of the second call until the 31st day of March of the calendar year in which the thirty-ninth year of his life is completed. During the period of the compulsory service in the standing army the forces of the cavalry and mounted field-artillery must serve the first three years, all other forces the first two years, uninteruptedly with the colors. With respect to the emigration of the reservists only those provisions are to control which apply to the emigration of members of the Landwehr.
NOTE—This Article originally consisted of two paragraphs, of which the third one here given was the second. An amendment of 1905 contains the first and second paragraphs here given. The first paragraph of the original Article read as follows: "Every German capable of bearing arms belongs to the standing army for seven years, as a rule from the completed twentieth year to the beginning of the twenty-eighth year of his life—the first three years with the colors, the last four years in the reserves—and to the Landwehr for the next five years of his life. In those members of the Federation in which hitherto a longer total service than twelve years was legal, the gradual reduction of the duty takes place only in a degree that the consideration of the preparedness of the Imperial army for war permits it." According to an amendment of 1888, the first sentence of this original first paragraph became as follows: "Every German capable of bearing arms belongs to the standing army for seven years, as a rule from the completed twentieth year to the beginning of the twenty-eighth year of his life—the first three years with the colors, the last four years in the reserves—, to the Landwehr of the first call the next five years of his life, and then to the Landwehr of the second call until the 31st day of March of the calendar year in which the thirty-ninth year of his life is completed." ARTICLE 60.

The peace strength of the German army shall be, until December 31, 1871, based upon one per cent. of the population of 1867, and shall be furnished by the several members of the Federation in proportion to the population. For the subsequent time the peace strength of the army shall be determined by way of Imperial legislation.
NOTE—See Article 71 of this Constitution.

Constitution of 1871	
ARTICLE 61.

53

After publication of this Constitution the entire Prussian military legislation is to be introduced without delay throughout the whole Empre, as well the statutes themselves as the regulations, instructions and rescripts issued in execution, explanation or supplement thereof, particularly therefore the Military Criminal Code of April 3, 1845, the Military Criminal Court Decree of April 3, 1845, the Ordinance concerning the Courts of Honor of July 20, 1843, the regulations concerning recruiting, period of service, quartering, commissariat, billeting, reparation of damage to fields, mobilization, etc., in time of war and in time of peace. But the Military Decree concernng Religious Services is excluded. After the uniform completion of the military organization of the German army a comprehensive Imperial Military Statute shall be laid before the Reichstag and the Bundesrat for constitutional action. Amax 62. To meet the expense of the whole German army and the institutions thereto belonging there shall, until December 31, 1871, be placed at the disposition of the Emperor annually as many times Two Hundred and Twenty-five (225) Thalers as the number of men in the peace strength of the army according to Article 60. Compare Division XII. After December 31, 1871, these contributions are to be continued to be paid by the several States of the Federation to the Imperial Treasury. In computing them the peace strength provisionally fixed in Article 60 shall be retained until it is changed by an Imperial statute. The expenditure of this amount for the whole Imperial army and its institutions shall be determined by the Budget Statute. In fixing the Budget for the army expenditures the basis shall be the statutory organization of the Imperial army, as founded upon this Constitution. NOTE—As to "Budget", see under Article 69 of this Constitution. ARTICLE 63. The entire land forces of the Empire shall constitute a single army, which in time of war and in time of peace shall be under the command of the Emperor. The regiments, etc., shall have consecutive numbers throughout Om whole German army. For the uniforms the primary colors and the out of the royal Prussian army shall be the standard. The de-

54	

Germany's Constitutions

termination of the external insignia (cockades, etc.) is left to the head of the particular Contingent. The Emperor has the duty and the right to take care that within the German army all bodies of the troops are at hand in full complement and fit for war, and that uniformity in the organization and formation, in equipment and command, in the training of the forces, and also in the qualification of the officers is established and maintained. For this purpose the Emperor is authorized to satisfy himself of the condition of the several Contingents at any time by inspections, and to order the removal of defects thereby discovered. The Emperor determines the strength, the composition and the division of the Contingents of the Imperial Army, and also the Grganization of the liandwehr, and has the right to designate the garrisons within the Federal territory and also to provide for the war-ready array of every part of the Imperial army. For the maintenance of the indispensable unity in the administration, commissariat, arming and equipment of all bodies of troops of the German army, the respective regulations issued hereafter for the Prussian army are to be imparted, for observance in a fitting manner, to the commanders of the other Contingents, through the Committee on the Land Forces and the Fortresses mentioned in Article 8, No. 1.
NOTE—The word translated "Contingent" is Kontingent, which means the Contingent furnished by each of the several. States towards the national or imperial army. ARTICLE 64.

All German troops are obliged to obey unconditionally the commands of the Emperor. This obligation is to be incorporated in the military oath. The highest commander of a Contingent and also all officers who command troops exceeding a Contingent, and all commanders of fortresses are appointed by the Emperor.* The officers appointed by him render to him the military oath. In the case of generals and the officers discharging generalships with a Contingent the appointment is to be made dependent upon the approval of the Emperor in each instance. The Emperor is authorized, for the purpose of a transfer, with or without promotion, to select from the officers of all the Contingents of the Imperial army for the places to be filled by him in the Imperial service, whether in the Prussian army or in other Contingents.
* At this point there was inserted, by amendment of October 28, 1918, the following: "under the countersignature of the Imperial Chancellor." As to the significance of this amendment, see under Articles 9, 11, 15, 17, 21, 53, 66 of this Constitution.

Constitution of 1871	
ARTICLE 65.

55

The right to construct fortresses within the Federal territory appertains to the Emperor, who shall apply, in compliance with Division XII, for the appropriation of the means necessary therefor, so far as the ordinary Budget does not provide them.
ARTICLE 66.

Where special conventions do not otherwise provide, the Federal sovereigns or the Senates, respectively, appoint the officers of their Contingents, with the restriction of Article 64. They are the Chiefs of all bodies of troops belonging to their territories, and enjoy all the honors connected therewith. They have particularly the right of inspection at any time, and receive, in addition to the regular reports and announcements concerning changes taking place, for the purpose of the necessary State sovereign publication, timely notice of the advancements and appointments affecting the particular bodies of troops. They also have the right, for police purposes, not only to use their own troops, but also to requisition all other bodies of troops of the Imperial army, that are stationed in their territories.*
NOTE—The "Senates" referred to are the Senates of the Hanseatic Cities of Bremen, Hamburg and Liibeek, which were considered the "sovereigns" thereof, the Cities themselves being states and members of the Federation in the full sense of the expressions.

* There was added to this Article, by amendment of October 28, 1918, the following: "The appointment, transfer, advancement and dismissal of the officers and military officials of a Contingent take place under the countersignature of the Minister of War of the Contingent. The Ministers of War are responsible to the Bundesrat and the Reichstag for the administration of their Contingent."
As to the significance of this amendment, see under Articles 9, 11, 15. 07, 21, 53, 64 of this Constitution. Stier-Somlo (p. 7, note 2) says it Article did not apply to Bavaria.

67. unexpended portions of the military appropriations belong under circumstances to a separate State government, but always to Imperial treasury. Awricut 68. The Emperor can, if the public safety in the Federal territory is threatened,declarmtiwnypherof.Util Of en. Imperial statute regulating the conditions, the form

56	

Germany's Constitutions

of the proclamation and the effects of such a declaration, the provisions applying thereto shall be those of the Prussian statute of June 4, 1851 (Compiled Statutes, 1851, pages 451, ff.). CLOSING PROVISION OF DIVISION XI. The provisions contained in this Division are applicable in Bavaria according to the more detailed provisions of the Treaty of Alliance of November 23, 1870 (Federal Gazette, 1871, page 9) under III, §5, and in Wurttemberg according to the more detailed provisions of the Military Convention of November 21/25, 1870 (Federal Gazette, 1870, page 658). XII. IMPERIAL FINANCES.
ARTICLE 69.

All receipts and disbursements of the Empire must be estimated for each year and be put into the Imperial Budget. The latter shall be determined by statute before the beginning of the Budget year according to the following principles.
NOTE—"Budget" is here used in the same sense as in the translation of the Constitution of 1919. See under Article 28 of that Constitution.

ARTICLE 70. To meet all common disbursements there shall be applied in the first place the common receipts flowing from the customsduties and common taxes, from the railroads, posts and •telegraphs and also from the other administrative branches. In so far as the disbursements are not covered by these receipts, they are to be defrayed by contributions of the several members of the Federation in proportion to their population, which contributions shall be assessed by the Imperial Chancellor to the amount of the Budget. In so far as these contributions are not covered by the assignments of the funds they are to be refunded to the members of the Federation at the end of the year to the extent that the other ordinary receipts of the Empire exceed its needs. Any surpluses from preceding years shall be used, in so far as the statute fixing the Imperial Budget does not otherwise provide, to cover the common extraordinary disbursements.
NOTE—This Article is given as amended 1904. Originally it was as follows: "To meet all common disbursements there shall be applied in the first place any surpluses from preceding years and also the common receipts flowing from the customs-duties, the common taxes on articles of consumption, and from the posts and telegraphs. In so far as the same are not covered by these

Constitution

of

1871	

57

receipts, they are, as long as Imperial taxes are not introduced, to be defrayed by contributions of the several members of the Federation in proportion to their population, which contributions shall be assessed by the Imperial Chancellor to the amount of the Budget." These "contributions", proportionate payments or quotas were called Matrikularbettritge.

Annan: 71. The common appropriation shall, as a rule, be granted for one year, but can be granted for a longer period in special cases. During the transitional period prescribed in Article 60 the Budget (arranged according to headings) covering the disbursements for the army is to be laid before the Bundesrat and the Reichstag merely for their information and remembrance. Aar rimm 72. Of the use of all receipts of the Empire an accounting is to be made annually, through the Imperial Chancellor, to the Bundesrat and the Reichstag, for the purpose of a discharge from responsibility. ARTICLE 73. In cases of extraordinary need the assumption of a loan can d by way of Imperial legislation, and also the assumption of guaranty by the Empire. CLosing PROVISION OF DIVISION XII. To the expenditures for the Bavarian army Articles 69 and 71 apply only in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of XNovemIbr,23a1870ndtioehClsngPrviofD Article 72 only in so far as the assignment to Bavaria of the amount required for the Bavarian army is certified to the Bundesrat and the Reichstag. SETTLEMENT OF CONTROVERSIES, AND PENAL PROVISIONS.
ARTICLE 74.

undertaking against the existence, the integrity, the safetyorhCniufeGrmaEpi,nlysut tRofeihcsBaugn,dmrb esatorf the Reichstag, a public official of the Em-

58	

Germany's Constitutions

pire, while the same are engaged in the exercise of their office, or with reference to their calling, by word of mouth, writing, printing. drawing, pictorial or other representation shall be adjudged and punished in the several members of the Federation as under the existing or in-the-future effective statutes therein, according to which a like act committed against the individual member of the Federaton, its Constitution, its legislative houses or estates, the members of its said houses or estates, its authorities and officials would be judicially handled.
NOTE--See the next Article, 76.

ARTICLE 75.

For those undertakings against the German Empire, designated in Article 74, which, if directed against one of the several members of the Federation would be qualified as high treason, the common Superior Court of Appeals of the three free Hanseatic Cities in Linea is the competent tribunal in the first and last resort. ,The detailed provisions concerning the competency and the procedure of the Superior Court of Appeals shall be determined b y Imperial legislation. Until the enactment of an Imperial statute, the hitherto existing competency of the courts in the several members of the Federation and the provisions relating to the procedure of these courts remain applicable.
NOTE—The word translated "Superior Court of Appeals" is Oberappellationsgericht. ARTICLE 76.

Controversies between different members of the Federation, so far as they are not of a private-law nature and therefore to be decided by the competent tribunals, shall be disposed of by the Bundesrat upon application of one of the parties. Constitutional controversies in members of the Federation in whose Constitutions no authorities to decide such controversies are designated, the Bundesrat has to settle amicably, upon application of one of the parties, or, if that is not successful, to bring them to settlement by way of Imperial legislation.
NOTE—The system of courts of ordinary jurisdiction was controlled by statute. There was one Imperial court, namely, the Imperial Supreme Court (Relcbsgerieht). The other courts were State courts, but they were controlled by Imperial statutes. ARTICLE 77.

If in a member of the Federation a case of denial of justice occurs and adequate relief in statutory proceedings can not be at-

Constitution of 1871	

59

tained, it Is the duty of the Bundesrat to receive substantiated complaints concerning denial of, or delay in, the process of law, to be adjudged according to the Constitution and the existing statutes of the particular member of the Federation, and thereupon bring about judicial relief at the hands of the State government that Provoked the complaint. XIV. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
ARTICLE 78.

Amendments of the Constitution are had by way of legislation. They shall be considered as rejected if they have fourteen votes against them in the Bundesrat. Those provisions of the Imperial Constitution by which certain rights of individual members of the Federation in their relations to the whole are determined, can be amended only with the consent of the member of the Federation entitled to said rights. NOTE—The provisions of the Constitution mentioned in the second paragraph of this Article are: 1. As to Bavaria: Article 4, Nos. 1, 8 and 10; Articles 36, 38, 46, 62; Closing Provisions of Divisions XI and XII. 2. As to Wurttemberg: Article 4, No. 10; Articles 8, 36, 38, 62; Closing Provision of Division XL 3. As to Baden: Articles 36 and 38: 4. As to Saxony: Article 8. 6. As to Bremen and Hamburg: Article 34. See also Article 7 of this Constitution.

