The imperial vicar, in execution of the decision of the national assembly from December 21, 1848, promulgated as law:
I. Fundamental Rights of the German People
The German people should be guaranteed the following basic rights. They should serve the constitutions of the individual German states as norm, and no constitution or law of an individual German state can ever take away or restrict.
Article I. 
§.1. The German people consist of nationals of the States forming the German Empire.
§. 2. The German people have the right of imperial citizenship. These rights can be exercised in every German Land. The right to vote to the German Imperial Assembly is decided by the imperial electoral law.
§. 3. Every German has the right, in every place of the imperial territory to take his residence and place of residence, to acquire property of every kind and to dispose over it, run every food branch, to win the communal citizenship.
The conditions for residence and domicile are established by the imperial power by a home law, those for the trade or business through a trade order, for all of Germany.
§. 4. No German state treats their citizens and other Germans differently concerning civic, embarrassment and process rights, which would reset the latter as a foreigner.
§. 5. The punishment of civic death will not take place, and where it is already very declared, loose its effect, unless thereby acquired private rights are violated.
§. 6. The freedom to emigrate is not restricted by the state; Deduction allowances are not applicable. 
The matter of emigration is under the protection and the welfare of the Empire.
Article 2.
§. 7. Before the law no distinction of classes applies. The nobility as class is repealed. 
All class privileges are abolished. 
The Germans are equal before the law. 
All titles, in so far as they are not connected to an office, are waived and may never be reintroduced. 
No citizen may accept a medal by a foreign state.
The public offices are equally accessible for all those capable. 
The conscription is the same for all; delegation does not occur.
Article 3.
§. 8. Personal liberty is inviolable. To the arrest of a person, except in case of in flagrante should only happen with a reasoned command by court. This command must be sent at the moment of arrest or within the next twenty-four hours to the detainee. 
The police department has any free any detainee in the course of the following day or hand over to the judicial authority. 
Each accused has to be released after depositing bail guarantee the detention as determined by court, unless being held for a serious embarrassing crime.
In the case of illegally declared or prolonged imprisonment the culprit and if necessary the State has the duty of reparation and compensation. 
The military and naval affairs necessary because of the modifications of these provisions are subject to special laws.
§. 9. The death penalty, except where martial law prescribes, or the law of the sea for the case of mutinies allows it, as well as the punishment of the pillory, the branding and corporal punishment are abolished. 
§. 10. The home is inviolable.
All house searches shall only be permitted: 
1. by a reasoned order of a court, which is delivered to the parties concerned immediately or within the next twenty-four hours, 
2. in the case of the prosecution in the act, by the legally authorized official, 
3. in the cases and manners in which the law allows as an exception the certain officials the same without a warrant.
The house search must, if possible, be made with consultation of housemates. 
The inviolability of the home is not hindrance to the arrest of a judicially persecuted.
§. 11. The seizure of letters and papers shall, except in the case of an arrest or house search, be carried out only with the reasoned order of a court, which has to be sent to the parties concerned immediately or within the next twenty-four hours.
§. 12. The privacy of letters is guaranteed. 
The necessary restrictions of criminal investigations and in cases of war are determined by legislation.
Article 4.
§. 13. Every German has the right to express his views freely, by word, writing, print and pictorial representation. 
The liberty of the press shall not be restricted, suspended or revoked under any circumstances and in any way through preventive measures namely censorship, concessions, safety orders, state requirements, limitations of the printing or the book trade, postal bans or other inhibitions of freedom of movement. 
Juries convict press offenses, which are prosecuted ex officio. 
A law on press will be adopted by the Empire.
Article 5.
§. 14. Every German has full freedom of faith and conscience. 
No one is obliged to disclose his religious convictions.
§. 15. Every German is unlimited in the common domestic and public exercise of his religion. 
Crimes and offenses that are committed in the exercise of this freedom are to be punished according to the law. 
§. 16. By the religious confession the enjoyment of civil and political rights is neither determined nor restricted. The civic duties must do the same no harm.
§. 17. Religious societies arrange and administer their affairs independently, but remains subject to the general state laws. 
No religious society enjoys privileges above others by the state; there is furthermore no state church. 
New religious communities may form; recognition of their commitment by the State is not required. 
§. 18. No one should be forced to a religious act or ceremony. 
§. 19. The formula of the oath shall be in the future: “So help me God”.
§. 20. The bourgeois validity of marriage depends only on the execution of the civil act; the church wedding can take place only after the execution of the civil act. 
The diversity of religion is not a bourgeois hindrance for marriage. 
§. 21. The registration books are kept by the civil authorities.
Article 6.
§. 22. The Science and its teaching are free. 
§. 23. Teaching and education is under the supervision of the State, and, apart from religious education, relieved from the supervision of the clergy.
§. 24. Every German has the right to establish teaching and educational institutions, to conduct and to teach lessons, if he has demonstrated its capability to the relevant state authority. 
Teaching at home is not subject to any restriction. 
§. 25. For the education of the German youth it should be taken enough care by public schools. 
Parents or their representatives may not leave their children or wards without classes, which is mandatory for the lower primary schools.
§. 26. The public teachers have the rights of civil servants. 
The State employs with the legally established participation of the municipalities the teachers of the elementary schools among the number of certified teachers. 
§. 27. No fees are paid for teaching in primary schools and lower vocational schools. 
Poor people receive free lessons at all public institutions.
§. 28. Everybody has the right to choose his profession and to train for the same, how and where he wants.
Article 7.
§. 29. The Germans have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms; a special permission for this is not required. 
Public meetings in the open air may be prohibited because of imminent danger to public order and security. 
§. 30. The Germans have the right to form associations. This right shall not be limited by any preventive measure. 
§. 31. The provisions contained in §§ 29 and 30 apply for the army and the navy, to the extent that they are not contrary to the military disciplinary provisions. 
Article 8.
§. 32. Property is inviolable. 
Expropriation can only be made with the considerations of the common good, only based on a law, and against fair compensation. 
The intellectual property shall be protected by the imperial legislation. 
§. 33. Each landowner may dispose his estate inter vivos and because of death wholly or partially. The individual have the right to mediate the implementation of the principle of divisibility of land property by transition laws. 
For the dead hand restrictions on the right to acquire property and to dispose them, are allowed by legislation, for reasons of public interest. 
§. 34. Every subservience and bondage association ceases forever. 
§. 35. Without compensation are repealed: 
1. The patrimonial and the manorial police, together with the current rights from these rights powers, exemptions and fees.
2. Personal taxes and benefits from these landlord and patron associations. With these rights, the compensation and expense are eliminated, which had to be fulfilled by the previously responsible. 
§. 36. All land taxes and benefits of the land, particularly the tithe are removable: if only at the request of the incriminated or also of the person entitled, and in what manner, has to be decided by the laws of the individual states. 
No premise will be debited henceforth with a tax or benefit non detachable. 
§. 37. With the property of premises comes the permission to hunt is on own land. 
The hunting justice on foreign land, hunting services, hunting savages and other services for the purpose of hunting are canceled without compensation. 
Only removable hunting justice is the one which was acquired by pesky contract with the owner of the land; about the way and manner in which the removal takes place has to be determine by the legislation of the Land. 
The exercise of the right to hunt because of reasons of public security and public welfare, is reserved to the Land legislation. 
The hunting justice on someone else’s ground shall not be re-established as a property justice in the future. 
§. 38. The family bequests are repealed. The laws of the individual States determine the manner and conditions of cancellation. 
The provisions shall remain subject to the provincial laws on the family bequests of the ruling princely houses. 
§. 39. Fiefdom is repealed. Details concerning the ways and manner of execution have to be arranged by the laws of the individual states. 
§. 40. The punishment of confiscation will not take place.
Article 9.
§. 41. All jurisdiction is vested in the state. No patrimonial courts should exist.
§. 42. The judicial power is exercised independently by the courts. Cabinets and ministerial judiciary is not allowed. 
No one shall be deprived of his lawful judge. Special courts should never take place. 
§. 43. There shall be no privileged jurisdiction of persons or goods. 
Military jurisdiction is limited to the conviction of military crimes and misdemeanors, such as the military breach of discipline, subject to the provisions for a state of war. 
§. 44.  No judge may, except by judgment and justice, be removed from office, or be impaired in rank and salary. 
Suspension may not take place without judicial decision. 
No judge may be relocated or put into retirement against his will, unless with decision of the court in cases and ways determined by law. 
§. 45. The trial shall be in public and oral. 
Exceptions from this public principle in the interest of morality is determined by law. 
§. 46. In criminal cases, the prosecution process applies. 
Jury courts decide anyhow on severe criminal cases and in cases of all political offenses.
§. 47. The civic administration of justice should be practiced or exercised in terms of special professional experience through informed judges, freely chosen by the professional associations.
§. 48. Justice and administration should be separately and independently of each other. 
Conflicts of competences are decided between the administrative and judicial authorities in the individual states by the Law Court as determined by law.
§. 49. The administration of justice ceases; the courts decide all rights abuses.
The police is not entitled to criminal jurisdiction. 
§. 50.  Legally valid judgments of German courts are equally effective and enforceable in all German provinces. 
An imperial law will determine further details. 
II. Introduction to Law
The following basic rights of the German people shall be introduced fully in the German Empire according to the following provisions:
Article I. With this Imperial law the following provision become valid:
1. Paragraph 1 and 2,
2. Paragraph 3, although concerning residence and domicile with reservation to the planned imperial laws,
3. Paragraph 4, 5, and 6,
4. Paragraph 7 with reservation to the limitation of Article 3 and 8 of this law, 
5. Paragraph 8, but with reservation of the last paragraph concerning army and naval affairs under consideration of Article 3 of this law,
6. Paragraph 10, with reservation to the limitation of Article 3 and 7 of this law,
7. Paragraph 11 and 12,
8. Paragraph 13, but with the reservation that in cases juries are not established yet, existing courts decide on press offenses, 
9. Paragraph 14, 15, 16 and second and third part in paragraph 17 of paragraph 18,
10. Paragraph 22, 24, 25 and 28, 
11. Paragraph 29, 30 and 31,
12. Paragraph 32, second part of paragraph 33, paragraph 34, 35 with exception of the first part (Article 3.8.), second part of paragraph 36, 37 with reservation concerning the laws on the removal of hunting rights and 	about the exercise of hunting rights (Article 4),
13. Paragraph 24 and the first part of in paragraph 44.
All provision of individual Land rights, which are contrary to this, cease to apply. 
Article 2. In relation to the principle of independent religious communities stipulated in paragraphs 17 the organic institutions and laws, which are required for the existing churches to implement this principle, shall be decided on and enacted in the individual states as soon as possible.
Article 3. Amendments of the individual Land legislations, as far as they are necessary because of the following provision of the basic rights, shall be established constitutionally and
1. instead of the death penalty and punishment of the pillory, the branding and corporal punishment as prohibited with paragraph 9 and paragraph 14 shall be replaced by other punishments for each crime as established by law;
2. by filling the gaps because of the abolishment of class differences in private law according to paragraph 7;
3. by provisions for conscription based on provisions in Paragraph 7;
4. by regulation of modifications for army and naval matters of paragraph 8;
5. by the issuing of laws which regulate the third case of house searches in paragraph 10;
6. by the issuing of provisions for oath, marriage and civil registrar according to paragraph 19, 20 and 21;
7. for the establishment of schooling based on paragraph 23, 26 and 27;
8. because of changes in matters of court and administration according to the provisions of paragraph 35 first part, of paragraph 41, 43, 44 in the second and third part as well as of paragraph 45 to 49. 
Article 4. The property conditions in the individual states shall be decided as stipulated in the paragraphs 33, 36 to 39. 
Article 5. The Empire shall control the issuing and execution of the previous new law. 
Article 6. Until the issuing of Paragraph 3, 13, 23 and 50 the named imperial laws are subject to land legislation. 
Article 7. In the cases in which according to the previous established new laws made are required or are announced, the existing laws and conditions remain in force until the issuing. Concerning the domestic search, those public officials who have the power for domestic search to protect the collection of revenues and the forest property, keep this authority tentatively.
Article 8. Amendment to the constitution of individual German states, which are necessary because of the abolishment of the class privileges, shall be issued within six months by the current organs of the land legislation according to the following provisions:
1. the restrictions concerning decisions about constitutional amendments as established by the constitutions do not apply, rather it should be proceeded with forms of ordinary legislation;
2. in case states have two chambers, and cannot establish a decision with this procedure, the two chambers are summoned together and decide with simple majority. 
The current organs of the land legislation are free to decide, that the considered amendments are to be established by a newly elected land assembly, for which agreement the provision according to 1) and 2) apply accordingly.
In case the laws are not issued within the named deadline, the imperial power requests the government of the individual state, based on the imperial electoral law to summon an individual land assembly chamber to amend the land constitution immediately and other legislation in accordance with the decisions of the national assembly. 
Frankfurt, December 27, 1848
The Imperial vicar
Archduke Johann
The Imperial Ministers 
H. v. Gagern. v. Peucker. v. Beckerath. Duckwitz. R. Mohl.






