Section I
The Empire
Article I. 
§ 1 The German Empire consists of the present German territories.
The determination of the relations of the Duchy of Schleswig remains subject to change. 
§ 2 If a German State and a non-German State have the same head of state, the German State has to have its own constitution, government and administration separate from the non-German State. In the government and administration of the German Land only German citizens may be appointed.
The Constitution and legislation of the Empire has in such a German Land the same binding force as in the other German States.
§ 3 If a German State and a non-German State have the same head of state, he must reside in his German State, or in this one a regency must be set down by constitutional means, to which only Germans may be appointed.
§ 4 Apart from the already existing links of German and non-German States, neither a head of state of a non-German State may at the same time become part of the government of a German state nor may a reigning prince in Germany, without resigning from its German government, accept on another crown. 
§ 5 The individual German states retain their autonomy, to the extent the same is not limited by the Constitution of the Empire; they have all state jurisdictions and rights, if these are not specifically granted to the imperial authority.
Section II
The imperial power 
Article I. 
§ 6 The imperial power exercises the international representation of Germany and of the individual German states towards foreign countries exclusively. 
The imperial power is employing the Reich ambassador and consuls. It is responsible for the diplomatic traffic; it concludes the alliances and treaties with foreign countries, especially the trade and navigation treaties, and also delivery contracts. She decides on all international law reprimands. 
§ 7 The individual German governments have no right to receive or hold permanent envoys. Also, the same shall not have any special consuls. The consuls of foreign states get their exequatur of the imperial power. 
The dispatch of proxies to the head of the Empire remains free to the individual governments.
§ 8 The individual German governments have the authority to enter into agreements with other German governments.
Their authority to establish contracts with non-German governments is limited to objects of private law, of the neighboring traffic and the police. 
§ 9 All contracts are not purely private law, which a German government concludes with another German or non-German, the imperial power must be informed, and as far as national interest are concerned, must be submitted for confirmation.
Article II.
§ 10 The imperial power only has the right of war and peace. 
Article III. 
§ 11 The entire armed forces of Germany are available to the imperial power.
§ 12 The Empire army consists of all land power for the purpose of the war of the individual German states. The law on the military determines the strength and nature of the imperial army.
Those states, which have fewer than 500,000 inhabitants, are united by the imperial power to a major military unity, which then are under the immediate direction of the imperial power, or associated with an adjacent larger state. 
The detailed provisions of such an association are stipulated in both cases by agreement of the states concerned with the mediation and approval of the imperial power. 
§ 13 The imperial power has a legislative power and is responsible for the organization only concerning the military; it controls for their implementation in individual countries by permanent control. 
The individual States are responsible for the training of their military based on the laws of the Empire and the ordinances of the imperial power and, respectively within the limits of the agreements made according to § 12. Their armed forces are at their disposal to the extent that the same is not used for the service to the Empire.
§ 14 In the oath, the obligation to be loyal to the empire and the head of the Imperial Constitution has to be included in the first place. 
§ 15 All costs accruing by the use of troops for purposes of the Empire that exceed the peacetime set by the Empire, have to be paid for by the Empire. 
§ 16 Concerning an universal and equal law for all of Germany military organization a special imperial law is issued. 
§ 17 The governments of the individual states remain responsible for the appointment of the commander and officers of their troops, insofar as their strength requires it. 
For the larger military unities, in which the forces of several states are united, the imperial power appoints the common commander. 
For the war, the imperial power appoints the commanding generals of the independent corps, and the staff of the headquarters.
§ 18 The imperial power has the power to create Empire fortresses and measures for coastal defense and as far as it is necessary for the security of the empire and to declare existing fortresses against cheap compensation to Imperial fortresses, especially for the traditional war material.
The Empire will pay for the Empire fortresses and measures for coastal defense of the Empire. 
§ 19 The navy is the sole responsibility of the empire. No single state has the permission to keep warships for itself or spend letters of marque. 
The crew of the Navy forms a part of the German Wehrmacht. It is independent of the land forces. 
The crew, which is provided by a single state for the navy, reduces the number to be held by the same country troops. A law of the Empire determines details about this, and about the compensation of costs between the Empire and the individual states.
The appointment of the officers and officials of the navy is solely made by the Empire. 
The imperial power is responsible for the equipment, training and maintenance of the fleet and the construction, equipment and maintenance of naval ports and the sea armory. 
The requirements for the necessary expropriations and the competences of the Empire agencies, which are necessary for the construction of naval bases and naval establishments, are determined by imperial laws to be issued.
Article IV. 
§ 20 The navigation stations near the sea and in the mouths of the German rivers (harbors, buoys, lightships, the guiding business, the fairway etc.) remain in the welfare of the individual riparian states. The riparian states maintain the same from their own resources. 
An imperial law will determine how far the mouths of the rivers are each expected. 
§ 21 The imperial power has the overall supervision of these institutions and facilities. 
It is in her right, to urge the concerned states to take care thoroughly of these, and also to increase and expand with Empire resources.
§ 22 The taxes levied in the lakeside States of the ships and their cargoes for the use of shipping establishments shall not exceed the costs necessaries for the maintenance of these institutions. They are subject to approval by the imperial power.
§ 23 In regard to these charges, all German ships and their cargoes shall be regarded as equal. Higher charges for foreign shipping can only be decided by the imperial power. The additional charges of foreign shipping goes to the Imperial treasury.
Article V. 
§ 24 The imperial power has the right to legislate, and the overall supervision over the navigable run of rivers and lakes flowing through several states or bounding rivers and lakes and over the mouths of tributaries, as well as the shipping operation and timber rafting on the same. 
In what way the navigability of these rivers should be maintained or improved, is determined by Empire law. 
The other waterways are left in the care of the individual states. But it is in the imperial authority, if it considers it necessary and in the interest of general traffic, to adopt general provisions concerning the shipping operation and timber rafting on these, and also to treat individual rivers under the same condition as the above-mentioned common rivers. 
The imperial authority is empowered to urge the states to the preservation of the navigability of these waterways.
§ 25 All German rivers ought to be free of river tolls for German shipping. Also timber rafting is on the navigable rivers free of such charges. Imperial law stipulates detailed provisions.
River tolls are equally distributed if rivers flow through or bound several states. 
§ 26 Fees for the harbor, crane, scale, storage, locks and similar fees, which are charged for rivers and mouths of tributaries, shall not exceed the necessary costs for the maintenance of these premises. They are subject to approval by the imperial power. 
No favoring of any member of a German state against those of other German states may take place. 
§ 27 River tolls and river shipping tolls may be placed on foreign ships and their cargoes only by the imperial power.
Article VI. 
§ 28 The imperial power has, to the extent that it is required for the protection of the empire or the interest of the general traffic, the supervision and the power of legislation over the railways and their operation. An imperial law will determine which aspects are to be included. 
§ 29 The imperial power has the right, if is considered necessary for the protection of the Empire or in the interest of general traffic, to grant the establishment of railways or to establish railways itself, if the individual state, in whose area the system will be, rejects the establishment. The Imperial power is free to use the railway for Empire purposes at any time on payment of compensation. 
§ 30 During the establishment or grant of railways by individual states, the imperial power is empowered to assume the protection of the empire and the interest of the general traffic.
§ 31 The Empire has the power of supervision and legislation over the country roads, to the extent it is required for the protection of the empire or the interest of the general traffic. An imperial law will determine which aspects are to be included there. 
§ 32 The imperial authority has the right, to the extent it is required for the protection of the empire or the interest of the general traffic, that country roads and channels are created, and rivers are made navigable or that their navigability will be expanded.
The arrangement of the necessary building works is carried out after previous consultation with the concerned individual states by the imperial power. 
The realization and maintenance of the new facilities is done by Empire trails and will be paid by the Empire if an agreement with the individual states is not achieved.
Article VII.
§ 33 The German Empire will form a customs and trading area surrounded by communal customs border, with elimination of all internal border tolls. 
The separation of individual places and parts of the customs area is reserved to the imperial power. 
The imperial power may join countries and associated territories not belonging to the Empire with special treaties to trading area. 
§ 34 The imperial authority has the sole legislative power on customs as a whole, as well as communal taxes on production and consumption. What ought to be communal taxes on production and consumption determines the imperial legislation.
§ 35 The collection and management of custom duties, such as the communal production and consumption taxes, happens after ordinance and under supervision of the imperial power. 
A certain part of the revenue is according to the ordinary budget reserved for the expenditure of the empire, the rest is distributed among the individual states. 
A special imperial law stipulates further details. 
§ 36 What items shall be taxed with production or consumption taxes by the individual States or by the individual communities and what conditions and restrictions should work here, is determined by the imperial legislation.
§ 37 The individual German states are not entitled to collect custom duties on goods that are imported or exported via the imperial border. 
§ 38 The imperial power has the right to legislate on trade and shipping, and supervises the execution of the relevant imperial laws. 
§ 39 The imperial power has the right to decide on imperial laws on customs and the execution of these. 
§ 40 Invention patents are exclusively granted by the Empire based on an imperial law; the imperial power exclusively has the right of legislation against the reprinting of books, any unauthorized imitation of works of art, factory signs, patterns and shapes and against other impairments of intellectual property.
Article VIII. 
§ 41 The imperial power has the right to legislate and the overall supervision of the postal system, including organization, tariffs, transit, postage and the relations between the individual postal administrations. 
The same ensures the uniform application of the law by law enforcement regulations, and their implementation is monitored in each country by a permanent control. 
The imperial power has the right to organize courses within several postal areas in the interest of general traffic. 
§ 42 Postal treaties with foreign postal administrations may only be concluded by the Empire or with her permission. 
§ 43 The imperial power has the right, as far as it seems necessary to take over the German postal system for the account of the Empire in conformity with imperial law, subject to a cheaper compensation of the beneficiaries. 
§ 44 The imperial power has the right to establish telegraph lines, to use the existing one with compensation, or to acquire by way of expropriation. 
Further provisions on the subject, as well as about the use of the telegraph for private traffic, are stipulated by imperial law.
Article IX. 
§ 45 The imperial power has the exclusive right of legislation and the overall supervision of the coinage. It is her decision to establish a unified coinage system for Germany. 
She has the right to mint imperial coins. 
§ 46 The imperial power has the right to establish the same system of measuring length and weight throughout Germany, as well as the fineness of the gold and silver. 
§ 47 The imperial power has the right to regulate the banking system and the issuing of paper money by imperial legislation. She supervises the execution of the relevant imperial laws.
Article X. 
§ 48 The expenses for all reprimands and institutions, which are executed imperially have to be paid for by resources of the Empire. 
§ 49 The Empire relies on her share of the income from customs duties and the joint production and consumption taxes to meet her expenses. 
§ 50 The imperial power has the right, as far as other income is not sufficient, to establish matriculars. 
§ 51 The imperial power is authorized to establish and charge imperial taxes and or permit charge in extraordinary cases, as well as take a loan or to contract other debts.
Article XI. 
§ 52 The scope of the jurisdiction of the Empire is established by the chapter on the imperial court. 
Article XII. 
§ 53 The imperial power is responsible to beware the constitutionally guaranteed rights for all Germans. 
§ 54 The imperial government is responsible for the preservation of the imperial peace.
She has to take the necessary steps for the maintenance of internal security and order: 
1. if a German state is disturbed or threatened by another German state in his peace; 
2. if in a German state security and order is disturbed or threatened by locals or foreigners. But the imperial power should only intervene in case the concerned government asks for it unless the concerned government is notoriously unable or the universal imperial peace is threatened; 
3. if the constitution of a German state is invalidated or amended by force or unilaterally, and by invoking the Imperial Court an immediate assistance is not possible.
§ 55 The measures that can be taken by the imperial power to preserve the imperial peace are: 1. decrees, 2. sending of commissioners, 3. use of armed force. 
An imperial law will determine the principles on which the costs induced by such measures have to be paid for. 
§ 56 The imperial power is responsible for the establishment of the cases and forms in which the armed forces may act against disturbances of public order by imperial law. 
§ 57 The imperial power is responsible for setting the legal standards on grant and loss of empire and citizenship rights. 
§ 58 The imperial power is responsible to issue imperial laws concerning the domestic right and to monitor their execution.
§ 59 The power of the Empire is it, without prejudice to the fundamental rights to freedom of association and assembly, to enact imperial laws relating to matters of association.
§ 60 The imperial legislation shall determine those requirements for public documents, which are required for their recognition of their genuineness in Germany. 
§ 61 The imperial power is authorized to establish general measures for health care in the interest of the common good.
Article XIII. 
§ 62 The imperial government has the power of legislation in so far as it is necessary for the execution of its constitutionally delegated powers and the protection of ceded institutions. 
§ 63 The imperial power has the right, is case she finds it necessary shared facilities and measure in the interest of whole of Germany, to enact necessary legislation to justify the same in the manner prescribed for the change in the constitutional forms. 
§ 64 The imperial power has the obligation to establish a coherent legal system of the German people by the enactment of general law books on civil rights, trade and exchange law, criminal law and judicial procedure. 
§ 65 All laws and regulations of the imperial power obtain binding power by their proclamation because of the Empire. 
§ 66 Imperial laws take precedence over the laws of the individual states, in so far as they have not explicitly established a subsidiary validity. 
Article XIV 
§ 67 The appointment of the official of the Empire is made by the Empire. 
The service pragmatics of the Empire will be established in an imperial law. 
Section III
The head of the Empire
Article I. 
§ 68 The dignity of the head of the Empire is transferred to one of the reigning German princes. 
§ 69 This dignity is hereditary in the house of princes, to which it has been transferred. It is inherited in the male family line according to the law of primogeniture. 
§ 70 The head of the Empire bears the title Emperor of the Germans. 
§ 71 The residence of the emperor is at the seat of the imperial government. At least for the duration of the Reichstag, the Emperor is staying there. 
As soon as the emperor is not at the seat of imperial government, one of the imperial ministers must be in his immediate vicinity. 
Imperial law regulates the provisions concerning the seat of the imperial government.
§ 72 The Emperor receives an appendage, which is set by the Reichstag.
Article II. 
§ 73 The person of the emperor is inviolable. 
The Emperor exercises the power, entrusted to him, by responsible ministers appointed by him. 
§ 74 All acts of government of the Emperor require for their validity the countersignature of at least one of the Ministers, which thereby assumes responsibility. 
Article III. 
§ 75 The Emperor exercises the international representation of the German Empire and of the individual German states. It appoints the imperial envoy, and the consuls and is the head of the diplomatic traffic. 
§ 76 The Emperor declares war and makes peace. 
§ 77 The Emperor closes the alliances and treaties with foreign powers with the involvement of the Reichstag, as far as this is established by the Constitution. 
§ 78 The Emperor has to be informed of all contracts, which are not purely private law, that German governments have concluded among themselves or with foreign governments, and in case imperial interest is implicated here, submitted for confirmation.
§ 79 The emperor convenes and closes the Reichstag; he has the right to dissolve the People's House. 
§ 80 The Emperor has the right of legislative initiative. He exercises legislative power in cooperation with the Reichstag under the constitutional restrictions. He proclaims the imperial laws and issues the necessary regulations for the enforcement of these. 
§ 81 In criminal cases, which are the competence of the Imperial Court, the Emperor has the right of pardon and mitigation. The prohibition of the initiation or continuation of investigations by the Emperor may be adopted only with the consent of the Reichstag. In favor of an imperial minister condemned because of his official duties the Emperor may exercise the right of pardon and mitigation only when that department pursuing the prosecution appeals for it. He does not have such a right for the benefit of the ministers of the Land. 
§ 82 The Emperor is responsible for the preservation of the imperial peace.
§ 83 The Emperor has the power over the armed forces. 
§ 84 In general, the Emperor has the power to govern in all affairs of the Empire according to the constitution. He as the carrier of this power has the rights and powers, which are settled in the imperial constitution of imperial power and not assigned to the Reichstag. 
Section IV
The Reichstag 
Article I. 
§ 85 The Reichstag consists of two houses, the State House and the People's House. 
Article II. 
§ 86 The State House consists of the representatives of the German states. 
§ 87 The number of members is distributed according to the following relation:
Prussia … 40 members
Austria … 38 
Bavaria … 18 
Saxony … 10 
Hannover … 10 
Wurttemberg … 10 
Baden … 9 
Kurhessentherme … 6 
Grand Duchy of Hesse … 6 
Holstein (Schleswig-, see § Empire. 1) … 6 
Mecklenburg-Schwerin … 4 
Luxembourg-Limburg … 3 
Nassau … 3 
Brunswick … 2 
Oldenburg … 2 
Saxe-Weimar … 2 
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha … 1 
Saxe-Meiningen-Hildburghausen … 1 
Saxe-Altenburg … 1 
Mecklenburg-Strelitz … 1 
Anhalt-Dessau … 1 
Anhalt-Bernburg … 1 
Anhalt-Köthen … 1 
Black-Sonderhausen … 1 
Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt … 1 
Hohenzollern-Hechingen … 1 
Liechtenstein … 1 
Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen … 1 
Waldeck … 1 
Reuss elder line … 1 
Reuss Younger Line … 1 
Schaumburg-Lippe … 1 
Lippe-Detmold … 1 
Hesse-Homburg … 1 
Lauenburg … 1 
Lübeck … 1 
Frankfurt … 1 
Bremen … 1 
Hamburg … 1 
     total 192 members.
As long as the German-Austrian lands are not taking part in the federal state the following states receive a greater number of votes in the States house, namely: 
Bavaria … 20 
Saxony … 12 
Hannover … 12 
Wurttemberg … 12 
Baden … 10 
Grand Duchy of Hesse … 8 
Kurhessentherme … 7 
Nassau … 4 
Hamburg … 2
§ 88 The members of the State House are appointed half by the government and half by the representation of the people of the countries concerned. 
In those German states, which consist of several provinces or countries with separate constitution or administration, members of the State House are not appointed by general state representation, but by the representatives of individual countries or provinces (provincial estates).
The relation, according to whom the number of these individual states can send members the provincial legislation is reserved to legislation of the Land. In case there are two chambers and there is no representation by provinces, both chambers vote in joint session by an absolute majority vote.
§ 89 In those States which send only one member in the State House, the government proposes three candidates from which the parliament chooses with an absolute majority of votes. 
In the same way should be preceded in those states, which send an odd number of members. 
§ 90 If several German states are connected to form a whole, an imperial law stipulates the necessary amendment in the composition of the State House. 
§ 91 Member States House can only be but who 
1. is citizen of the state, which sends him;
2. is 30 years old;
3. is in full enjoyment of civil and political rights.
§ 92 The members of the State House are elected for six years. Half of them is renewed every three years. 
In what ways the resignation of half of them takes place every three years is determined by imperial law. The resigning members are always reelegible. 
In case after these three years before the completion of the new elections for the State House an extraordinary Reichstag is appointed, insofar the new elections have not taken place yet the former members join. 
Article III.
§ 93 The People's House consists of the representatives of the German people. 
§ 94 The members of the People's House will be getting elected for four years for the first time and soon always for three years. 
The election is done according to the rules established by the imperial election laws. 
Article IV. 
§ 95 The members of the Reichstag obtain from the imperial treasury a consistent daily allowance and compensation for their travel expenses. Imperial law establishes details.
§ 96 The members of both houses cannot be bound by instructions. 
§ 97 No one can simultaneously be a member of both houses.
Article V. 
§ 98 For a decision of every house of the Reichstag at least half of the statutory number of members and a simple majority is required. 
In case of a tie, the motion is considered as rejected. 
§ 99 Every house has the right of legislative initiative, the complaint, the address and the collection of facts, such as the prosecution of ministers. 
§ 100 A decision of the Reichstag can only become valid with the consent of both Houses. 
§ 101 A decision of the Reichstag, which has not obtained the approval of the imperial government, may not be repeated in the same term. In case the Reichstag confirms the decision in three terms immediately following the ordinary sessions the approval of the imperial government is not necessary for the decision of the third Reichstag to the law. An ordinary term, which does not take at least four weeks, is not counted in that order. 
§ 102 A Reichstag decision is required in the following cases: 
1. If it is the enactment, repeal, amendment or interpretation of imperial laws.
2. If the Reich budget is determined, in case bonds are contracted, in case the Empire takes over duties not foreseen in the budget, or matricular or taxes are raised.
3. In case river and sea shipping have to pay higher taxes. 
4. In case forts of States are declared imperial fortresses. 
5. In case trading, shipping and delivery contracts are concluded with foreign countries, as all international treaties, insofar as they concern the Empire.
6. In case states or parts of states are not part of the German customs territory, or in case individual municipalities or part of the territory are excluded from the customs line. 
7. In case German territories are ceded, or in case not-German territories are incorporated into the Empire, or to be otherwise associated with it.
§ 103 The following provisions shall apply for the establishment of the imperial budget: 
1. All initiatives of the imperial government concerning finances are presented to the People's House first. 
2. Authorizations of expenditure may be made only at the request of the imperial government and for the amount of this application. Each permit is valid only for the specific purpose for which it was intended. The use is only allowed within the limit of the grant. 
3. The duration of the financial period and budget approval is one year. 
4. The budget of the regular expenses of the Empire and of the reserve fund and the funding resources necessary for both, is determined by the first Reichstag by decision of the Reichstag. An increase of this budget also requires a Reichstag decision by a later Reichstag.
5. This regular budget is presented during each Reichstag first to the People’s House, which examines the individual approaches concerning explanations and documents submitted by the imperial government, and wholly or partially approves or rejects. 
6. After the review and approval by the People's House, the budget is submitted to the State House. Within the general amount of the ordinary budget, as decided by the first Reichstag or by subsequent resolutions, it has only the right to make memories and exhibits, about which the People's House has to finally decide.
7. All extraordinary expenses and the necessary funds, similar to the increase in the ordinary budget, require the decision of the Reichstag.
8. The list on the use of imperial funds is presented to the Reichstag, first to the People’s House, `for review and completion.
Article VI. 
§ 104 The Reichstag convene every year at the seat of the imperial government. The time of the meeting is announced by the head of the Empire during convening, unless an imperial law stipulates one.
In addition, the Reichstag can be convened at any time for a special meeting by the head of the Empire. 
§ 105 As a rule the ordinary sessions of the Reichstag in the individual states should not coincide with those of the Reichstag. Imperial law regulates the details. 
§ 106 The People's House may be dissolved by the head of the Empire. In case of dissolution the Reichstag has to convene again within three months. 
§ 107 The dissolution of the People’s House results in a simultaneous adjournment of the States House until the re-convening of the Reichstag. 
The terms of both houses are the same. 
§ 108 The end of the term of the Reichstag is determined by the head of the Empire. 
§ 109 An adjournment of the Reichstag or of either house by the head of the Empire needs, if it is pronounced after the opening of the session for longer than a fortnight, the consent of the Reichstag or of the respective House. 
Also the Reichstag itself as well as each of the two houses can adjourn for a fortnight.
Article VII.
§ 110 Each of the two Houses shall elect its president, its vice president and its secretaries. 
§ 111 The meetings of both Houses shall be public. The rules of procedure of each house determine under which conditions confidential meetings can be held.
§ 112 Each House shall examine the warranties of its members and decides on the admission of these.
§ 113 Each Member shall swear the oath upon entry: "I swear faithfully to observe the German imperial constitution and to maintain it, so help me God." 
§ 114 Each house has the right to punish its members for unworthy behavior in the House and to exclude them in extreme cases. Details shall be regulated by the rules of procedure of each House. 
Exclusion can only be granted by a majority of two thirds of the votes. 
§ 115 Neither bearer of petitions nor deputations at all are allowed in the Houses. 
§ 116 Each House has the right to adopt its own rules of procedure. The business relations between the two Houses are arranged by agreement of both Houses.
Article VIII. 
§ 117 A member of the Reichstag may not be arrested for criminal accusations neither be taken into investigation, with the sole exception of apprehension in the act, during the duration of the term without the consent of the House to which it belongs. 
§ 118 In this latter case the concerned House has to be informed immediately of the arranged measures. It decides on repealing detention or investigation until the conclusion of the term. 
§ 119 The same applies for every House in case of an arrest or investigation, which has been imposed at the time of his election upon a member or has been imposed pursuant to this until the opening to the meetings. 
§ 120 No member of the Reichstag may at any time in court or disciplinary prosecuted for his vote or held responsible because of remarks made as part of the exercise of his profession or otherwise outside the Assembly.
Article IX. 
§ 121 The imperial ministers shall have the right to participate in the negotiations of both Houses of the Reichstag and to be heard at any time by those. 
§ 122 The imperial ministers have the obligation to appear at the request of any of the Houses of the Reichstag and to inform, or to specify the reason why they cannot do so. 
§ 123 The imperial ministers cannot be members of the State House. 
§ 124 If a member of the Peoples House accepts an office or a promotion in the imperial service, it must submit to a new election; it retain its seat in the House until the new election has taken place.
Section V
The Imperial Court 
Article I. 
§ 125 The Empire exercised its jurisdiction by the imperial court. 
§ 126 The jurisdiction of the imperial court includes: 
a) Suits of a single state against the imperial power for violation of the imperial constitution by issuing of imperial laws and by measures of the imperial government, as suits of the imperial power against an individual state for the breach of the constitution. 
b) Disputes between the House of States and the People’s House and between each of them and the imperial government, concerning the interpretation of the imperial constitution, in case the contending parts decide to seek the decision of the imperial court. 
c) Political and private-law disputes of any kind between the individual German states. 
d) Disputes over succession to the throne, government capacity and reign in the individual states. 
e) Disputes between the government of an individual state and its people's representatives on the validity or interpretation of the state constitution. 
f) Suits of the nationals of any state against their government because of the annulment or unconstitutional change in the state’s constitution. 
Suits of the nationals of any individual state against the government for violation of the state constitution can only be brought to the imperial court, in case the procedure in the state constitution cannot be applied. 
g) German citizen complaints for the violation of the rights granted to them by the constitution. Detailed provisions on the scope of this right of action and the mode and procedure how this is exercised is determined by imperial legislation. 
h) Complaints about denied or inhibited justice when the provincial legal means of redress have been exhausted. 
i) Criminal jurisdiction over the charges against imperial ministers, as far as they relate to their ministerial responsibility. 
k) Criminal jurisdiction over the charges against the ministers of the individual states, as so far as they relate to their ministerial responsibility. 
l) Criminal jurisdiction in the cases of high treason and treason against the Empire. 
Whether other crimes against the empire have to be transferred to the criminal jurisdiction of the imperial court, will be determined by imperial laws.  
m) Suits against the imperial revenue. 
n) Actions against German States when the obligation to pay the claims is disputed or doubtful among several states, and also if the shared commitment is alleged against several states in a lawsuit.
§ 127 The question of whether a case is suitable for a decision of the imperial court, can only be decided by the imperial court itself.
§ 128 A special law is issued, stipulating the creation and organization of the imperial court, the procedure and the enforcement of the imperial court decisions and ordinances.
This law will also determine whether and in which cases the imperial court decides via a jury. Likewise, it remains subject: whether and how far that law is regarded as an organic constitutional law. 
§ 129 The imperial legislation retains the right to establish admiralty and maritime courts and to adopt provisions on the jurisdiction of the ambassadors and consuls of the empire.
Section VI
The fundamental rights of the German people 
§ 130 The German people are guaranteed the following fundamental rights. They should serve the constitutions of the individual German states as a norm, and no constitution or legislation of any German individual state can ever cancel or limit. 
Article I. 
§ 131 The German people consists of nationals of the states, which form the German Empire. 
§ 132 Every German has the German imperial citizenship right. These legal rights can be exercised in any German state. About the right to elect the German National Assembly, the imperial electoral law decides. 
§ 133 Every German has the right to take his residence and domicile, to acquire property of every kind and to dispose of them, to operate any food branch, to win the civil rights community, in every place of the imperial territory.
The conditions for residence and domicile are stipulated by a native law, those for commercial operations by a commercial order, for all of Germany by the imperial power.
§ 134 No German state shall make a difference between his nationals and other Germans in the civic, life and limp, and process rights, which reduces the latter to a foreigner. 
§ 135 The punishment of civic death shall not take place, and where it is already declared, cease in its effects, unless hereby-acquired private rights are violated. 
§ 136 The freedom to emigrate is not restricted by the state; deducting money should not be raised. 
Matters of emigration are under the protection and the welfare of the empire.
Article II. 
§ 137 Everybody is equal before the law no matter of class. The nobility as a class is abolished. 
All class privileges are abolished. 
The Germans are equal before the law. 
All titles, so far as they are not connected with an office, are abolished and may never be reintroduced. 
No citizen of a foreign state may accept a medal. 
Public functions are equally accessible to all those capable. 
Conscription is the same for all; substitution does not occur.
Article III. 
§ 138 Personal liberty is inviolable. 
To the arrest of a person, may, except in case of in flagrante delicto, just happened with a reasoned order by a judge. This command must be sent to the detainee at the moment of arrest or within the next twenty-four hours. 
The police authority must everyone taken into custody either release during the following day or hand over to the judicial authority. 
Each accused has to be released on bail or guarantee of detention as determined by the court, unless they are accused of another serious crime against life and limb.
In the case of illegally possessed or prolonged imprisonment the culprit and if necessary the state is obliged to reparation and compensation for the one injured. 
The modifications of these provisions necessary for the army and naval affairs are subject to special laws. 
§ 139 The death penalty, except where martial law prescribes it, or the law of the sea allows it in the case of mutinies, as well as the punishment of the pillory, the branding and corporal punishment are abolished. 
§ 140 The home is inviolable.
All house searches shall only be permitted: 
1. by a reasoned order of a court, which is delivered to the parties concerned immediately or within the next twenty-four hours, 
2. in the case of the prosecution in the act, by the legally authorized official, 
3. in the cases and manners in which the law allows as an exception the certain officials the same without a warrant.
The house search must, if possible, be made with consultation of housemates. 
The inviolability of the home is not hindrance to the arrest of a judicially persecuted. 
§ 141 The seizure of letters and papers shall, except in the case of an arrest or house search, be carried out only with the reasoned order of a court, which has to be sent to the parties concerned immediately or within the next twenty-four hours. 
§ 142 The privacy of letters is guaranteed. 
The necessary restrictions of criminal investigations and in cases of war are determined by legislation.
Article IV. 
§ 143 Every German has the right to express his views freely, by word, writing, print and pictorial representation. 
The liberty of the press shall not be restricted, suspended or revoked under any circumstances and in any way through preventive measures namely censorship, concessions, safety orders, state requirements, limitations of the printing or the book trade, postal bans or other inhibitions of freedom of movement. 
Juries convict press offenses, which are prosecuted ex officio. 
A law on press will be adopted in the Empire.
Article V. 
144 § Every German has full freedom of faith and conscience. 
No one is obliged to disclose his religious convictions. 
§ 145 Every German is unlimited in the common domestic and public exercise of his religion. 
Crimes and offenses that are committed in the exercise of this freedom are to be punished according to the law. 
§ 146 By the religious confession the enjoyment of civil and political rights is neither determined nor restricted. The civic duties must do the same no harm. 
§ 147 Religious societies arrange and administer their affairs independently, but remains subject to the general state laws. 
No religious society enjoys privileges above others by the state; there is furthermore no state church. 
New religious communities may form; recognition of their commitment by the State is not required. 
§ 148 No one should be forced to a religious act or ceremony. 
§ 149 The formula of the oath shall be in the future: "So help me God". 
§ 150 The bourgeois validity of marriage depends only on the execution of the civil act; the church wedding can take place only after the execution of the civil act. 
The diversity of religion is not a bourgeois hindrance for marriage. 
§ 151 The registration books are kept by the civil authorities.
Article VI. 
§ 152 The Science and its teaching are free. 
§ 153 Teaching and education is under the supervision of the State, and, apart from religious education, relieved from the supervision of the clergy.
§ 154 Every German has the right to establish teaching and educational institutions, to conduct and to teach lessons, if he has demonstrated its capability to the relevant state authority. 
The home is subject to any restriction. 
§ 155 For the education of the German youth it should be taken care of enough by public schools. 
Parents or their representatives may not leave their children or wards without classes, which is mandatory for the lower primary schools.
§ 156 The public teachers have the rights of civil servants. 
The State employs with the legally established participation of the municipalities the teachers of the elementary schools among the number of certified teachers. 
§ 157 No fees are paid for teaching in primary schools and lower vocational schools. 
Poor people receive free lessons at all public institutions.
§ 158 Everybody has the right to choose his profession and to train for the same, how and where he wants.
Article VII. 
§ 159 Every German has the right to contact in writing the authorities, the people's representatives and the Reichstag with requests and complaints.
This right can be exercised by both individuals and of corporations and of the several people of an association; within the army and the navy only in such a way as determined by the disciplinary provisions
§ 160 A pre-approval of the authorities is not necessary to prosecute public officials for their official acts. 
Article VIII. 
§ 161 The Germans have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms; a special permission for this is not required. 
Public meetings in the open air may be prohibited because of imminent danger to public order and security. 
§ 162 The Germans have the right to form associations. This right shall not be limited by any preventive measure. 
§ 163 The provisions contained in §§ 161 and 162 apply for the army and the navy, to the extent that they are not contrary to the military disciplinary provisions. 
Article IX. 
§ 164 Property is inviolable. 
Expropriation can only be made with the considerations of the common good, only based on a law, and against fair compensation. 
The intellectual property shall be protected by the imperial legislation. 
§ 165 Each landowner may dispose his estate inter vivos and because of death wholly or partially. The individual have the right to mediate the implementation of the principle of divisibility of land property by transition laws. 
For the dead hand restrictions on the right to acquire property and to dispose them, are allowed by legislation, for reasons of public interest. 
§ 166 Every subservience and bondage association ceases forever. 
§ 167 Without compensation are repealed: 
1. The patrimonial and the manorial police, together with the current rights from these rights powers, exemptions and fees. 
2. Personal taxes and benefits from these landlord and patron associations.
With these rights, the compensation and expense are eliminated, which had to be fulfilled by the previously responsible. 
§ 168 All land taxes and benefits of the land, particularly the tithe are removable: if only at the request of the incriminated or also of the person entitled, and in what manner, has to be decided by the laws of the individual states. 
No premise will be debited henceforth with a tax or benefit non detachable. 
§ 169 With the property of premises comes the permission to hunt is on own land. 
The hunting justice on foreign land, hunting services, hunting savages and other services for the purpose of hunting are canceled without compensation. 
Only removable hunting justice, is the one which was acquired by pesky contract with the owner of the land; about the way and manner in which the removal takes place has to be determine by the legislation of the province. 
The exercise of the right to hunt because of reasons of public security and public welfare, is reserved to the provincial legislation. 
The hunting justice on someone else’s ground shall not be re-established as a property justice in the future. 
§ 170 The family bequests are repealed. The laws of the individual States determine the manner and conditions of cancellation. 
The provisions shall remain subject to the provincial laws on the family bequests of the ruling princely houses. 
§ 171 Fiefdom is repealed. Details concerning the ways and manner of execution have to be arranged by the laws of the individual states. 
§ 172 The punishment of confiscation will not take place. 
§ 173 The taxation should be ordered in such a way that the privileges of individual classes and goods in state and municipality stop.
Article X. 
§ 174 All jurisdiction is vested in the state. No patrimonial courts should exist. 
§ 175 The judicial power is exercised independently by the courts. Cabinets and ministerial judiciary is not allowed. No one shall be deprived of his lawful judge. Special courts should never take place. 
§ 176 There shall be no privileged jurisdiction of persons or goods. 
Military jurisdiction is limited to the conviction of military crimes and misdemeanors, such as the military breach of discipline, subject to the provisions for a state of war. 
§ 177 No judge may, except by judgment and justice, be removed from office, or be impaired in rank and salary. 
Suspension may not take place without judicial decision. 
No judge may be relocated or put into retirement against his will, unless with decision of the court in cases and ways determined by law. 
§ 178 The trial shall be in public and oral. Exceptions from this public principle in the interest of morality is determined by law. 
§ 179 In criminal cases, the prosecution process applies. 
Jury courts decide anyhow on severe criminal cases and in cases of all political offenses. 
§ 180 The civic administration of justice should be practiced or exercised in terms of special professional experience through informed judges, freely chosen by the professional associations.
§ 181 Justice and administration should be separately and independently of each other. 
Conflicts of competences are decided between the administrative and judicial authorities in the individual states by the Law Court as determined by law.
§ 182 The administration of justice ceases; the courts decide all rights abuses.
The police is not entitled to criminal jurisdiction. 
§ 183 Legally valid judgments of German courts are equally effective and enforceable in all German provinces. 
An imperial law will determine further details. 
Article XI. 
§ 184 Each municipality has as fundamental rights of its constitution: 
a) the selection of their head and representatives;
b) the independent management of their community affairs with the inclusion of the local police, under supervision of the State as stipulated by law;
c) the publication of their municipal budget;
d) Public negotiations as a rule. 
§ 185 Each premise belongs to an association of municipalities. 
Restrictions because of forests and deserts are reserved to the provincial legislature.
Article XII. 
§ 186 Every German state shall have a constitution with a representation of the people. The ministers are responsible to the people's representatives. 
§ 187 The people's representatives have a decisive voice in the legislative process, in the taxation, in the order of the state budget; also where there are two chambers present, each chamber for itself has the right of legislative initiative, complaint, address, and the prosecution of the minister.
The meetings of the diet are usually public.
Article XIII. 
§ 188 The non German-speaking tribes of Germany have the guarantee to develop their folksy development, namely the equality of their languages, in their areas church life, classes, and the internal administration, and justice. 
Article XIV. 
§ 189 Every German citizen in a foreign country is under the protection of the Empire. 
Section VII
The guarantee of the Constitution 
Article I. 
§ 190 For each change of government the Reichstag comes, if it is not already, together, without appeal, in a way it was assembled the previous time. The Emperor, who accedes the government makes an oath to the constitution during a session and in front of both houses of the Reichstag. 
The oath reads: "I swear to protect the Empire and the rights of the German people, to hold the imperial constitution upright and to carry it out conscientiously, so help me God.” 
Only after this oath the Emperor is entitled to government actions. 
§ 191 The imperial officials take an oath to the imperial constitution when taking office. Details are stipulated in the service pragmatics of the Empire. 
§ 192 Concerning the responsibility of the imperial ministers an imperial law shall be issued.
§ 193 The obligation to the national constitution is connected in the individual states, with the obligation on the state constitution and preceded by it.
Article II.
 § 194 Nothing in the Constitution or in the laws of any state may be in conflict with the imperial Constitution. 
§ 195 A change in the form of government in an individual state can only take place with the consent of the imperial power. This consent must be given in the manner as stipulated for amendments to the Constitution. 
Article III. 
§ 196 Amendments in the imperial Constitution can only be made by a resolution of both Houses and with the consent of the head of the Empire. 
For such a decision in each of the two Houses the following is required: 
1. The presence of at least two thirds of the members; 
2. Two votes between which at least a period of eight days are obligatory; 
3. A majority of at least two-thirds of the members present at each of the two votes. 
The consent of the head of the Empire is not required if the same Reichstag decision has been accepted in three ordinary terms immediately following each other. An ordinary term, which will is not at least four weeks long, is not counted in that order.
Article IV. 
§ 197 In the event of war or insurrection, the provisions concerning fundamental fights on arrest, house search and the right of assembly can be abrogated temporarily by the imperial government or the government of any State for individual districts; but only under the following conditions: 
1. the decision has in any case to come from the Reichstag, the general ministry of the Empire or of an individual state;
2. The ministry of the Empire has to ask immediately for the consent of the Reichstag, the Ministry of the individual state the consent of the state assembly, when they are gathered at the time. If the same are not in session, the ordinance shall not last longer than 14 days without gathering the same and submit the established measures to their approval. 
Imperial law stipulates other provisions. 
For the proclamation of martial law of fortresses existing statutory provisions shall remain in force. 
Notarization:
Frankfurt am Main, March 28, 1849. 
Martin Eduard Simson of Königsberg in Prussia, at the time President of the Constituent Assembly of the Empire.
Carl Kirchgeßner from Wurzburg, at the time Second Deputy Chairman, Member of the constituency Weiler in Bavaria. 
Friedrich Siegm. Jucho from Frankfurt am Main, I. Secretary. 
Carl August Fetzer from Stuttgart, Secretary. 
Dr. Anton Riehl from Vienna, Member of Parliament for Zwettl, Secretary. 
Carl Biedermann of Leipzig. Member of Parliament for the XI. Saxon constituency, secretary. 
Gustav Robert v. Maltzahn Cüstrin, Member of Parliament for the constituency of Konigsberg i.d.N., Secretary. 
Max Neumayr from Munich, Member of Parliament for the X. Upper Bavarian constituency, secretary.
The following are the other names of all deputies of the Assembly.




