CONSTITUTION
OF THE

REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA (Constitution of 1821)

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA In the Name of God, Author and Legislator of the Universe, We, the Representatives of the People of Colombia in Congress assembled, complying with the wishes of our constituents to establish the fundamental rules of our Union and to establish a form of government which will insure the benefits of liberty, property, and equality in so far as it is possible to a Nation beginning its political career and still struggling for its independence, agree to and hereby enact the following CONSTITUTION TITLE I
THE COLOMBIAN NATION AND COLOMBIANS SECTION I THE COLOMBIAN NATION

Article 1: The Colombian Nation shall be forever essentially and irrevocably free and independent of the Spanish Monarchy and of all other foreign power and domination; and it is not, and shall never be, the patrimony of any family or individual. Article 2: Sovereignty resides essentially in the Nation. Magistrates and government officials, whatever may be the nature of their authority, are its agents, and they shall be responsible to it for their publicondt. Article 3: It is the duty of the government, by wise and just laws, to protect the liberty, security, property, and equality of all Colombians.
SECTION 2 COLOMBIANS

Article 4: The following are Colombians: (I) All persons born free in the territory of Colombia, and child; en of the same; (2) Those who were established in Colombia at the time of her political transformation, provided they continue faithful to the cause of independence;

(3) Those who, not being born in Colombia, obtain letters sir ' naturalization. Article 5: It shall be the duty of each Colombian to live in submission to the Constitution and laws, to respect and obey the authorities to contribute to the public expenses, and to be ready at all times to serve and defend the fatherland, even at the sacrifice of property and life that be necessary. TITLE II
THE TERRITORY AND GOVERNMENT OF COLOMBIA SECTION I TERRITORY OF COLOMBIA

Article 6: The territory of Colombia is the same as that which comprised the former Viceroyalty of New Granada and the Captaincy General of Venezuela. Article 7: People within the territory mentioned who are still under the Spanish yoke shall form a part of the Republic with equal rights and representation at whatever time they are liberated. Article 8: The territory of the Republic shall be divided into Departments, the Departments into Provinces, the Provinces into Cantons, and the Cantons into Parishes.
SECTION 2 GOVERNMENT OF COLOMBIA

Article 9: The Government of Colombia is a popular representative one. Article 10: The people shall not of themselves exercise any other attribute of sovereignty than that of preliminary elections, nor shall they entrust the exercise thereof to any single person. For purposes of administration the supreme power shall be divided into the Legislative, Executive, and judicial. Article II: The power to enact laws belongs to Congress, the power to execute them to the President of the Republic, and the power to apply them in civil and criminal cases to the tribunals and courts. TITLE III
PARISH AND ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES SECTION I PARISH ASSEMBLIES AND THE CANVASS OF THEIR ELECTIONS

Article z2: In each Parish, regardless of the size of its population,

a Parish Assembly shall meet on the last Sunday in July every four years. Article 1 3 : The Parish Assembly shall be composed of the voters in good standing in the Parish, and it shall be presided over by the Judge or Judges therein, assisted by four persons of good reputation having the qualifications of a parochial voter. Article 14: Without the necessity of awaiting any orders, the Judges shall convoke the Assembly on the day prescribed by the Constitution. Article 15: To be a parochial voter it is necessary: (1) To be a Colombian; (2) To be married or twenty-one years of age; (3) To know how to read and write; but this qualification shall not be obligatory until the year 1840; (4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of one hundred pesos. In default of this, to be engaged in some business, trade, profession, or useful industry, having a house or place of business and not being dependent upon another as a day laborer or as a servant. Article 16: Rights as a parochial voter may be lost: (I) By accepting employment from another government without the permission of Congress while holding a position of profit or confidence in the Colombian Government; (2) For having been sentenced to corporal punishment, unless restored to citizenship; (3) For having sold one's vote or for having bought the vote of Another for himself or for a third party in the primary [Parish] Assembly, the Electoral Assembly, or in any other. Article 17: Rights as a parochial voter may be suspended: (I) In case of mental derangement; (2) For being a declared bankrupt or vagabond; (3) For persons on trial, until declared innocent or sentenced to a noncorporal punishment; (4) In cases of indebtedness to the public treasury after the time for payment has expired. Article 18: The function of the Parish Assembly is to vote for the Hector or Electors to which the Canton is entitled. Article 19. Provinces entitled to only one Representative shall eIect ten Electors chosen by distribution among the Cantons in accord with their population. Article 20: Provinces entitled to two or more Representatives shall choose Electors in every Canton in the Province, and each Canton

shall elect one Elector for every four thousand persons and another for a remainder of three thousand. Every Canton, regardless of population, shall nevertheless choose one Elector. Article 21: To be an Elector, it is required: (1) To be a duly qualified parochial voter; (2) To be able to read and write; (3) To be twenty-five years of age and a resident of one of the Parishes of the Canton; (4) To possess real property of an unencumbered value of five hundred pesos, or to have an employment yielding an annual income of three hundred pesos, or to be in possession of property yielding an annual income of three hundred pesos, or to practice some profession or be the holder of a scientific degree. Article 22: Each parochial voter shall vote for the cantonal Elector or Electors by stating publicly the names of the citizens, inhabitants of the same Canton, whom he prefers, and such vote shall be promptly entered in his presence in the registers kept for that purpose. Article 23: All questions relative to qualifications and procedure in parochial voting, as well as all complaints on the subjects of collusion or bribery, shall be decided by the Judges and their assistants, and their decision shall, for the time being, be carried into effect with the right of appeal to the Council (Cabildo) of the Canton. Article 24: Elections shall be public, and no one bearing arms may attend them. Article 25: Elections shall be open for eight days, at the end of which the Assembly shall be considered dissolved; and any action not prescribed by the Constitution or law which may be taken is not only null, but an offense against the public security. Article 26: As soon as the elections are concluded, the Judge or Judges who have presided over the Assembly shall transmit to the Council (Cabildo) the sealed register of elections for the Parish. Article 27: As soon as the returns of parochial voting have been received, the Council (Cabildo) shall meet in public session under the presidency of one of the Alcaldes ordinarios, 1 or in his absence, one of the Regidores2 In the presence of the Council (Cabildo), the returns shall be opened and lists of all the votes shall be compiled and entered in the register. Article 28: Citizens who obtain the greatest number of votes
1 This official is roughly comparable to a justice of the peace or municipal judge. 2 This official was a member of the Cabildo or Council.

CONSTITUTION OF 1

8 21

45

shall be declared to be constitutionally chosen Electors. In case of a tie, it shall be decided by lot. Article 29: The Council (Cabildo) of the Canton shall send the returns to the capital of the Province, and shall promptly notify the persons elected in order that they may be present in the capital on the day appointed by the Constitution.
SECTION 2 THE PROVINCIAL ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES

Article 3o: The Electoral Assembly shall be composed of the Electors chosen in the Cantons. Article 31: On the first of October in every fourth year, the Electoral Assembly shall meet in the provincial capital and shall proceed to effect all elections assigned to it, provided two thirds of the Electors are present. The Council (Cabildo) of the capital shall preside until the Assembly has elected from among its members a president, who shall be the person receiving the greatest number of votes. Article 32: Articles 24 and 25 shall apply to Electoral Assemblies. Article 33: The term of office for Elector shall be four years. Vacancies shall be filled, when this is necessary, by those having the next highest number of votes. Article 34: The Electoral Assemblies shall vote for: (I) The President of the Republic; (2) The Vice-President of the same; (3) The Senators of the Department; (4) The Representative or Representatives of the Province. Article 35: The votes cast in these four kinds of elections shall be entered in four different registers, and the Electoral Assembly shall canvass the last-mentioned election. Article 36: To be elected Representative of a Province it is necessary to obtain a majority of the votes; that is, one vote more than one half of the votes of all the Electors attending the election. Article 37: Representatives shall be chosen one by one, in a continuous session, and those obtaining the said majority shall be declared elected. If no one obtains it, the two having the greatest number of votes shall be voted upon, and he who receives the majority of votes cast shall be the Representative. Cases of tie shall be decided by lot. Article 38: The election of the Representative or Representatives being completed, the President of the Electoral Assembly shall without delay notify those who are elected in order that they may attend the

46

THE CONSTITUTIONS OF COLOMBIA

next session; and the registers shall be sealed and sent to the House of Representatives. Article 39: Under similar formalities, and without canvass by the Assembly, the registers of the voting for President and Vice-President of the Republic and for Senators shall be remitted to the Council (Cabildo) of the capital of the Department so that when the sealed registers of all the Provincial Assemblies have been received the same may be duly forwarded to the Senate in order that the formalities prescribed in Title IV, Section 5, may be carried into effect. TITLE IV
THE LEGISLATIVE POWER SECTION I DIVISION, LIMITS AND FUNCTIONS OF THIS POWER

Article 40: The Congress of Colombia shall be divided into two Houses, which shall be the Senate and the House of Representatives. Article 41: Laws may originate in either of the two Houses; each may propose amendments, alterations, and additions; each may refuse to consent by an absolute majority to laws proposed by the other House. Article 42: Laws concerning imposts and taxes are excepted, however, and may originate only in the House of Representatives; but the usual right to add to, amend, or reject them is nevertheless reserved to the Senate. Article 43: Bills entered for debate by the ordinary rules shall be debated on three separate days with an interval of at least one day between each discussion; without this procedure they may not become law. Article 44: In cases of urgency, this formality may be dispensed with provided the House in which the bill originates has, after a discussion, declared that such urgency exists. The declaration of urgency and the reasons therefor shall be sent to the other House together with the bill. If the latter House does not hold that such urgency exists, it shall return the bill to the House of origin, where the bill shall then be debated in accordance with the normal formalities. Article 45: No bill rejected by one House may be considered anew until the congressional session of the following year, but this shall not prevent some of the articles thereof from being part of other bills which have not been rejected.

Article 46: No bill constitutionally accepted for debate, debated, and passed by both Houses shall have the force of law until it has been signed by the Executive. Should the latter not deem the law expedient, he shall return the bill to the House of origin, along with his objections thereto, whether such arise out of any defect in the formalities or because of the substance thereof, within ten days after he shall have received it. Article 47: The Executive's objections shall be entered in the Journal of the House in which the bill originated. If the members of that House are not satisfied with the objections submitted, they shall discuss the matter de novo; and should the bill be approved a second time by a two-thirds vote of the members present, it shall be sent, along with the Executive's objections, to the other House. The bill shall have the force of law, and must be signed by the Executive if the second House also approves it by a two-thirds vote of the members present. Article 48: If, after the expiration of the ten-day period referred to in Article 46, the bill has not been returned with objections, it shall have the force of law and shall be promulgated as such, unless, during such period of time, the Congress shall have recessed or adjourned, in which case the objections shall be presented to the Congress at its next session. Article 49: The Executive's sanction is also necessary in order to give effect to all other resolutions, decrees, statutes, and legislative acts of the two Houses; the following are excepted from this requirement: those concerning the opening and closing of the session, those decrees requesting reports or setting up committees concerning congressional duties, election of congressional officials, orders issued for filling vacancies which may occur in the two Houses, rules for debate and internal order, the punishment of members as well as those who may be wanting in respect due such members, together with all other acts in which the concurrence of both Houses is not necessary. Article so: Bills which have been passed by both Houses under conditions of urgency shall be sanctioned or returned by the Executive within two days without any Executive reference to the condition of urgency. Article sr: In transmitting bills and resolutions from one House to the other or to the Executive, express mention shall be made of the days on which they were debated, the date of passage, and in cases of decisions of urgency, an exposition of the reasons motivating such decision. Whenever any of these requisites is omitted, the bill or resolution shall be returned within two days to the House in which such

omission has occurred, or to the House of origin if it occurred in both. Article 52: Whenever a bill is to be sent to the Executive for his sanction, it shall be drawn up in duplicate and read before both Houses. Both originals shall be signed by the Presidents and Secretaries of the two Houses, and then it shall be carried by a committee to the Executive. Article 53: A law being sanctioned or objected to by the Executive in accordance with Article 46, shall be returned along with the presidential decree to the two Houses and to the Secretary of the department (despacho) concerned in order that a record of that fact may be made. The original bill shall be kept in the archives of the House of origin. Article 54: In promulgating legislation the following formula shall always be used: The Senate and the House of Representatives of the Republic of Colombia, in Congress assembled, etc., decree:
SECTION 2 SPECIAL POWERS OF CONGRESS

Article 55: The powers belonging exclusively to Congress are: (I) Annually to vote appropriations with regard to the budget submitted by the Executive; (2) To enact necessary measures for the preservation, administration, and alienation of the national property; (3) To establish all taxes, duties, and contributions; to watch over expenditures and receive an accounting thereof from the Executive or any other officer of the Republic; (4) To contract debts on the credit of Colombia; (5) To establish a national bank; (6) To determine and make uniform the value, weight, type, and denomination of money; (7) To fix uniform weights and measures; (8) To create the Courts of Justice and the inferior courts of the Republic; (9) To create or abolish public offices and fix, diminish, or augment the salaries therefor; (10) To enact naturalization laws; (11) To grant rewards to persons who have performed great services for Colombia; (12) To decree public honors to the memory of great men; (13) To decree the conscription and organization of the Army, determining its size in time of peace and war, and to fix the period of service;

(I4.) To provide for the construction and equipment of the Navy, and also to increase or diminish it; (15) To establish regulations for the governance of the land and sea forces; (16) To declare war on the basis of information furnished by the Executive; (17) To instruct the Executive to negotiate peace; (18) To give consent and approval to treaties of peace, alliance, amity, commerce, neutrality, and any others which have been concluded by the Executive; (19) To provide by law for public education, the advancement of science and art, institutions of public utility, and to grant for a limited time exclusive privileges for their support and encouragement; (2o) To grant general pardons for grave reasons of public convenience; (21) To select the seat of government and change it when necessary; (22) To fix the boundaries of the Departments, Provinces, and other territorial divisions of Colombia as may be necessary for the improvement of administration; (23) To allow or refuse the passage of foreign troops through the territory of Colombia; (24) To grant or refuse permission to squadrons of a foreign state to remain in the ports of Colombia for more than a month; (25) To grant, during the present War of Independence, to the Executive those extraordinary powers deemed indispensable in those places within the area of military operations, as well as in those places recently liberated from the enemy, but defining them as clearly as possible and circumscribing the time of their operation to such as shall be absolutely necessary; (26) To enact laws and other legislative measures of whatever nature may be necessary as well as to amend, add to, or repeal existing legislation. The Executive may lay before Congress any matter tor its consideration, but never in the form of a law.
SECTION 3 FUNCTIONS AND PREROGATIVES COMMON TO BOTH HOUSES AND THEIR MEMBERS

Article 56: Each House may adopt rules for the regulation of its sessions, debates, and deliberations. They may punish any member

for violation of said rules by imposing such penalties as are established, even to the point of expelling members and declaring them ineligible to hold any office of trust or honor in the Republic when such is decided by a two-thirds vote of the members present. Article 57: Neither House may open its sessions without the attendance of an absolute majority of its members; but in any case, those members present, regardless of their number, may meet and compel the 'absent members to attend in such manner and under such penalties as the Houses themselves shall establish. Article 58: The session having begun, the attendance of two thirds of the members present [in the capital] shall be enough for the continuation of the session, provided the said two thirds are never less than two thirds of an absolute majority. Article 59: The Houses shall have the exclusive right to regulate the internal conduct of the same as well as regulate anything outside the Houses that may be necessary for the free exercise of their functions. In pursuance of this right, they may punish, or cause to be punished, with such penalties as they may deem proper, anyone wanting in the respect due them, or anyone who may conspire against them as a body or against the immunities of their individual members, or who may in any other manner disobey or embarrass their orders or deliberations. Article 6o: The sessions of both Houses shall be public; however, they may be secret when deemed necessary. Article 61: The proceedings of each House shall appear in a journal along with a record of the debates and resolutions which shall be published from time to time, except such matters as may be considered secret; and whenever it shall be requested by one fifth of the members present, the votes of each member on any motion or resolution shall be recorded. Article 62: Each House shall elect from among its members a President and a Vice-President whose terms shall be one year, from one ordinary session to the next; and they shall choose a Secretary. either from among the membership or a person not a member. The Houses shall also appoint other officials deemed necessary, and fix their remuneration. Article 63: Communications between the Houses and the Executive, or between themselves, shall be made through the Presidents or through committees. Article 64: Senators and Representatives represent the Nation and not the Department or Province in which they are chosen; they may

receive neither orders nor instructions from the Electoral Assemblies, which may only present petitions to them. Article 65: The following may be neither Senators nor Representatives: the President and Vice-President of the Republic, Justices of the High Court of Justice, Secretaries of State, Intendants, Governors, and any other officers so prohibited by law; other officers may serve provided they discontinue the personal performance of their duties during the sessions. Whenever a Senator or Representative is appointed to another public office, it shall depend upon his own decision whether he accepts or refuses it. Article 66: Members of Congress shall enjoy immunity of person and property during the sessions and in going to and coming from the same except in cases of treason or other grave crimes against the public order; they are not responsible before any other authority or at any time for their speeches or opinions uttered in the Houses. Article 67: Senators and Representatives shall receive from the National Treasury compensation determined by law and calculated according to the time spent in coming to the sessions and returning home therefrom.
SECTION 4 TIME, DURATION, AND PLACE OF CONGRESSIONAL SESSIONS

Article 68: Congress shall meet each year, the ordinary session beginning January 2. Article 69: Each ordinary session of the Congress shall last ninety days. In case of necessity it may be prolonged as much as thirty days more. Article 70: Both Houses shall hold their sessions in the same Parish; while in session, neither shall be able to suspend its sessions for more than two days or move to another place without mutual consent; but having agreed on a change, should they differ as to time , and place, the Executive may effect a compromise between the two extremes.
SECTION 5 ELECTIONS AND ELECTORAL CANVASSING BY CONGRESS

Article 71: In election years Congress shall assemble in the Senate chamber; in its presence the election returns for President and VicePresident of the Republic and for Senators of the Departments shall be opened and lists made of all the votes of the Electoral Assemblies, which shall be entered in a register for each class of election. The can-

vass shall be, made publicly by four members of Congress and the secretaries. Article 72: In order to be elected President of the Republic a candidate must receive two thirds of the votes of the Electors who were present at the Provincial Assemblies. He who has obtained this majority shall therefore be declared President. Article 73: Whenever the aforesaid majority is not obtained, Congress shall proceed to choose a President from among the three having the highest number of votes. In this election, he who obtains two thirds of the votes of the members present shall be President of the Republic. Article 74: If no one obtains the necessary majority in said congressional voting, Congress shall then confine its voting to the two receiving the greatest number of votes in the preceding balloting. Article 75: The election of the President shall take place in a single sitting, which shall be a permanent one. Article 76: The election of the Vice-President of the Republic shall follow the same procedure employed in the election of the President. Article 77: The Congress shall declare to be Senators those who have obtained an absolute majority of votes of the Electors of each Department participating in the election. Article 78: If some fail to obtain the requisite majority, Congress shall nominate, from among those having the most votes, three times as many candidates, or as close thereto as possible, as there are vacancies to be filled. Having done this, Congress shall proceed to elect, one by one, the necessary number of persons from this list. If in employing this procedure no election can be made, the formalities prescribed in Article 74 shall be followed. Article 79: In cases of doubt or tie, the election shall be decided by lot. Article 8o: When the seat of any Senator or Representative becomes vacant because of death, resignation, expulsion, or other cause, such vacancies shall be filled by Congress, choosing one from among those persons appearing in the Registers of the Electoral Assemblies who have obtained the greatest number of votes; but if this number should not appear in the Registers, the respective House shall issue orders for another person to be chosen in the manner prescribed in this Constitution. The term of office of such person shall last only until the next ordinary election. Article 81: If the same person should be elected by the Department

in which he was born and by the Department in which he resides, or by the Province in which he was born and the Province in which he resides, the election by his jurisdiction of birth shall prevail. Article 82: Congress shall notify those elected President, VicePresident, and Senator in order that they may enter upon their duties on the appointed day. A rticle 83: For the first time, the present Congress shall choose the President, Vice-President, and Senators.
SECTION

6

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Article 84: The House of Representatives shall be composed of the Representatives chosen in all the Provinces of the Republic in accordance with this Constitution. Article 85: Each Province shall choose a Representative for each 30,000 persons; if after said calculation is made there remains a residue in excess of 15,000 persons, another Representative shall be chosen; every Province regardless of population shall choose at least one Representative. The present Congress shall fix by decree the number of Representatives to which each Province is entitled until a census of the population is taken. Article 86: This proportion of one for each 30,000 persons shall continue to be the basis of representation until the number of Representatives equals 100; although the population should increase, the aforesaid number of Representatives shall not be increased, but the number of persons per Representative shall be increased to 40,000 persons. This latter proportion shall continue until the number of Representatives shall be 15o; then, as in the preceding case, the proportion shall be raised to 5o,000 persons per Representative. In every case one additional Representative shall be chosen for any residue which is more than one half the basic proportion. Article 87: In addition to having the qualifications required to be an Elector, no person shall be elected Representative who does not possess the following qualifications: (I) To be a resident or native of the Province which elects him; (2) To have resided in the territory of the Republic for the two years immediately preceding the election; this requirement shall not exclude those absent in the service of the Republic or with permission of the Government, or those banished or fugitives from the country AS a result of their devotion and service to the cause of independence;

(3) To be owner of landed property of an unencumbered value of two thousand pesos, or possess an annual income of five hundred pesos accruing from landed property, or be a professor of some science. Article 88: Persons not born in Colombia, to be Representatives, must have resided eight years in the Republic and have ten thousand pesos' worth of real property. Persons born in any other part of the American territory which in the year 1810 was a dependency of Spain, and which has not since been united to some other foreign country, are excepted; in such cases, it shall be enough that such persons have four years' residence and five thousand pesos' worth of real property. Article 89: The House of Representatives has the exclusive right to bring charges before the Senate against the President of the Republic, the Vice-President, and Justices of the High Court of Justice in all cases of conduct manifestly contrary to the welfare of the Republic, of their respective offices, or for grave offenses against the public order. Article 9 o: Other Colombian officials are also subject to inspection by the House of Representatives, and it may bring charges before the Senate against such officials for neglect of duty or other grave crimes. This, however, does not diminish the power nor preclude other administrative chiefs and tribunals who, in the interest of better enforcement of the laws, may judge, dismiss, and punish their subordinates according to law. Article 91: The term of office for Representatives shall be four years. Article 92: To the House of Representatives belongs the power to pass upon the validity of the election of its members as well as their qualifications, together with the resolution of all questions arising in connection therewith.
SECTION 7 THE SENATE

Article 93: The Senate of Colombia shall be composed of Senators chosen in the Departments of the Republic in conformity with this Constitution. Each Department shall have four Senators. Article 94: The term of office for Senators shall be eight years. The Senators of each Department shall be divided into two classes: those of the first shall vacate their seats at the end of four years, and those of the second class at the end of eight years, in order that there shall be an election of one half the Senate every four years. At its first meeting the Senate shall determine by lot the two Senators of each De-

partment whose terms of office are to close at the end of four years. Article 95: In addition to possessing qualifications required for Electors, to be a Senator it is necessary: (I) To be thirty years of age; (2) To be a native or resident of the Department in which the election takes place; (3) To have been resident in the territory of the Republic for the three years immediately preceding election under such exceptions as are enumerated in Article 87; (4.) To be owner of real property of an unencumbered value of four thousand pesos, or in default of this, an annual income of five hundred pesos accruing from landed property, or be a professor of some science. Article 96: Persons not born in Colombia may not be Senators without a previous residence of twelve years and owning real property amounting to sixteen thousand pesos; those who are natives of any other part of the American territory which in the year 1810 was a dependency of Spain and which has not since been united to any foreign country are excepted; it is sufficient that such persons have a residence of six years and real property worth eight thousand pesos. Article 97: The Senate has the special power to function as a court of justice to hear, judge, and sentence employees of the Republic against whom charges may be brought by the House of Representatives in those cases mentioned in Articles 89 and 90. Article 98: In those cases in which the Senate is functioning as a court of justice, the House of Representatives may choose one of its members to act as prosecutor, and he shall proceed according to the orders and instructions which the House may communicate to him. Article 99: The Senate shall proceed to try the case or appoint a committee of its members to do so, reserving the sentence which the Senate itself is bound to pronounce. Article zoo: Whenever any accusation has been admitted by the Senate, the person accused shall, ipso facto, be suspended from office; and the officer having the authority to do so shall in the meantime fill the vacancy. Article 1o1: To pass sentence in such trials it is necessary that it he done by a two-thirds vote of the Senators present. Article I 0 2 : The decisions of the Senate in such cases may not extend beyond depriving the convicted person of his office and declaring him ineligible to hold any other office of honor, profit, or confidence

in Colombia; such guilty person, however, shall remain liable to indictment, trial, sentence, and punishment according to law. Article 103: In such cases as the Senate may desire, the President of the High Court of Justice or any of its members shall advise the Senate and interpret points of law. Article 104: The decrees and sentences pronounced by the Senate in such cases shall be executed without the sanction of the Executive. TITLE
V

THE EXECUTIVE POWER SECTION I THE NATURE OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER

Article 105: The exercise of the Executive Power of, the Republic shall belong to the President of the Republic of Colombia. Article lo6: To be President one must be a native-born citizen of Colombia and possess all the other qualifications required of Senators. Article 1o7: The presidential term shall be four years, and no one is eligible for re-election without an intervening term. Article lo8: There shall be a Vice-President, who shall exercise the functions of President in case of death, removal, or resignation, until a successor shall be chosen, which shall take place at the next meeting of the Electoral Assemblies. He shall likewise exercise the same functions in case of absence, illness, or any other temporary incapacity of the President. Article 109: The Vice-President of the Republic shall possess the same qualifications as the President. Article 110: In the event the offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic are temporarily vacant, the President of the Senate shall assume the office; but when such vacancies are permanent, elections shall be held immediately in accordance with this Constitution. Article III: Any persons elected to the office of President or VicePresident other than at the normal constitutional time shall serve in that capacity only until the next ordinary meeting of the constitutional Assemblies. Article 112: The President and Vice-President shall receive for their services such salaries as the law may assign, which may neither be increased nor be diminished while they are in office.

SECTION 2 FUNCTIONS, DUTIES, AND PREROGATIVES OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

Article 113: The President is the head of the general administration of the Republic. The preservation of internal order and tranquillity as well as external security is especially committed to him. Article 114: It is his duty to promulgate and command the execution and observance of the laws, decrees, statutes, and acts of Congress when, according to Section I of Title IV of this Constitution, they have force as such; and he shall issue regulations and instructions necessary for the execution of the same. Article 115: He convokes Congress at the times appointed by this Constitution and at extraordinary times when any important consideration demands it. Article 116: At proper times he issues all necessary orders for constitutional elections. Article 117: Throughout the whole Republic he is the supreme commander of the land and naval forces, and is exclusively charged with their administration; but he may not command them in person without previously obtaining the consent of Congress. Article 1 18: When, in accordance with the preceding article, he personally commands the forces of the Republic or any part of them, the functions of President shall by this fact alone devolve upon the Vice-President. Article 11 9 : He declares war in the name of the Republic after Congress has decreed it, and he then takes all preparatory measures. Article 120: He concludes treaties of peace, alliance, amity, truce, commerce, neutrality, and all others with foreign princes, nations, or peoples; but, without the consent and approval of Congress, he may not give or deny ratification of treaties concluded by plenipotentiaries. Article 121: With previous agreement and consent of the Senate, appoints all ministers and diplomatic agents, and military officers he the rank of colonel and above. holding Article 122: When the Senate is in recess he may commission such officers when their appointment is urgent, said commissions being in force until the next ordinary or extraordinary session of the Senate, when they shall be confirmed in accordance with the preceding article. Article 123: . He also has the power to- appoint all other civil and military officers the appointment of whom is not granted to some other Authority by the Constitution or law.

Article 12 4 : He shall see that justice is administered promptly and completely by the tribunals and courts of the Republic and that their sentences are executed. Article 125: He may suspend from office officials who are incapable or delinquent in their duties; but he shall at the same time transmit information thereof to the tribunal having jurisdiction as well as the proceedings and documents pertinent to the case in order that a trial may take place in accordance with law. Article 126: He may not deprive any individual of his liberty or inflict any punishment upon him. When the welfare and security of the Republic necessitate the arrest of anyone, the President may issue orders to that effect, but before the expiration of forty-eight hours he shall place the person arrested at the disposal of the competent tribunal or judge. Article 127: In the interests of humanity when a motive sufficiently weighty requires it, he may commute a capital sentence provided the judges who handed down the same are agreeable thereto, whether he initiated it or did so at the suggestion of the said judges. Article 128: In cases of internal strife and armed conflict endangering the security of the Republic, and in cases of unexpected armed invasion, he may with the previous consent of Congress take whatever extraordinary measures the case may require, which may not be comprehended within the normal sphere of his power. If Congress is not in session, he may act completely upon his own initiative; but he shall convoke Congress without delay in order to obtain its confirmation. This extraordinary authority shall be entirely limited in time and place where it may be indispensably necessary. Article 129: The President of the Republic, at the opening of the annual session of Congress, shall send to both Houses a report on the political and military state of the Nation, and of its revenues, expenses, and resources, pointing out improvements and reforms which should be made. Article 130: He shall also give each House any information requested, withholding, however, that of which the publication is not expedient at the time. Article 131: As long as he is in office, the President of the Republic may be accused only before the Senate, and judged by it, in the cases mentioned in Article 89. Article 132: The President may not leave the territory of the Republic during his term of office or for one year thereafter without permission of Congress.

SECTION 3 THE COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENT

Article 1 33 : The President of the Republic shall have a Council of Government composed of the Vice-President of the Republic, one Justice of the High Court of Justice chosen by him, and the Secretaries of State. Article 134: The President shall consult the Council in all matters referred to in Articles 46, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, as well as all other matters of importance, but he shall not be bound by the advice given. Article 135: The Council shall keep a journal of its opinions and every year transmit to the Senate an exact copy thereof except for such matters as require secrecy.
SECTION 4 THE SECRETARIES OF STATE

Article 136: There shall be established five Secretaries of State: namely, Foreign Affairs, Interior, Finance, Navy, and War. It shall be lawful for the Executive temporarily to unite two ministries. Article 137: It shall be lawful for Congress to make such alterations in the above number as experience may suggest or circumstances demand; the functions of each ministry shall be assigned by a particular regulation drawn up by the Executive and submitted to the Congress for its approval. Article 138: Each Secretary is the regular and indispensable agency through which the Executive issues orders to subordinates. Any order not authorized by the proper Secretary shall not be executed by any tribunal or by any public or private person. Article 139: It is the duty of the Secretaries of State, with the consent of the Executive, to give each House all the information concerning their respective ministries which Congress may request, either in writing or verbally, withholding only that which it is not expedient to publish. TITLE VI
THE JUDICIAL POWER SECTION I POWERS OF THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE, THE ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE OF ITS MEMBERS

Article 140: The High Court of Justice of Colombia shall be composed of at least five Justices.

Article 141: To be a Justice of the High Court of Justice it is necessary: (I) To have the qualifications of an Elector; (2) To be a lawyer in good standing; (3) To be thirty years of age. Article 142: The Justices of the High Court of Justice shall be proposed in ternary by the President of the Republic to the House of Representatives. The House shall reduce this number to two and present them to the Senate, which body shall then choose the persons who are to compose the bench. The same procedure shall be followed in filling any vacancy occurring because of death, removal, or resignation. If the Congress is not in session, the Executive shall make temporary appointments until such time as the vacant places may be filled in accordance with the above formality. At the present time they shall be chosen by this Congress. Article 143: The High Court of Justice shall: (I) Take cognizance of all cases affecting Ambassadors, Ministers, Consuls, or Diplomatic Agents; (2) Take cognizance of controversies arising out of treaties and negotiations entered into by the Executive; (3) Settle questions of competency which may arise between the Superior Tribunals. Article 144: The law shall determine the stage, form, and cases in which the Court shall take cognizance of the above-mentioned cases, as well as all other civil and criminal matters which may be assigned to it. Article 145: Justices of the High Court of Justice shall hold office during good behavior. Article 146: At fixed periods to be determined by law, they shall receive such compensation for their services as may be assigned.
SECTION 2 SUPERIOR COURTS OF JUSTICE AND THE INFERIOR COURTS

Article 147: For the more prompt and easy administration of justice, Congress shall establish throughout the Republic such Superior Courts as it may deem necessary or existing circumstances may permit, assigning to each its territorial jurisdiction and the place in which it is to sit. Article 148: The Judges of the Superior Courts shall be named by the Executive upon proposal in ternary by the High Court of Justice. Their term of office shall be that stated in Article 145.

Article 149: The Inferior Courts shall, for the present, continue under such regulations as shall be determined by a special law until Congress shall reform the administration of justice. TITLE VII
INTERNAL GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC SECTION I ADMINISTRATION OF THE DEPARTMENTS

Article 15o: Congress shall divide the territory of the Republic into six or more Departments for convenience and facility of administration. Article 151: The political direction of each Department shall be in the hands of an official known as the Intendant, subject to the President of the Republic, whose natural and immediate agent he is. His powers shall be determined by law. Article 152: Intendants shall be chosen by the President of the Republic in accordance with Articles 121 and I22. Their term of office shall be three years.
SECTION 2 ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROVINCES AND CANTONS

His

Article 153: In each Province there shall be a Governor entrusted with the immediate direction thereof and subordinate to the Intendant of the Department, and with such powers as the law shall determine. term of office and manner of appointment shall be the same as the Intendants. Article 154: The. Intendant of the Department is the Governor tohePrvincfw aptloheDrmniscatd. Article 155: The present Councils (Cabildos) and Municipalities of the Cantons shall continue as now established. Congress shall reg their number, boundaries, and powers, as well as anything else which may be conducive to their .better administration.
those of

TITLE VIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 156: All Colombians have the right to write, print, and freely their thoughts and opinions without the necessity of examination, revision, or censorship by any authority prior to publication. I Int those who abuse this precious right shall suffer the penalties prov vided by law.

Article 157: The freedom possessed by all citizens to demand their rights before the depositaries of public authority with due moderation and respect shall never be impeded nor limited. On the contrary all, in accordance with law, shall find a prompt and sure remedy for injuries and losses suffered to their persons, property, honor, and reputation. Article 158: Every man is presumed to be innocent until found guilty in accordance with law. If, prior to any declaration of guilt, it be necessary to arrest or confine him, no harsh measures shall be employed which are not indispensably necessary for confinement. Article 159: In criminal matters no Colombian may be imprisoned unless indicted for an offense carrying corporal punishment. Article 160: Any person may be arrested if taken in flagrante delicto, and all persons are authorized to seize him and take him before a judge in order that the provisions of the preceding article may be immediately carried into effect. Article 161: In order that a citizen may be imprisoned, it is necessary: (1) That there be an arrest order signed by the authority in whom the law entrusts this power; (2) That the order expressly state the reasons for the arrest; (3) That he receive notice thereof and a copy of the same. Article 162: No warden or jailer may admit to or detain in prison any person unless he has received an order of arrest or commitment referred to in the preceding article. Article 163: The warden or jailer may not prohibit the imprisoned person from communicating with any person whatsoever unless the order of commitment contains a clause forbidding such communication. The latter may not last more than three days; no chains or other such restraints shall ever be used unless expressly directed by the judge. Article 164: The following are guilty of arbitrary detention and subject to the penalty thereof: (I) Those who, without legal power, shall arrest or cause to be arrested any person whatsoever; (2) Persons who, having said power, abuse it by arresting or causing to be arrested or keeping in confinement any person for reasons not provided by law, or contrary to the forms therein prescribed, or in places which are not publicly and legally known as prisons; (3) Wardens or jailers who contravene the provisions of Articles 162 and 163. Article 165: Whenever the causes for arrest, detention, or confine-

ment have ceased to exist, the prisoner shall be set free. Upon giving icient bail, the accused shall be put at liberty at any stage in the legal suff proceedings where it appears that corporal punishment shall not be applicable to his case. When testimony against the accused is being taken, which shall be done within three days, all documents and declarations of witnesses, together with their names, shall be read in full to him; and should the accused be unacquainted with such witnesses, all possible information concerning them shall be given him in order that he may ascertain who they are. Article 166: No one may be judged by special commissions, but only by tribunals to whom the law has given cognizance of the case. Article 167: No one shall be judged, much less punished, except by virtue of a law enacted prior to the commission of his crime and after being legally cited; no one shall be compelled under oath or any other constraint to give testimony against himself in a criminal action; nor shall persons bear witness against one another who are kin either by ascent or descent or relatives to the fourth degree of consanguinity or to the second degree of affinity. Article •I68: Any punishment or treatment in excess of the penalty provided by law is a crime. Article 169: It shall be unlawful to enter the house of a Colombian except in cases determined by law and under the responsibility of the judge who issues the order. Article 17o: The private papers of citizens as well as their correspondence are inviolable; and it shall be unlawful to register, inter( cept, or examine them except in cases expressly prescribed by law. Article 171: Every judge and tribunal shall pronounce sentence by citing the law or grounds applicable to the case. Article 172: In no trial shall there be more than three instances; mid the judges who participate in one shall never be allowed to sit in any appeal of the same suit. Article 173: The penalty attaching to any crime shall never be made to apply to the family or children of the delinquent. Article 174: No Colombian, except those in the Navy or Militia on active duty, shall be subjected to military law, nor shall he be made to suffer any of the penalties provided in that law. Article 175: One of the first cares of Congress shall be to provide f or jury trial in certain kinds of cases until the advantages of this institution become well known, at which time it shall be extended to all criminal and civil cases to which it is usually applied in other countries with all the forms adapted to this mode of procedure.

Article 176: The military, in time of peace, may not be quartered or lodged in the houses of private citizens without the consent of the owners; or in time of war, unless by order of the civil magistrates conformably to law. Article 177: No one may be deprived of the least portion of his property, nor shall it be applied to public use without his own consent or that of the legislative body; whenever any legally determined public necessity demands that the property of any citizen be applied to such use, it presupposes the payment of a just compensation. Article 178: No kind of labor, cultivation, industry, or commerce shall be prohibited to Colombians except such as are now necessary for the support of the Republic and which shall be declared free as soon as Congress deems it fit and proper. Article 179: The establishment of entailed estates and every other description of entail is prohibited. Article 180: No gold, silver, paper, or other equivalent for money shall be removed from the public treasury except for the objects and purposes designated by law; a statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of the public revenue shall be annually published for the information of the Nation. Article 181: All titles of honor granted by the Spanish Government shall be abolished, and Congress may not grant titles of nobility or hereditary honors or distinctions or create any office or position whatsoever the pay or emoluments of which are intended to last any longer than the good behavior of the incumbents. Article 182: No person holding a position of honor or confidence under authority of Colombia shall be able to accept any gift, title, or emolument from any king, prince, or foreign state without the consent of Congress. Article 183: All aliens from any country whatsoever shall be admitted to Colombia; they shall enjoy in their persons and property the same protection as the citizens thereof so long as they obey the laws of the Republic. Article 184: Those persons not born in Colombia who, during the War of Independence, have served with honor in one or more campaigns, or have rendered important services to the Republic are to be considered equal to natural-born citizens in respect to their eligibility for offices which do not require them to be natural-born Colombian citizens, provided they possess the necessary qualifications.

TITLE IX
THE OATH OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS

Article 185: No official of the Republic may exercise his functions without taking an oath to sustain and defend the Constitution and to execute faithfully and exactly the duties of his office. Article 186: The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take such oath in the presence of Congress, and it shall be administered by the President of the Senate. The Presidents of the Senate, House of Representatives, and the High Court of Justice shall take their oaths in the presence of their respective bodies; and the members of such bodies shall take theirs at the hands of their respective Presidents. Article 187: The Secretaries of State, Judges of the Superior Courts of Justice, Intendants of the Departments, Governors of Provinces, Generals of the Army, and other principal officials shall take oaths before the President of the Republic, or before the person to whom this function is committed. TITLE
X

CONCERNING THE OBSERVANCE OF FORMER LAWS, AND THE INTERPRETATION AND AMENDMENT OF THIS CONSTITUTION

Article 188: Laws hitherto existing are hereby declared to be in lull force in all matters and cases not directly or indirectly repugnant to this Constitution or to the decrees and laws which Congress may enact. Article 189: Congress shall have power to resolve doubts which may arise concerning the meaning of any of the articles of this Constitution. Article 190: At any time, should two thirds of both Houses deem it expedient to alter or amend any of the articles of this Constitution, it shall be lawful for the Congress to propose the same so that Congress may consider it de novo after the membership of both Houses has been renewed by at least one half of those members who proposed the amendment; and if the same be ratified by two thirds of each House in accordance with the formalities prescribed in Section i of Title IV, the same shall be valid and form part of the Constitution; but the provisions contained in Section I of Title I and in Section 2 of Title II may never be amended. Article 191: When all or the greatest part of that portion of the territory of the Republic which is now under Spanish domination shall

be so liberated as to be able to contribute through its representatives to the perfection of the edifice of our social well-being, and when after ten or more years of operation the advantages and disadvantages of this Constitution shall have been brought to light, a grand convention of Colombia shall be convoked by Congress and authorized to examine and amend the same in all its parts. Done in the first General Congress of Colombia, signed by all Deputies present in the city of Rosario in Cucuta on the 30th day of August in the Year of Our Lord 1821, and of Independence the eleventh. President of the Congress: DOCTOR MIGUEL PEA Vice-President of the Congress: RAFAEL, BISHOP OF MERIDA IN
MARACAIBO

Alejandro Osorio, Luis Ignacio Mendoza, Vicente Azuero, Jose Ignacio de Marquez, Diego Fernando Gomez, Jose Cornelio Valencia, Domingo B. y Briceno, Joaquin Borrero, Antonio Maria Briceno, Joaquin Fernandez de Soto, Jose Antonio Borrero, Diego Bautista Urbaneja, Miguel de Zarraga, Manuel Benitez, Jose Antonio Yaiiez, Andres Rojas, Ildefonso Mendez, Jose F. Blanco, Pedro F. Carvajal, Miguel Dominguez, Dr. Raman Ignacio Mendez, Bart°lome Osorio, Francisco de P. Orbegozo, Salvador Camacho, Juan Ronderos, J. Prudencio Lanz, Cerbeleen Urbina, Mariano Escobar, Jose Gabriel de Alcala, Jose Antonio Paredes, Jose Maria Hinestrosa, J. Francisco Pereira, Sinforso Mutis, Juan Bautista Estivez, Jose Manuel Restrepo, Casimiro Calvo, Manuel Maria Quijano, Miguel de Tobar, Jose de Quintana y Navarro, Jose Ignacio Valbuena, Joaquin Plata, Miguel Ibanez, Dr. Felix Restrepo, Francisco Jose Otero, Carlos Alvarez, Gabriel Briceno, Lorenzo Santander, Nicolas Bailin de Guzman, Pedro Gual, Bernardino Tobar, Pacifico Jaime, Policarpo Uricoechea, Vicente A. Borrero, Jose A. Mendoza, Francisco Gomez, Francisco Conde. Secretaries: Miguel Santamaria and Antonio Jose Caro.

