3rd Series — No 81

INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION

CONSTITUTIONAL AND PARLIAMENTARY INFORMATION

Third Series — Twenty first year

GREECE
CONSTITUTION
(1968)

On 29th September 1968 a new Constitution was approved in a referendum by 4,633,602 votes to 390,470. The Constitution became official on 15 November 1968, though the application of several articles, essentially those referring to Parliament and civil liberties, is still provisionally suspended. The English translation that follows is the official translation provided by the Greek Government.

CONSTITUTION OF GREECE
PREAMBLE

We, the Greek People, fully cognizant of our responsibility towards coming generations, strictly adhering to the values of the Greek Christian civilization as well as to the principles of national sovereignty, democracy, peace and progress, and resolved to: Secure national and state unity, Consolidate the system of Crowned Democracy in freedom, equality and justice, Reform political and parliamentary life, Safeguard internal peace and security, Contribute to social progress and prosperity and to serve international peace through justice and liberty as a member of equal standing in the world-wide society of peoples, do hereby approve by referendum this Constitution.

PART ONE GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1. 1. The established religion in Greece is that of the Eastern Orthodox Church of Christ. The exercise of proselytism, as well as any other form of interference against the established religion, is prohibited. 2. The Orthodox Church of Greece, acknowledging as its head our Lord Jesus Christ, is indissolubly united in doctrine with the Great Church of Christ in Constantinople and every other Church of the same doctrine; observes steadfastly as they do, the holy apostolic and synodical canons and holy traditions pertaining to dogma and worship. It is autocephalous, exercises its sovereign rights independently of any other Church, and is administered by a Holy Synod of Bishops. 3. The ecclesiastical status existing in certain areas of the State is not inconsistent with the provisions of the previous paragraph. 4. The text of the Holy Scriptures shall be unalterable. Its rendering nto a different linguistic form, without approval of the Autocephalous Church of Greece and of the Great Church of Christ in Constantiiople is absolutely prohibited. 5. A draft law or bill, relating to the organization and adminstrofheCucGanotbedmifrPlanty deliberation, unless accompanied by an opinion of the Standing Holy ynod, delivered within twenty days from the date such draft law or bill has reached it. Failure of the Standing Holy Synod to act within e above period, does not impede deliberation in Parliament. Article 2. 1. The form of Government in Greece is that of a Crowned Democracy. 2. All powers emanate from the People, exist for the People and Nation and are carried into execution in the manner prescribed the Constitution. Article 3. 1. The legislative power is exercised by the King and Parliament. 2. The executive power is exercised by the King and the Governt.

A. 2

3. The judicial power is exercised by the courts. Judicial decisions are executed in the name of the King.

Article 4. 1. The national flag of Greece comprises 9 horizontal stripes, five of which are blue, alternating with four of white colour. On the upper mast corner, a white cross lies within a blue square background which stretches forth three blue and two white stripes downwards from the top. 2. Military flags, as well as the application of the provisions of this article are governed by law.

Article 5. 1. No alteration in the state boundaries can be made except by law. 2. No foreign army is permitted into Greece, nor can it remain or pass through it except by law.

Article 6. The official language of the State and the schools is that in which the texts of the Constitution and Greek legislation are composed.

Article 7. 1. Greeks are equal before the law. 2. Greek citizens are those who possess the qualifications, as provided by the Laws of the State. 3. Titles of nobility or distinction are neither granted nor acknowledged to Greek citizens. 4. Only Greek citizens are acceptable in all the public services, except for cases introduced by special legislation. 5. Greek citizens shall contribute, without exception, towards meeting public expenditure according to their means. 6. Every Greek able to bear arms is obliged to assist in the defence of the Country as provided for by the law.

PART TWO
THE STATE AND THE INDIVIDUAL

CHAPTER A

Individual Rights.
Article 8. Every person within the territorial boundaries of the Greek .State shall enjoy full protection for his life, honour and freedom, irrespective of nationality, creed or language. Exceptions are permitted in such cases as provided for by International Law. Article 9. 1. Every person has the right to the free development of his personality provided he does not infringe on the rights of others and does not violate the Constitution and the moral code. 2. Personal liberty is inviolable. No one is prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or otherwise restricted, except whenever and in whatever way the law rules. Article 10. 1. With the exception of persons caught in the act of committing an offence, no one shall be arrested or imprisoned without a judicial warrant stating the reasons, which must be served at the time of arrest or remand in custody pending trial. 2. The person caught in the act or held on a warrant of arrest, is brought before the competent examining magistrate not later than 24 hours from the time of the arrest, and if the arrest is made beyond the seat of the examining magistrate, then within the time absolutely necessary for his conveyance before said magistrate. Within three days of the time of presentation, the examining magistrate is obliged to either release the person arrested or issue a war-rant for his imp risonment. This delay can be extended by two more days at the request of the person arrested in the event of force majeure which must be attested forthwith by a decision of the competent judicial council. 3. Should both the aforementioned delays expire without any action, every jailer or other officer, whether civil or military, in charge

of the arrested person, must release him forthwith. The v iolator of the above provisions, shall be punished for illegal confinement and shall be obliged to make good all damages sustained by the injured party and, in addition, to give satisfaction to said party by such a sum of money as provided by law. 4. The maximum term of custody pending trial provided by law cannot exceed one year for criminal charges and/or six months for . .misdemeanour charges. In completely exceptional cases these maximum time limits can be further extended by six and three months respectively, by virtue of a decision of the competent judicial council. 5. The law defines the conditions under which, through judicial decision, the State indemnifies those unjustly imprisoned or convicted. Article 11. 1. No crime shall exist nor shall any sentence be imposed unless provided for in a law existing prior to the commission of the act. A heavier sentence than that provided for at the time the act is committed, shall never be imposed. 2. Tortures and general confiscation are prohibited. Permanent and, or total suspension of civil rights shall not he imposed. Capital punishment for political crimes, except compound, shall not be imposed. Article 12. No one shall be removed without his consent from the jurisdiction of the judge assigned to him by law. The establishment of judicial committees or extraordinary courts under any name is prohibited. Article 13. 1. The home of each person is inviolable. No house search can take place except at a time and manner provided by law. 2. The violators of the above provision shall be punished for violation of the sanctity of the home and shall be obliged to fully indem-fythjurpandogivehmfurtsaconghte payment of a monetary sum, as provided by law. Article 14. 1. Everyone may express orally, in writing, in print or in any other way his thoughts, with due adherence to the laws of the State. 2. The press is free and discharges a public function involving rights and duties, as well as responsibility for the accuracy of its contents.	

3. Censorship and every other preventive measure is prohibited. 4. Seizure of printed matter, either before or after publication is' prohibited. Exceptionally, seizure after, circulation is permitted under orders from the public prosecutor: a) because of insult to the Christian and or any other known religion; b) because of insult to the person of the King, the Crown Prince, their wives and children; c) because of a publication which 1) discloses information on the organisation, composition, armament and deployment of the armed forces, or on the fortifications of the country, ii) is patently rebellious, or aims at overthrowing the regime, or the existing social system or is directed against the territorial integrity of the State or creates defeatism, or provokes or instigates the commission of a crime of high treason, iii) intends to, project or diffuse for political exploitation, views of outlawed parties or organisations, and d) because of indecent publications manifestly offending public decency in cases provided for by
law.

5. In all cases of the previous paragraph the public prosecutor must, within twenty four hours from seizure, submit the case to the judicial council, the latter having within another twenty four hours, to decide whether the seizure will be maintained or lifted; otherwise the seizure is lifted ipso jure. The public prosecutor and the publisher of the seized item may appeal against the decision of the council. 6. Press offences are deemed offences whose author is taken in the act, and are subject to legal proceedings without preliminary investigation as provided by the law. Violation of this provision by the competent public prosecutor constitutes a serious disciplinary offence. 7. After a second conviction within five years for any press offence whatsoever as provided for by §§ 4 and 9 of this article, the Court shall order the permanent or temporary suspension of the publication of the printed matter involved and, in serious cases, the prohibition of the practicing of the journalist profession by the person convicted as provided by law. Such suspension or prohibition shall commence from the time the Court order becomes final. 8. The title of a suspended publication cannot be used by anyone, so long as such suspension is still effective. 9. The publisher of the printed matter and the writer of a slanderous publication involving one's private or family life, aside from the penalties, provided for in criminal statutes, shall be subject to a civil and joint liability to fully compensate any damage caused thereby, and give monetary satisfaction to the victim as provided by law. 10. The law shall determine the manner in which refutable publications shall be fully rectified in print. A. 3

11. The prerequisites for the issuing of newspapers or Other political publications, the conditions and ethical rules of practicing the profession of journalism, and the rules for operation of newspaper enterprises shall be determined by law. 12. The law establishes compulsory financial control of newspaper enterprises. The outcome of such control shall be published. 13. Special restrictive measures may be adopted by law to pro. tect youth from literature dangerous to morals. 14. The provisions on the protection of the press contained in the present article shall not be applicable to motion pictures, public shows, phonograph records, radio and television broadcasts, as well as any other similar means of conveying speech or image. Article 15. The privacy of letters and of all other means of correspondence is inviolable. Law designates the guarantees under which judicial authority, for reasons of national security and public order or for the ascertaining of abject crimes, is not bound by the inviolability of letters and correspondence. Article 16. 1. The freedom of religious conscience is inviolable. 2. Every known religion is free and the forms of worship thereof shall be practised without hindrance, under the protection of the laws. 3. The functionaries of all known religions are subject to the same supervision by the State, reserved to the functionaries of the established religion. 4. The exercise of religious duties shall be free but cannot be offensive for public order, sound morals or national symbols. 5. No one shall, by reason of his religious convictions, be exempted. from discharging his duties to the State or refuse to comply with the laws of the country. 6. No oath shall be administered except by law determining also the form thereof. Article 17. 1. Education shall be under the supreme supervision of the State, shall be offered at its expense, and shall aim at the ethical and intellectual training, as well as the development of the patriotic conscience of the youth based on the principles of the Greek and Christian civilization.

2. The establishment of general directives of national policy on education is being made as prescribed by law, after consultation with the National Council of Education. 3. Elementary education shall be compulsory for all. The law fixes the years of compulsory instruction which cannot be less than six. 4. The high-level educational institutions are self-administered legal entities of public law and operate under the supervision and financial support of the State. Their teaching staff are civil servants. The faculties of these institutions are elected by their regular professors. State supervision over such educational institutions is exercised by the Minister of National Education and Religion through a Government Commissioner, as the law provides. 5. Subject to permission by the authorities, private citizens whose civil rights have not been revoked as well as legal entities may establish schools operating • according to the Constitution and the laws of the State. Those , establishing private schools and those teaching in them, are obliged to have the same moral and other qualifications as those required of public servants and prescribed by law.

Article 18. 1. Greeks have the right to assemble peacefully and unarmed as provided by law. 2. The police may be present only at public gatherings. Public gatherings must be duly notified to the police authorities forty eight hours prior to their being held. Open air gatherings may be prohibited if they endanger public order and security.

Article 19. 1. Greeks have the right to form associations with due adherence o the laws of the. State, which, however, shall under no circumstances ,object this right to prior permission by the Government. 2. Every union of persons, the purpose or the activity of which,

re directed against the territorial integrity of the State, or the regime r the social order or the security of the State or the political or civil
berties of the citizen shall be banned. It is disbanded by Court ecree. 3. Co-operatives are disbanded, because of violation of law or eir statutes, by Court decree. By decree issued by the chief judge the district Court the operation of a co-operative or union may be spended temporarily, if at the same time proceedings for its permant dissolution are initiated.

4. The right of association of civil servants may be s ubject to certain restrictions imposed by law. The same r estrictions on the right of association may be imposed on employees of local government bodies, or other legal entities of public enterprises, and public utilities. 5. Resort to strike for the purpose of achieving political or other ends irrelevant to material or moral interests of the workers shall be prohibited. 6. Strikes of any form by Civil Service personnel of any kind, personnel of local government bodies or of other legal entities of public law, shall be prohibited. The participation of such personnel in a strike is considered in itself as a submission of resignation. Article 20. 1. Any person or co-acting persons, observing the law of the State, have the right to submit petitions in writing to the authorities, which are obliged, in accordance with the law, to act promptly and give a written and reasoned reply to the petitioner. 2. Prosecution of the petitioner for violations existing in the petition is permitted only after the final decision under permission from the authority which received the application. Article 21. 1. Property is under the protection of the State. 2. No one shall be deprived of his property, except for duly proven public weal expediency when and as the law provides, at all times after full compensation. The compensation must correspond to the value of the expropriated property at the time of publication of the expropriation act as the law specifically provides. An eventual change of . the value of expropriated property occurring after the expropriation has been announced what is more due to it, is not taken into consideration. 3. The amount of compensation shall always be fixed by the civil courts. Compensation may also be provisionally fixed by the court, after a hearing or summons of the beneficiary who may• be , obliged, in the judgment of the Court to offer a reasonable guarantee fora its collection, as provided by law. Before payment of provisional or final compensation, the owner retains his rights and occupation of the expropriated property shall not be permitted. The designated compensation must at the latest be deposited within one—and—ahalf years after the judicial decision is issued, otherwise the expropriation is lifted ipso jure. 4. In cases of expropriation for the purpose of urbanization and town planning, especially in the large urban centres, the law may' pro

!de that in lieu of a monetary compensation, the owner will be granted realty located in the area under expropriation of a value equal to iat accounted for expropriation. If the value of the real property eing offered in exchange is disputed, the courts shall decide on it and may adjuge a supplementary monetary compensation. The transfer of tle of the ceded property is effected by registering the court decree rdering the expropriation. The provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of le present article have analogous application as to the rest. 5. Special laws regulate matters pertaining to ownership and disosition of mines, quarries, caverns, archaelogical treasures, mineral, inning and subterranean waters. 6. Matters pertaining to the ownership, exploitation and adminiration of sea shoals and large lakes are regulated by law. 7. Special laws regulate matters pertaining to requisitions for the , cds of the armed forces in the event of war or mobilization or towards !solving an urgent social need which could endanger public order and alth. 8. Any other enjoinment of the free use and enjoyment of property beyond the cases referred to in the previous paragraph, may be impod by law. The law shall determine the debtor and the procedure hereby the beneficiary of the compensation for the deprivation of use id enjoyment of the property shall be compensated. The aforemen,ned deprivation is immediately voided when the reasons calling for are eliminated. In the event the deprivation is not removed, the ,nstitutional Court shall decide upon petition by any person having Jested legal right. 9. A law may permit the expropriation by zones in favour of the ate for purpose of executing public works or projects of public benefit. The same law shall determine the prerequisites and the condi, for such an expropriation, as well as matters relating to the dis, sal by the State of expropriated land over and above those necessary the project under execution. 10. The redistribution of agricultural tracts, for a more profitable ploitation of the land is permitted in accordance with the procedure :ermined by special law. 11. The agricultural properties of the Stavropigiakon Holy Monasies of Saint Anastasia Farmakolitrias in Chalkidiki, of Vlatadon in ssaloniki and of the Evangelist, John the Theologist in Patmos, epting those of Metochion, are not subject to expropriation. Article 22. 1. The alteration of the contents or the conditions of a hereditait, codicil or donation, insofar as its provisions in favour of the e or for public weal purposes are concerned, is prohibited.

2. When it has been judicially established that the will of the lega_ tor or donor cannot be carried out to its full extent, the appl ication of the donation or bequest for a more beneficial use identical or similar to the one envisaged, may be permitted by way of exception, as the law provides. Article 23. 1. Legislative decree No. 2687 of the year 1953, issued in application of article 112 of the Constitution of January 1st, 1952, « Concerning investment and protection of foreign capital», as autnentically interpreted by legislative decree No. 2928 of the year 1954 and paragraph 3 of article 5 of legislative decree No. 4256 of the year 1962, maintains its prior formal force. Subsequent law to be issued only once and for all may amend the above legislative decree to confer additional protection to the foreign capital involved. 2. Emergency Law No. 465 of the year 1968 «on amendment and completion of some provisions of Law 1880/1951 on ship taxation» expanding the protection of Greek merchant marine beyond the one afforded by art. 13 of legislative decree 2687/1953 «Concerning investment and protection of foreign capital» cannot be amended. Subsequent law to be issued only once and for all may amend it only to confer additional protection. 3. Emergency Law 89 of the year 1967 <<Concerning establishment in Greece of foreign commercial and industrial companies» and emergency law 378 of the year 1968 supplementing the above, cannot be amended. Subsequent law to be issued only once and for all, may amend them only to confer additional protection.

Article 24. 1. The discharge of civil rights and liberties shall be vested in every-one within limits securing the enjoyment of the same rights and -liberties by other citizens and protecting the interests of the society as a whole. abuses the inviolability of a home, the freedom of ex2. pression, especially in print, the secrecy of the means of correspon dence, the freedom of assembly, the freedom of forming associations or cooperatives, arid the' right of property, for the purpose of struggling against the prevailing political system, the civil liberties, or of endangering the national independence, and territorial integrity of the State, shall be deprived of these rights or of all rights safe-guarded under the Constitution. The • determination of the abuse, the deprivation of individual rights and the extent thereof shall be pronounced by the constitutional Court as provided by law.

Article 25. 1. In case of war, mobilization due to external dangers or serious disturbance or manifest threat for public order and security of the State from internal perils the King on the recommendation of the Cabinet may by Royal Decree suspend throughout the Country or in part thereof the operation of articles 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, ' 19, 111, and 112 of the Constitution or some of them, and put into effect the then applicable law on (State of Siege» and to establish extraordinary tribunals.. This law may not be modified while in operation. 2. The Royal Decree referred to in the above paragraph, and the measures taken by virtue thereof, are communicated to the Parliament at its first meeting after its publication. In the event of a serious disturbance or patent threat for public order and security of the State from internal perils, the Royal Decree is placed before the Council of the 'Nation within twenty four hours after its issuance. If the Council of the Nation does not agree with the issuance of the Royal. Decree, Parliament is obligatorily assembled even if it has been dissolved, within twenty days of its publication, in order to decide whether to maintain or annul the decree's' effect by absolute majority vote of its entire membership in this last instance. 3. The effect of the above Royal Decree shall not, in the case- of war, extend beyond the end thereof, and in all other cases its effect shall be terminated ipso facto three months from the date of its publication, unless it has been extended in the meantime by another Royal Decree with the permission of the Parliament.

CHAPTER B

Social and economic rights and duties.
Article 26. 1. Marriage and the family are under the protection of the State. 2. The parents have the right and duty to raise and educate their children. The State takes measures for the moral, intellectual and patriotic education of minors. 3. Families with many children, war invalids, as well as widows and orphans of those killed in action, shall enjoy the special care of the State. Article 27. 1. The State cares for the securing of employment; determines general conditions thereof and aims at the improvement of the financial status and moral uplifting of the workers.

2. Special laws shall regulate matters pertaining to requisitioning of personal services in case of war or mobilization or for cure of an urgent social need. 3. The State cares for the health and the social security of the population, as well as the acquisition of a home by those lacking one. Article 28. The State cares for the creation of prerequisites and incentives for the development of the economy on a national as well as regional scale to the end of making feasible a steady improvement of the living conditions of the people. Article 29. 1. Agrarian and urban cooperatives are under the protection of the State which looks to their development. 2. The creation of a compulsory cooperative in conformity with the law, is not contrary to the Constitution.

PART THREE
THE ORGANIZATION OF THE STATE

SECTION 1

THE KING
CHAPTER A

General provisions.
Article 30. 1. The King is the Supreme Authority of the State, the symbol of the unity of the Nation.

3. The King shall convene the Parliament within three months and shall repeat the oath before the Deputies. Article 31. 1. The King and Crown Prince shall have attained to age on completing their twenty first year. 2. The King and Crown Prince must profess the faith of the Eastern Orthodox Church of Christ. 3. The King and the Government look to it that the Crown Prince, receives an education suitable to the high office for which He is destined. Article 32. The Crown of Greece and that of any other state whatsoever can never be united upon the same head. Article 33. 1. The person of the King is non-responsible and inviolable. 2. The King or a member of the Royal Family may assume the honorary presidency of organizations or public weal foundations, being however excluded from direct or indirect involvement in administration thereof. Organizations or public weal foundations which are under the honorary presidency of the King or a member of the Royal Family, are subject to State control. Article 34. 1. The appanage of the King and that of the Crown Prince are provided for by law. 2. With the exception of the King and the Crown Prince, no other member of the Royal Family is entitled to any appanage out of the Public Treasury.

CHAPTER B

Succession to the Throne and Regency.
Article 35. The Greek Crown and its constitutional rights are hereditary and pass to the legitimate and lawful direct linear descendants of the then eigning King, in the order of primogeniture, preference being given A. 4

to males. In the lack of such heirs, same are passed to the descendants of King George the First in the same order.

Article 36. Should there be no successor to the Throne in accordance with Article 35, the King appoints such with the consent of the Parliament, convened for the purpose, and by a vote of two thirds of the total number of Deputies taken by open ballot.

Article 37. 1. In the event of vacancy of the Throne, the royal authority is temporarily exercised by a three member Regency, composed of the Speaker of Parliament, the President of the Constitutional Court and the President of the Council of State. 2. Within two months, at the latest from the date such vacancy of the Throne has happened representatives, equal in number to the Deputies, are elected by those citizens having the right to vote as the law provides. These representatives convening together with the Parliament, elect the King by a majority of two thirds of the total number taken by open ballot. 3. The law shall regulate matters pertaining to the Regency.

Article 38. 1. In the event of death or abdication of the King, if the adult Crown Prince is absent, the Royal authority shall be exercised by the Cabinet until his arrival and oath. 2. In the event of death or abdication of the King, if the Crown Prince is a minor, the exercising of the Royal authority is entrusted to the three member Regency provided for in Article 37.

Article 39. 1. In the event of death of the King, if the Crown Prince is a minor, the guardian appointed in the deceased King's will is called to assume the guardianship, while Parliament, convening even if its term is completed or it has been dissolved, elects a co-guardian by absolute majority vote of its entire membership, voted in open ballot. A guardian is elected by Parliament only in the event that one has not been appointed by the will of the deceased King. 2. The guardian and co-guardian must be Greek citizens of the Eastern Orthodox Faith.

Article 40. In the event the King is absent abroad, the Royal authority shall be entrusted to the adult Crown Prince by Royal Decree issued on recommendation of the Council of Ministers. In case of lack of a Crown Prince, or due to minority or absence likewise abroad, Royal authority shall be entrusted to the president of the three member Regency, provided for in Article 37. Article 41. 1. If the King determines that due to illness the discharge of his duties is impeded, he shall appoint the Crown Prince as Regent by Royal Decree issued on recommendation of the Council of Ministers. In the lack of, minority or absence of the Crown Prince outside the State, the King by virtue of Royal Decree shall on recommendation of the Council of Ministers, appoint a Representative of the Throne, revocable without restriction, this to be a Greek citizen of the Eastern Orthodox Faith who shall discharge the Royal Authority in his name. By the same Royal Decree the jurisdictions of the Representative shall be defined. 2. If the King is not in a condition to discharge his duties, the Government shall convene the Parliament even though its term may have expired or it may have been dissolved. Should Parliament recognize the need for Regency by an absolute majority vote of the total number of its members or if not attaining it, by an absolute majority vote of those members present who must not be less than two fifths of the total number of deputies, in a second ballot taken within three days, the Crown Prince shall discharge Royal Authority. In lack of, minority or absence of the Crown Prince from the State, the Royal Authority shall be exercised by the three member Regency provided for in Article 37.

CHAPTER C

The Powers of the King.
Article 42. No act whatsoever of the King shall be valid nor it shall be executI, unless it is countersigned by the competent Minister, who by his ;nature alone is made responsible. Article 43. 1. The King shall appoint the Prime Minister and on his recommen shall appoint and dismiss the members of the Government. The

Government must enjoy the confidence of the Parliament. The King shall dismiss the Government after hearing the opinion of the Council of the Nation. 2. After general elections, the King shall appoint the leader of the party having the absolute majority in Parliament, as Prime Minister. If this party shall have no leader, the appointment of the Prime Minister shall take place after the parliamentary members of the party elect its leader. 3. In the event no party wins the absolute majority in Parliament, after general elections, Parliament after electing its Presidium proposes a Prime Minister, by absolute majority vote of all members of Parliament and the King appoints him. If during this sole ballot, no one has absolute majority, the King shall then appoint the Prime Minister after first having obtained the opinion of the Council of the Nation. 4. In every other case except that provided in art. 93. 3 the King shall appoint the Prime Minister after having obtained the opinion of the Council of the Nation. 5. In the event of change of the entire Government, the Royal Decree ordering its dismissal or approving its resignation and appointment of the new Government, shall be countersigned by the new Prime Minister after he is sworn-in.

Article 44. The King shall convene Parliament to regular session once a year, and to special sessions whenever He shall deem it advisable, proclaiming personally or through the Prime Minister the opening and closing of each parliamentary session. Article 45. 1. The King shall have the power to adjourn the works of the parliamentary session only once, by either postponing the opening or interrupting their continuation. 2. The adjournment of the work may not last more than thirty days and cannot be repeated during the same parliamentary session without the consent of Parliament. Article 46. 1. The King may dissolve Parliament after having heard the opinion of the Council of the Nation, yet, the Royal Decree dissolving -Parliament, countersigned by the Council of Ministers, must direct

the assembling of the electors within thirty five days and of the new Parliament within forty five days from the day of the elections.

Article 47. 1: The King shall ratify, issue and publish the laws voted by Par -liament. 2. A proposal or bill voted on by Parliament, but not signed, issued Ind published within a month by the King is again submitted to the ilenum of Parliament, and if Parliament passes it again by absolute majority or all its members, the King shall ratify issue and publish it s law within a month. Article 48. 1. The King shall issue the necessary decrees for the execution of thelaws,buHmynvrpedthialconrxempty from the execution thereof. 2. The issuance of Royal regulatory Decrees, is permitted on the issis of authorization granted by law within the limits thereof, on proposal of the competent Minister. 3. Laws voted by Parliament in a plenary session may grant autho to issue Royal Decrees of legislative nature. These laws. shall 'e the general legislative directions and shall have a time limit thin which such authority will tie exercised. 4. Matters Within the jurisdiction of the Plenum of the Parliament ording to Article 72 shall not be subject to delegation . provided for the previous paragraph. 5. On special occasions of extraordinarily urgent and unforseeable assity, the King, on recommendation of -the Cabinet and after the 'arming opinion of the Constitutional Court as to urgency, is led to issue legislative decrees. These must be submitted to the iament for validation within twenty days of their publication or in twenty days after it has been convened. If they are not sub. d to the Parliament within the aforementioned time limits or they notaprvedbyiwh montsfreih mission, they shall henceforth lose their effect.

Article 49. he King shall lead the armed forces. He shall confer military according to the law, to servicemen. The command of the forces shall be exercised by the Government as provided for 'tide 129 § 2.

Article 50. The King shall appoint and dismiss civil servants acc ording to law, with certain exceptions as provided thereof. Article 51. The. King shall award the established decorations in accordance with the provisions of the pertinent law. Article 52. 1. The King shall have the right, on recommendation of the Minister of Justice, and with the advice of a council composed in majority of judges, to pardon, commute or reduce sentences pronounced by the courts. 2. The King shall have the right, only by consent of Parliament, to grant pardon to a Minister convicted in accordance with Article 94. 3. Amnesty shall be granted only in the case of political crimes by Royal Decree issued at the proposal of the Council of Ministers. 4. Amnesty of common crimes shall not be granted even through law. Article 53. 1. The King shall represent the Nation internationally and He shall declare war on proposal of the Cabinet He shall conclude international treaties or conventions except those concluded by other officials to which the necessary authority has been conferred by law. 2. Peace treaties and agreements of alliance shall be communicated to Parliament, when the security and the interest of the country so permit. 3. Treaties or trade and other agreements embodying concessions which, according to the provisions of the Constitution, require a law or which impose burdens to Greeks individually, shall have no power without statutory law enactment. 4. Secret articles of a treaty can never reverse the non-secret articles. 5. In order to serve world peace and promote cooperation with other States, the acknowledging of powers to instruments of international organizations, is, according to the Constitution, possible through a treaty or agreement. For the voting of the law ratifying the treaty or agreement, the presence of four fifths of the members of Parliament is required as well as a majority of three fourths of those part taking in the vote.

Article 54. 1. The King, in specially provided instances under the Constitution, shall convene the Council of the Nation under his chairmanship The King shall convene it also on other instances on proposal of the Cabinet. 2. The Council of the Nation shall comprise the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the Parliament, the leaders of the two largest parties in Parliament, provided either of them is not the Prime Minister, the President of the Constitutional Court and the Chief of the Armed Forces. Article 55. The King shall have no other powers except those explicitly vested in him by the Constitution.

SECTION 2

THE PARLIAMENT

CHAPTER A

Election and constitution of the Parliament.

Article 56. 1. The Parliament is composed of Deputies, elected in accordance with the law through direct, universal and secret suffrage by those citizens who have attained to their twenty first year of age and have the right to vote. 2. Those irrevocably convicted.. to any penalty whatsoever for acts or activities directed against the existing political or social system shall be denied the right to vote. 3. The parliamentary elections shall 'be carried out simultaneously throughout the Country. 4. The discharge of the right to vote , shall be mandatory.

Article 57. 1. The number of Deputies for , each electoral district is designated by virtue of a Royal Decree, in proportion to its legal population, as determined in the last census ; however, the total number of Deputies shall never exceed one hundred and fifty.

2. The electoral system and the electoral districts shall be deter. mined by law voted upon in a plenary session of the Parliament, and applicable, to the elections following the next pending ones. 3. The number of electoral districts may not be less than ten or more than fifteen, while the formation of each one of them on the basis of legal population, must be such as to elect a minimum of at least five Deputies. 4. The election of a portion of Parliament, not less than one sixth and not more than one fifth of the total number of Deputies, shall be carried out uniformly throughout the Country, on the basis of the electoral strength of each party. The nomination of these Deputies shall be made 'as specifically provided by law on the basis of a separate list of candidates from each party and in proportion to the number of preference votes which each one received. These lists shall be deposited with the Constitutional Court and published at least fifteen days before the elections. The candidates appearing on the list may not also stand as candidates in the electoral districts. 5. The number of Deputies elected in the electoral districts shall be determined by subtracting from the total number of Deputies those elected in accordance with the previous paragraph. 6. A party or coalition of parties which has not accumulated a certain percentage of the total valid ballots shall not be entitled to representation in Parliament. This percentage fixed by law can not be higher than one sixth and or lower than one tenth for parties, and not higher than one third and lower than one fourth for coalitions of parties. Article 58.

1. Greek citizens having the right to vote, may freely establish political parties and participate in them. The political parties through
their activity shall express the will of the people and must contribute to the advancement of the national interest.

2. The organization, the program and the activity of the parties must be governed by national and democratic principles. Their leaders and administrative committee must be elected by representative conventions of their members. The Charter of every party must be approved by the Constitutional Court, which checks as to the conformity of its provisions in relation to the Constitution. No party shall have the right to participate in elections if its Charter has not had the aforementioned approval.
3. The parties shall be required to maintain records of revenue and expenses, as well as control records there of. In these ledgers every type of contribution must be listed by name. During the month of February of each year the parties shall be required to issue their financial statement of the previous year.

	 specifically 4. The general functioning of the parties, as of the provided by law, shall be subject to the continuous supervision Constitutional Court, which shall have the right to dissolve any party.. whatsoever for violation of the Constitution or the
were

5. Parties whose aims or activities are manustlyorcipedhformsteofgvrnmtedohwxistng social system or endanger the territorial integrity of the state or of the public security, shall be outlawed and dissolved decision Constitutional Court, as provided by law. 6. The Deputies of the party being dissolved shall be declared deposed of their office, and the seats held by them in Parliament shall period . remain vacant until the termination of the parliamentary 7. The application of the provisions of this articles are regulated by law. Article 59. The Deputies shall represent the Nation.

Article 60. 1.' The Deputies shall be elected for five consecutive years com	 expiry of the mencing from the day of the general elections. the Cabinet ed parliamentary period a Royal Decree countersigned shall direct the holding of general parliamentary electives within thirty five days. The new Parliament shall convene in regular session within forty five days from the time the elections	 werhld. 2. The Parliamentary elections shall be carried and in any case by a political (not caretaker) Government. 3. A Parliamentary seat vacated during the last year of the period, shall not be filled through a supplementary election. as provided by law, when the number of the vacant seats does not exceed one fifth of the total number of Deputies. 4. In the event of war, the Parliamentary period is extended throughout it. If Parliament has dissolved, the carr ying out of elections is postponed until the end of the war.

Article 61. 1. In order for one to be eligible for Deputy, he must be a Greek on the day citizen, must have attained to the age of twenty-five yea rs f election, and when eligible to vote in accordance with the law, lust be enrolled in an electoral list, and must be bearer of at least high school, general or vocational education diplomn A. 5

2. No one can be proclaimed a candidate, or elected Deputy if: a) he does not possess Greek nationality by birth, except in case of territorial annexation, b) he is a naturalized Greek male citizen as well as a female who acquired Greek citizenship through marriage before ten years have elapsed from the time of naturalization or marriage, c) he has not fulfilled his military obligations or has not been legally exempted thereof, d) through an irrevocable sentence, he has been deprived of his political rights, for a time-period twice as long as that prescribed in the Court decision depriving him of his political rights, even though he may have been pardoned with lifting of the consequences, e) he has been irrevocably convicted for treason, premeditated murder, espionage, robbery, theft, bribery, desertion, counterfeiting, forgery, perfidy, fraud, extortion, crimes against morals, slanderous defamation or traffic of narcotics, to a life-term except if reinstated, f) he has been irrevocably convicted to a life-term for active participation in a party, organization, association or union, aiming at the propagation and application of ideas tending to overthrow the existing political .or social system or the detachment of part of the State territory. 3. A Deputy deprived of one of the above qualifications or falling under one of the cases of § 2, forfeits eo ipso his parliamentary office. Should doubts arise, the Constitutional Court shall decide. 4. No one may be elected Deputy for four continuous parliamentary periods. Exception is made for those who served as parliamentary Prime Ministers, or leaders of parties acknowledged according to the Constitution and the Rules of Parliament. 5. A member of the Government, with the exception of the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Ministers of the Government, may not submit candidacy for the immediately forthcoming elections even though he had resigned before the termination of the period. Article 62. 1. Salaried civil servants, regular officers of the armed forces, the security forces, the Port Officers Corps; the fire department, mayors and presidents of communities, notary publics, registrars of mortgages and property transfers, employees of local government bodies or other public entities or employees of public or municipal enterprises, directors and presidents of administrative councils of all the above, cannot be nominated as candidates nor elected. Deputies unless they resign their positions prior to being nominated candidates. 2. The resignation will be submitted in writing. The return of such resignees to the position from which they resigned shall be forbidden.

3. Military personnel, civil servants or in general those who have assumed the obligation to remain in the service for a fixed period of time, shall not be permitted to be nominated as candidates or elected as Deputies during the period of such obligation. Article 63. 1. The duties of the Deputy shall be incompatible with the duties of a director or other representative, administrative or paid legal counsel and employee of commercial companies or enterprises enjoying special privileges or regular state subsidy based on special legislation. 2. Those falling under any of the above categories must state their choice between the Deputy position and the above tasks within eight days after their election has been made final. In the event they fail to submit their statement within the specified time limit they automatically forfeit the office of Deputy. 3. The law may determine the incompatibility between the Deputy's position and other positions. 4. Deputies accepting activities or duties referred to herein or in the previous article, as well as duties or activities defined by law as incompatible to the position of Deputy, shall forfeit eo ipso their rights to it. 5. Lawyers who have been elected Deputies cannot practise law except before the Constitutional Court, the State Council and Supreme Court. 6. Deputies cannot rent farmland belonging to the State, or undertake state procurements or same for local government bodies or other public entities or public or municipal enterprises, or act as contractors for the execution of municipal, or local public works or rent public or municipal taxes, or accept concessions on public property. Any violation of the above regulations will cause forfeiture of the Deputy's position and cancellation of the contract. Such contracts shall also be void when consummated by commercial companies or enterprises in which a Deputy is director, legal or administrative counsellor, or a member or a limited liability or general partner in a partnership. 7. The Constitutional Court, as prescribed by law, shall decide on questions relating to restriction, incompatibilities and forfeiture of the position of Deputy. Article 64. 1. It is the prerogative of the Deputy to resign his parliamentary post, same being effected as soon as the required written statement is submitted to the Speaker of the Parliament this being an irrevocable
•

2. The renegation of a Deputy to another party during the Par. liamentary period shall he prohibited and shall be considered as a resignation. A statement of party independence shall be permitted.

Article 65. The control of the validity of parliamentary elections shall be assigned to the Constitutional Court.

Article 66. 1. The Deputies before undertaking their duties shall take in the Parliament and in a public session the following oath: do solemnly swear in the name of the Holy, Homoiousian and Indivisible Trinity to observe loyalty to the Country and to the Constitutional King, to obey the Constitution and the laws and to conscientiously carry out my duties x..

a

2. Deputies of other religions shall take the above oath in accordance with the ritual of their own religion.

Article 67. 1. No Deputy may be prosecuted or questioned in any manner, because of an opinion or vote rendered by him during the performance of his duties as a member of the Parliament. 2. By way of exception a Deputy shall be responsible and shall be prosecuted according to the law for insulting and defaming, slanderously or not, a person or an authority. In these cases, no permission of Parliament shall be required for his prosecution. 3. Whosoever publishes, or in any way discloses the contents of reports queries or interpellations deposited in Parliament, prior to a discussion before it, or the furnishing of a written reply thereon shall be liable for similar violations, to those charged to the Deputy who has deposited them. Article 68. No Deputy may be prosecuted, arrested or imprisoned during the Parliamentary session without the permission of the Body. The permission shall be considered granted, if the Parliament does not respond within forty-five days from the time the Public Prosecutor's application was forwarded to the Speaker of the Parliament Permission is not required for in the act, crimes, as well as for insult and ordinary or slanderous defamation.

Article 69. 1. The Parliament by means of Rules voted according to Article 80, Para. 1 and published in the Government Gazette per the instructions of its Speaker shall define the manner in which it shall carry out its duties, as well as, all matters concerning its personnel. 2. The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of the provisions of Parliamentary Rules upon the petition of a Deputy. 3. Parliament shall elect the Speaker and other members of the Presidium from its members as provided by the Rules. 4. The Speaker and the Deputy - Speakers are elected in the beginning of every session for the entire duration of it by a two thirds majority of the whole number of MPs. In the event such majority is not attained, voting is repeated. If during this vote a three fifths majority of the whole number of Deputies is not attained, a third vote takes place during which an absolute majority of the whole number. of Deputies is sufficient for the election. 5. The Speaker shall take care for the maintenance of order in the Parliament. He shall have the authority to impose on misconducting Deputies the penalty of recalling them to order and recording it in the minutes. After three such recalls within the same session, he shall order the expelling of the Deputy for the rest of the session and the corresponding deduction in Parliamentary remuneration. 6. The acts of the Speaker which concern the hiring and in general the service status of the personnel of the Parliament, are subject to an appeal or petition for annulment before the Council of State.

Article 70. 1. Deputies shall be entitled to remuneration payable from the Public Treasury, and specified by a law voted on by the plenum of Parliament. No exemption, discharge, allowance, privilege or allocation of any other nature is granted to Deputies. 2. If a Deputy shall be absent from more than five. (5) meetings per month without the permission of the Parliament, one-thirtieth of his monthly remuneration will be withheld for each absence.

CHAPTER B

Powers and operation of Parliament.
Article 71. 1. Parliament convenes ipso jure on the 15th of the month of September of every year in regular session fort its annual work, except if the King has convened the body in session earlier in accordance with Article 44. 2. The duration of the regular session cannot be less than three months, not including the time of suspension, according to Article 45. The regular session is obligatorily extended until the approval of the budget according to Article 83 or the voting of a special law according to the same article. 3. The Parliament shall carry out its legislative work in plenum and in two sections. 4. These sections are formed in proportion to the strength of the parties, more specifically as provided for by the Rules of Parliament. 5. The Rules of Parliament shall also specify the distribution of competence between the sections according to Ministries 6. During the period Parliament is not in session, a special section shall be in operation thereof. The provisions of the Constitution pertaining to the other sections shall apply thereon. 7. The provisions of the Constitution pertaining to Parliament, if not otherwise specified, apply to its plenary and by sections operation. Article 72. 1. Drafts and bills relating to the following matters shall be discussed and voted upon by Parliament in plenary session: the Royal House, the Regency, the election of Deputies and the incompatibility of their duties to other activities, the electoral system and the electoral districts, delegating powers according to Art. 48 §2, Deputies remuneration, the abuse of civil liberties, the dissolution of parties, the organizing and functioning of the Constitutional Court, boundary changes of the country, the entry and sojourn of foreign troops in the country or crossing of the country by them, the criminal liability of the Ministers, the state of siege, the issuance of currency, the levy of taxes and in general of public burdens, the relief or exemption from taxation, the granting of pensions, the State budget and accounts as well as drafts and bills which are submitted to it by the Government or the sections of the Parliament, following a decision taken by the absolute majority of their members.

2. The Parliament in plenary session votes its own Rules and those of its sections. 3. All other drafts or bills are submitted to the sections, being discussed and voted by them,, as more specifically provided by. the Rules. • 4. Every dispute as to the competence of a section, is reffered to the plenum of the Parliament, following a decision of the section such decision taken by an absolute majority vote of the total of its members. The decision of the plenum binds the sections. 5. The plenum of Parliament following a decision taken by the absolute majority of the entire number of Deputies, may ask that a draft or proposal of law which has been pending before a section, be brought before it for discussion and vote.

Article 73. Parliament shall convene in plenum at least once weekly in order to discharge Parliamentary control.

Article 74. 1. The Parliament shall convene in open sessions at the. Parliament House, but may also deliberate in closed sessions at the request of the Government or fifteen Deputies, if so decided by a majority vote in secret meeting. Afterwards, it shall decide if, on the same subject, the discussion should be repeated in an open sitting. 2. The Ministers and Under-Secretaries shall have free access to the meetings of the Parliament and shall be heard whenever they request the floor. 3. The Parliament and the parliamentary committees may petition the presence of the Minister and Under-Secretary competent on the topics being discussed by them.

Article 75. 1. The plenum of the Parliament can not proceed to a discussion without the presence of at least 50 of its members nor can it decide without the absolute majority of the members present which, however, under no circumstances can be less than forty Deputies. 2. No section of the Parliament shall debate without at least twenty five of its members being present nor may it reach any decision without the absolute majority of those present which, however, can never be less than twenty.

3. In the case of a tie vote, voting is repeated, and on a second tie the proposal is dropped. 4. The final vote of Bills and drafts, in both the plenum and in the sections, is always by name. Article 76. No self-invited person shall appear before the Parliament to report anything verbally or in writing. Petitions are presented through a Deputy or submitted to the Presidium. The Parliament shall have the right to forward to the Ministers, the reports addressed to it, and the Ministers or Under-Secretaries are obligated to make clarifications whenever requested. Article 77. 1. On commencement of each regular session, the Parliament establishes committees composed of its members in proportion to the strength of the parties, for the elaboration and study of Bills and drafts submitted to it. 2. The Parliament establishes Investigation Committees composed of its members in proportion to the strength of the parties. The establishment of these Committees is mandatory if two fifths of all the members of Parliament, so request. A law prescribes the functions of these Investigation Committees. 3. The establishment of Investigation Committees on matters pertaining to foreign policy or to the defence of the country is not permitted.

Article 78. 1. The right to propose laws belongs to Parliament and the Government. 2. Every bill or law proposal, prior to being brought before Parliament, shall be referred to a special Committee for legal elaboration, as per the specific stipulations of the law. Article 79.
1. Every draft and bill shall be accompanied by an explanatory report as well as the report of the committee which made the elaboration of the legal text according to article 78 § 2. The draft or bill is forwarded to a Parliamentary Committee and on submission of its report or inactive expiration of the designated time limit, it shall be introduced for discussion after verbal recommendation by the competent Minister or Rapporteur of the committee, provided same was not conducted when the draft or bill was submitted.

2. Bills aiming at the modification, of laws concerning pensions or the granting of pensions or the acknowledgement of service duty which gives such a right, are submitted only by the Minister of Finance following the opinion of the Council of Comptrollers and in case of pensions which shall be borne by the budget of organizations of local government or other legal entities of public law, by the competent Minister and by the Minister of Finance. Such pension Bills must be specific, and the entering of provisions referring to pensions in laws aimed at regulating other matters shall not be allowed, or such bills will be null and void. 3. Any and all Law Bills 'and Drafts entailing additional budget expenditure submitted by Ministers, shall not be processed unless they are to be accompanied by a report of the State Accounts Office specifying the expenses to be incurred. If such Bills and Drafts of Law are submitted by Deputies they are previously forwarded to the State Accounts Office which shall be obligated to submit a relevant report within fifteen days, otherwise, upon inactive expiration of the above time-limit the Law Draft may be processed without said report. 4. The same applies to the amendments, if so requested by the competent Minister. In this case the State Accounts Office is required to submit their report to the Parliament, within three days. Upon inactive expiration of said time-limit the discussion may also proceed without the report. 5. No Bill or Draft of Law amendment or supplement originating from the Parliament shall be introduced for discussion, if entailing Public expenditure, local government or local entities of Public Law expenditure or curtailment of their revenues or their property to the end of granting salaries or pension or personal benefit in general, or if it refers to the general status of public servants, local government employees or other public entities or public concerns, in general. 6. A law draft entailing expense or curtailment of the revenues shall not be introduced for discussion, unless accompanied by a special report signed by the competent Minister- and by the Minister of Finance and specifying the manner in which said expenses or curtailments are to be met. 7. All Bills introducing local or special taxes or any kind of dues in favour of organizations or of public entities or private entities, must also be countersigned by the Ministers of Coordination and Finance. 8. A Bill or Draft of law aiming at the amendment of provisions of a previous law, shall not be introduced for discussion if the entire text of the provision to be amended is not entered in the explanatory report and if the entire new provision as formulated after the amendment is not entered in the text of the Draft or the proposal.

9. No law Bill or Draft containing provisions unrelated to the main scope of the draft or proposal shall be entered for discussion. 10. No addition or modification to a law Bill or draft, shall be introduced for discussion, unless it is directly related to the main scope of the draft or proposal.

Article 80. 1. Every Bill and Draft is discussed and voted upon once on a per principle, per article, and per its entirety basis. 2. By exception, Bills and Drafts are discussed and voted twice by the plenum of Parliament and at two different debates which are at least two days apart, during the first meeting in principle and per article, and during the second, per article and in the entirety, if so requested by one third of the entire number of Deputies up to the commencement of the discussion in Parliament. 3. Submitted amendments are referred to the legal committee for elaboration, as provided by Article 78 paragraph 2. 4. If during the discussion amendments have been accepted, the voting of the entirety is postponed for three -days from the day of distribution of the amended draft. A second postponement is not permitted. 5. Amendments by Deputies, not previously submitted with regard to the drafting of parliamentary committee's report, are not introduced for discussion without the consent of the Government. 6. A law provision not related to tie main scope of the law is null and void. A law containing more than one provisions unrelated to each other, is invalid in its entirety. 7. Judicial administrative, codes drawn up by special committees constituted by special laws, can be passed by a separate law validating such codes in their entirety. 8. The codification of existing provisions can be made by means of a simple classification thereof or by the revalidation of abolished laws save for laws regulating tax matters.

Article 81. A law Bill or Draft rejected by the Plenum of the Parliament or one of its sections, may not be re-introduced during the same session nor in the section operating after Parliament adjournment.

Article 82. 1. No tax can be levied or collected without law. 2. The object of taxation, the tax rate, the procedure of assessing. taxes, tax exemptions or exceptions as well as the granting of pensions cannot be objects of legislative delegation. 3. No tax or any other financial levy can be imposed by retroactive law. 4. By way of exception, any import or export duties or consumer's tax levied or increased, can be collected from the day the Bill is submitted to Parliament, provided the law is promulgated in accordance with the time limits of article 47 § 2, or within 10 days after the close of the session at the latest. Article 83. 1. During its regular annual session, the Parliament votes on the national budget of income and expenditures for the following year, and decides on the annual report submitted thereof. 2. All State income and expenditures must appear in both the budget and the annual report. 3. The budget is submitted to the Parliament through the Minister of Finance at least one month' prior to the beginning of the fiscal year and after it has been examined by a special committee of Deputies, it is voted upon as provided in the Rules of the Parliament. 4. Upon the beginning of the fiscal year, the introduced budget shall be considered to have been passed, while the administration of the State's income and expenditures will he made in accordance with the provisions thereof. The Parliament may amend amounts specified, within two months from the beginning of the fiscal year. 5. If for any reason whatsoever, the administration of the income and disbursements based on the budget becomes infeasible then the administrating shall be made as provided by special law. 6. If the budget or special law referred to in the preceding paragraph are not passed due to termination of the session of Parliament, a Royal Decree issued on proposal of the Council of Ministers, shall extend the validity of the budget of the previous fiscal year by four months. 7. The annual report and the general balance-sheet of the State must be submitted to the Parliament within a year from the end of the fiscal year at the latest. They are examined by a special committee of Deputies and are voted on by the Parliament in accordance with its Rules.

Article 84. No salary, pension, subsidy or compensation shall be entered in the State budget or granted without organisational or other special law. Article 85. The minting and issuing of currency, is regulated by law. Article 86. 1. The authentic interpretation of law, lies with the legislative authority. 2. A law which is not actually an interpretative one, shall have effect as a new law.

SECTION 3

THE GOVERNMENT

CHAPTER A

The composition of the government. Article 87. 1. The government is composed of the Cabinet comprising, the Ministers under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister. 2. By Royal Decree issued on proposal of the Prime Minister, up to two Deputy Prime Ministers may be appointed, with or without portfolio. 3. In want of a Deputy Prime Minister, the Prime Minister may designate, whenever necessary, one of the Ministers to provisionally act in his stead. 4. The number of Ministers cannot be higher than twenty. 5. A special law regulates the office of Under-Secretaries who are invited, according to circumstances, to participate in the meetings of the Cabinet whenever their presence is considered necessary by the Prime Minister. Article 88. 1 No member of the Royal Family may be appointed Minister Under-Secretary.

2. With the exception of the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Ministers, no member of Parliament may be appointed member of the Government or Under-Secretary, even though he may resign his parliamentary office. 3. No one may be appointed as member of the Cabinet or . UnderSecretary if he lacks the qualifications for Deputy, as provided for under Article 61 § 1 or if he comes within any of the conditions of article 61 § 2. 4. The provisions of Article 63 shall apply both to the Ministers and Under-Secretaries. Lawyers appointed as Ministers or Under-Secretaries, may not practise law. 5. A law, may establish the incompatibility of the office of Minister or Under-Secretary with other activities.

CHAPTER B

Scope and responsibilities of the Government.
Article 89. 1. The Prime Minister designates and expresses the general policy of the Government, secures its unity and directs its activities towards implementation of its policies, being responsible towards the Parliament and the King as regards fulfillment of his mission. 2. The Prime Minister supervises the implementation of the laws by the Government as well as the Public interest services in general and their proper functioning in the interest of the State and of the citizens. Article -90. The Deputy Prime Ministers of the Government, assist the Prime Minister or replace same in his absence or when he is impeded, as per his decisions in this connection.

Article 91. 1. Each Minister shall carry out the duties in accordance with the law pertaining to his office. Ministers Without portfolio, shall perform such duties as prescribed by the decision of the Prime Minister. 2. The Under-Secretaries assist the Minister at the Ministry to which they have been appointed and perform such duties as entrusted to them by his decision.

Article 92. The members of the Government and the Under-Secretaries are collectively responsible for its general policy, each one being held personally responsible for his actions or omissions within the competence of his office. Article 93. 1. The Government must, within fifteen days from the date the Prime Minister has taken the oath of office, table a motion of confidence by the Parliament. The Government is entitled to do so at any other time. If during the forming of the Government the Parliament is not in session, the latter is called to session within fifteen days for a vote of confidence. 2. Parliament may, by decision taken through an absolute majority vote of all its members, withdraw its confidence from the Government or one of its members. A motion of censure cannot be submitted, except after the lapse of one year from the rejection of such a motion, by Parliament or from the approval by it of a motion of confidence submitted by the Government. A motion of censure must be undersigned by at least one sixth of the Deputies, and the points on which discussion of the motions is to take place, must be clearly specified. 3. By exception, a motion of censure can also be submitted before the lapse of one year, if it is undersigned by the half plus one of the _ entire number of Deputies, provided it is accompanied by proposal designating a new Prime Minister. 4. The discussion on the motion of confidence or censure, commences two days after introduction of the relative proposal, unless the Government asks for the immediate opening of the debate, at any rate it may not be extended beyond the period of three days or five days if specifically relating to the political program of the Government 5. On a motion of confidence or censure, voting takes place imme-diately after the termination of the debate; it may, however, be postponed for forty eight hours, if the Government so requests. 6. A motion of confidence can not be accepted if it is not bayptheroslvumdji ftheandgDpuis,womayn no case be less than two fifths of the total number of Deputies. A motion of censure may be accepted only after approval by the absolute majority of the total number of Deputies. 7. The Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Ministers, if members of Parliament, are entitled to vote on the above motions.

Article 94. 1. The. Parliament is entitled to accuse the Cabinet members and the Under-Secretaries in conformity, with the laws on responsibility of Ministers, before a special court which is presided by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and composed of twelve judges drawn by the Speaker in public session from all justices of the Supreme Court and the judges of the Court of Appeal who were in office before the indictment, according to the specific provisions of the law. 2. No prosecution, investigation or preliminary investigation shall be assumed against a Cabinet member or Under-Secretary, before the Parliament so decides. Any administrative inquiry is also considered as an investigation. If, during the administrative inquiry, evidence is found capable of substantiating liability of a Cabinet member or Under-Secretary, the investigators shall promptly interrupt the investigations and shall forward the evidence, through. the Public Prosecutor, to the Parliament. 3. The Parliament shall decide on the formulation of charges against a member of the Government or an Under-Secretary, following an investigation and report by the Commissioner under Article 127, as provided by the law.

SECTION 4 THE COURTS

CHAPTER A

Constitution of the courts. Article 95. 1. Justice is administred by courts constituted of regular judges. 2. In discharging their duties, judges are subject only to the Constitution and the Laws. 3. No query or interpellation or declaration may be submitted or any discussion whatsoever may be conducted in Parliament concerning a trial pending before any court. Article 96.
1. The regular justices of any category, the regular members of

he Council of Comptrollers, and the prosecuting Attorneys are appointed to the initial rank by the King, in accordance with the law.

2. Special laws shall determine the qualifications, the rank, salary and general service status of the functionaries mentioned in the previous paragraph. Article 97. 1. The members of the Constitutional Court, State Councellors, Supreme Court justices, members of the Council of Comptrollers, judges of the Courts of Appeal, the assistant-members of the State Council and the Council of Comptrollers, the judges of the District Courts and the regular judges of the regular administrative courts are appointed for life. The prosecuting attorneys and assistant prosecuting attorneys, the general Commissioners of the Council of Comptrollers, the commissioners and vice-commissioners of the administrative courts, the reporters of the Council of State, Justices of the Peace, magistrates, clerks of all courts and prosecuting attorneys offices and their assistants, Notary Publics as well as the registrars of mortgages and deeds shall be permanent, and shall hold their positions as long as their respective posts exist. The life-long or permanent members of the judiciary and other • Court employees may be dismissed from their positions only by virtue of a judicial decision, because of criminal conviction, breach of discipline, illness or incompetence, confirmed as the law provides and in accordance with the provisions of Articles 116 and 117. 2. Retirement is compulsory for members of the Council of State, the Supreme Court justices, the prosecuting attorney and the assistant prosecuting attorneys at the Supreme Court, the members of the Council of Comptrollers, the chief judges and prosecuting attorneys of the Court of Appeal, the Presidents of the Appellate administrative courts, the General Commissioner of the Council of Comptrollers, the Commissioners of the Appellate administrative Court, upon completion of their seventieth year of age. All other regular judges, prosecuting attorneys, commissioners and assistant commissioners of the administrative courts retire upon completion of the sixty fifth year of their age. 3. Notary publics and non-salaried registrars of deeds and mortgages retire upon completion of the seventhieth year of their age. Article 98. 1. The members of the Constitutional Court are appointed, as provided by law, by Decree issued at the recommendation of the Council of Ministers following the opinion of the plenum of the Constitutional Court. 2.. The number of members of the Constitutional Court shall be eleven. It may, however, be increased up to fifteen by Royal Decree, issued at the, recommendation -of the Ministerial Council following the concurring • opinion of the Constitutional Court

3. The members of the Constitutional Court are selected: a) among the members of the highest Court or University professors of law or distinguished legal scholars and b) from public personalities distinguished in the political, economic and professional life, as well as public functionaries of the highest rank. 4. The majority of the members of the Constitutional Court come from those under (a) of the previous paragraph. 5. The offices of President and Vice-Presidents of the Constitutional Court are occupied by members of their Court who are promoted to them by Royal Decree issued on recommendation of the Council of Ministers. G. All matters concerning the auxiliary judiciary personnel, secre- tarial and other staff of the Constitutional Court shall be determined by law. 7. During the first period of application of the present Constitution, of the eleven members of Constitutional Court, six shall be appointed from category (a) and the remaining five from category (b) of paragraph 3 of the present' article. Their appointment is made by Royal Decree on recommendation of the Council of Ministers, after opinion of a Committee, the composition of which is provided by law. Article 99. 1. Counsel and assistant Counsel of the State Council are promoted as provided by law, by virtue of Royal Decree issued on the recommendation of the Minister of Justice with the concurring opinion of the plenum of this court, 2. The promotions to the positions of President and Vice-Presidents of the Council of State are reserved to Counsel of this Court, by virtue of Royal Decree issued on -recommendation of the Council of Ministers. Article 100. 1. Promotions, assignments, transfers and detachments of the justices of the regular civil and Criminal Courts, as well as those of public prosecutors and assistant public prosecutors, are effected by Royal Decree, issued on the recommendation of the Minister of Justice following a decision by the Supreme Judicial Council. This Council is composed of members of the Supreme Court. If the Minister of Justice disagrees with a 'decision of the Supreme Judicial Council he may, within a mandatory time limit of fifteen days from the day he is taking notice of the decision, refer it to the plenum of the Supreme Court. The decisions of the plenum of the Supreme Court, as

well as those of the Supreme judicial Council, to which he did not dissent, are mandatory for the Minister. 2. Promotions to the offices of Chief Justice, Deputy-Chief justices and Public Prosecutor of the Supreme Court are reserved to the members of the Supreme Court and are effected by Royal Decree, issued on the recommendation of the Council of Ministers. 3. Decisions provided for by this article as well as the a dministrative acts issued in execution thereof; are not subject to review by the Council of State. Article 101. 1. The assistant members of the Council of Comptrollers are promoted by virtue of Royal Decree, issued on recommendation of the competent Minister with the concurring opinion of the plenum of this Court, in accordance with the provisions of the law. 2. The promotions to the offices of President and Vice-President of the Council of Comptrollers are reserved for the counselors of this Court and are effected by Royal Decree issued on recommendation of the Council of Ministers. Article 102. 1. The promotions, assignments, transfers and detachments of justices, commissioners and vice-commissioners of the administrative courts are effected 'by Royal Decree, issued on recommendation of the competent Minister pursuant to prior decision of the Supreme Council of Administrative Justice. This Council is composed of members of the Council of State. If the competent Minister dissents to 'a decision of the Supreme Council of Administrative Justice he may, within the mandatory time limit of fifteen days from the day the decision was announced to him, refer ;the case to the plenum of the . Council of State. The decisions of the plenum of the Council of State as well as those of the Supreme Council of Administrative Justice to which he has not dissented, are binding for the Minister. 2. Decisions issued according to the provisions of the present article, as well as the administrative acts issued in execution thereof, are not subject to review by the Council of State. Article 103. The acceptance of any, other paid service or the practising of any profession whatsoever, as well as the participation in administrative bodies of local government organisations or other public entities public enterprises and commercial companies is prohibited for regular justices. Their election as members of the Academy of Athens as well as their assignment to the special administrative courts, provided. for by Article 109 Paragraph 3, is permitted.

Article 104. 1. Disciplinary power over the members of the Constitutional Court, the State Council, the Supreme Court and the Council of Comptrollers is discharged, in accordance with the law, by a council composed of two members from each of these courts, under the chairmanship — in cases concerning members of the Constitutional Court of the President of the State Council, and in cases concerning members of the Council of State, the Supreme Court and the Council of Comptrollers, of the President of the Constitutional Court. The members of the council are chosen by a drawing of lots. The members of the court, on the activities of which in its entirety or of some of its members the council is called upon to pass judgment, are not included in the drawings. The disciplinary action is taken up by the Minister of Justice. 2. The disciplinary power over the remaining regular judges, public prosecutors, assistant prosecutors, commissioners and deputy-commissioners of the Administrative Courts, is exercised by councils composed of regular judges in accordance with the law. Disciplinary action is taken before these councils by the Minister of Justice. 3. The decisions issued in accordance with this article are not subject to review before the State Council. Article •105. The qualifications of the employees of the secretariat of all courts and district attorneys offices are predetermined by law. The transfer, detachment and promotion of these employees is effected pursuant to a concurring and considered opinion of the legal councils, composed of regular judges, and disciplinary power is discharged upon them by the regular judges, prosecutors and assistant prosecutors or by court councils, composed as the law rules.

CHAPTER B

The Powers of the Courts.

Article 106. 1. The Constitutional Court decides on the meaning and the extent of the powers of the King, Parliament and the Government, upon application, in accordance with the Constitution, of the Government,
the Speaker of the Parliament or a Parts' recognized according to the Constitution and the Rules of Parliament. The decisions of the Constitutional Court shall he published, upon instructions from its president. in the Government Gazette.

2. The Constitutional Court decides: On appeals against legislative or administrative acts, on the preparation or carriage of parliamentary elections, as well as pleas against the validity of the election of deputies, whether they refer to electoral violations in carrying them out, or lack of qualification. b) On the constitutionality of a law, legislative decree, or on provisions thereof, in the event of publication of conflicting decisions as to it by the State Council, the Supreme Court or the Council of Comptrollers upon petition by the Minister of .Justice or anyone having a lawful interest. c) On every other case coming under its jurisdiction, as provided for by the Constitution.
A)

3. All decisions of the Constitutional Court are irrevocable. They are published by order of its President in the Government Gazette, and from the time of their publication, the' decisions are res judicata to all.
4. A provision of law or legislative decree proclaimed unconstitutional by decision of the Constitutional Court, is null and void as of the time such law or decree is published or from the time set forth in the decision.

Article 107. 1. Under the jurisdiction of the Council of State fall: a) The elaboration of regulatory decrees and those under article 48 § 2. b) The annulment —upon petition— of acts of the administrative authorities on account of excess , of their authority or violation of a law as more specifically provided for by the law. c) The reversal, upon petition, of a final decision of the administrative courts for violation of the law or excess of authority. d) Any other administrative case provided by- the Constitution or the law. 2. A law-may establish further grounds for reversal or annulment. 3. The provisions of Articles 116 and 117 Of the Constitution do not apply in the case of paragraph 1. 4. Compliance with the annulling decision of the Council of State constitutes an obligation for the Administration. Article 108. 1. Under the jurisdiction of the Council of Comptrollers fall: a) The rendering of opinions on law pertaining to pensions, granting of pensions or acknowledgement of service for the granting of a pension according to :Article 79, paragraph 2.

b) The account to the Parliament on the financial report and general balance-sheet. c) The auditing of expenditures of the State agencies, 'of local government and other legal entities of Public Law as the law provides. d) The auditing of rendered public accountings. e) The adjudication of disputes arising from the auditing of rendered public accountings. f) The recourse or appeals against the accountable 'actions of Ministers or other administrative officers, the local government bodies; and other legal entities of Public Law. g) The adjudication of cases concerning the liability of civil servants for all damage incurred to the State resulting from fraud or negligence. h) The hearing of appeals arising from the pension awards according to the law. i) All other administrative . cases specified by law. 2. The provisions of Articles 116- and 117 of the Constitution are not applicable to the cases under a.b.c., and :a of the preceding para- graph. 3. The decisions of the Council of Comptrollers on the assessment of those accountable and the awarding of pensions are not subject to review by the Council of State. Article 109. 1. Regular administrative courts are established by special legislation for the adjudication of either all the administrative disputes or certain categories thereof. 2. Every other administrative case specified by law shall fall under the jurisdiction of regular administrative courts. 3. Administrative disputes continue under the jurisdiction of the regular civil courts, as provided for by law, until the establishement of the regular administrative courts, save for those placed under the jurisdiction of administrative courts established by special laws in observance of articles 116 and 117 of the Constitution. Pending the issuance of special laws, those existing concerning administrative jurisdiction are valid. Article 110. All disputes or cases of civil law fall under the jurisdiction of the regular civil courts, while criminal cases fall under the jurisdiction of criminal courts.

Article 111. 1. Crimes and political offences are brought before mixed courts constituted as the law provides, by regular judges constituting majority and jurors. 2. Until the present comes into effect, crimes placed under the jurisdiction of the appeal courts by parliamentary acts and special laws shall continue to be decided by them, provided a law does not place them under the jurisdiction of the mixed courts. 3. Press offences fall under the jurisdiction of the regular criminal courts, as provided by law. Article 112. 1. Special laws, in deviation of the provision of paragraph 1 Article 95 shall govern: matters pertaining to a) military, naval and air force court martials, under the jurisdiction of which no civilians may come, except for criminal offences against the security of the armed forces, b) special prize courts. 2. Special laws regulate matters pertaining to juvenile courts on which the provisions of Articles. 95 § 1,116 and 117, may not be applicable. Article 113. 1.. A law may provide that for misdemeanours certified by Police officers, specific fines may, be established, payment of which absolves the violators from penal prosecution. Those questioning whether a violation did occur are entitled to petition to be brought before the courts. In case of failure to petition or to appear before Court the fine shall be collected within a set time limit, according to the law on collection of public revenues. 2. The trial of misdemeanours relating to farm lands and claims resulting therefrom, may be entrusted to the rural Constabulary. Decisions issued by these authorities shall be subject to appeal before a judicial authority, such appeal suspending the execution of such decisions. Article 114. The lifting of conflict between: a) Judicial and administrative authorities, b) the Council of State and administrative authorities and, c) administrative and regular courts, shall be decided by a mixed ,court consisting of an equal number of Supreme Court justices and Counsellors of the State, under the chairmanship of the Minister of Justice or his deputy as provided by law.

Article 115. 1. Suits for mistrial against members of the Council of State, and the assistants of the Council, Supreme Court justices,, judges of the courts of appeal and of district courts, public prosecutors, assistant prosecutors, judges, commissioners and deputy commissioners of administrative courts and life members of the Council of Comptrollers, are tried by special court constituted, as the law provides, by drawing lots, of one member of the Comptrollers, three lawyers regular or alternate members of the Supreme Disciplinary Council and two professors of the Faculty of Law of the University of Athens. No permission is required to commence the action of mistrial. 2. Any, member of this court belonging to such body, the actions or omissions of certain or all members of which are brought to court, shall be disqualified. to take a seat in the court deciding thereon. 3. Action for mistrial against members of the Constitutional Court is not permitted.
CHAPTER C

The functioning of the administration of justice.
Article 116. . The hearings of the courts are public. By exception, the court by its own decision, as provided by the law, must order the proceedings in total or' in part, to be held behind closed doors if public discussion may be prejudicial to national interests or social order, or the Armed Forces, or good morals, or public order or special reasons to protect the family or the private life of a person, justify same. Article 117. All decisions must be duly supported and pronounced in public sessions. Article 118. The courts are bound not to apply provisions of a law, legislative decrees, and regulative acts, which are enacted ' in violation of the Constitution or are inconsistent with its provisions. Article 119. Every citizen is entitled to demand the protection of the court a nd to have the opportunity to advance views in support of his rights or interests before the court.

SECTION 5

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE STATE

CHAPTER A

Organizational principles of the administration.
Article 120. 1. The administration of the State is organized in accordance with the system of decentralization, as the law rules. 2. The State is divided into districts. In demarcating these districts by law, consideration shall be given to the geo-economical, population and transportation conditions defined by law. Article 121. 1. Local Government comprises municipalities and communities. 2. The election of Municipal and 'Community authorities is effected secretly through universal suffrage. 3. In deviation of the provisions of the previous paragraph a law regulates matters relating to the designation of the executive instruments of associations of Municipalities, Communities or Municipalities and Communities. 4. In order to be elected Mayor, Community President, Municipal or Community Counsellor, one must be a Greek citizen, have completed his twenty fifth year of age on the day of election and at the same time have the right to vote, be registered in the electoral lists and not come under any of the cases, provided for in Article 61 paragraph 2. 5. The organizations of local government aim exclusively at the advancement of local interests and the satisfaction of the needs of the population of the respective district. Any involvement of these agencies in matters deviating from , the aforementioned aims, shall be prohibited, as the law rules. 6. The. State exercises supervision over the organizations of local government according to the law. A law provides for the manner and details for application of this provision.	 7. The State provides the local self-government organizations with the necessary funds so that they may fulfil their mission.

8. The councils of local self-government organizations may be dissolved or members of same be dismissed on motion of the supervising authority as the law provides, because of activities against the territorial integrity of the State. The form of government, the social system, the security of the State and the political and individual' liberties of the citizens, or because of activities in violation of paragraph 5 of the present article.

Article 122. 1. The Athos peninsula extending beyond Megali Vigla and constituting the district of Aghion Oros shall in accordance with its ancient privileged status, be a self-governed part of the Greek State, whose sovereignty thereon shall remain unaffected.	 Spiritually, Aghion Oros shall come under the direct jurisdiction of the Oecumenical Patriarchate. All persons residing in monastic life thereon, shall acquire Greek'nationality upon admission as novices or monks without any further formality. 2. Aghion Oros shall, in accordance with its regime be governed by its twenty holy monasteries, amongst which the entire peninsula is divided and its territory shall be exempt from expropriation. The administration shall be exercised by representatives of the holy monasteries constituting the holy community. No change whatsoever shall be permitted in administrative system or the number of monasteries of Aghion Oros, nor in their hierarchy and their position in regard to their dependencies; and the dwelling thereon of heterodox or schismatic persons shall be prohibited. 3. The detailed determination of the Aghion Oros regimes and the manner in which they operate, is effected by the Charter of Aghion Oros which in cooperation with the representative of the State, is drawn up and voted for by the twenty holy monasteries, then ratified by the Oecumenical Patriarchate and the Greek Parliament. 4. The correct observance of the Aghion Oros regimes, shall from the spiritual point-of-view fall under the supreme supervision of the Oecumenical Patriarchate and from the administrative field one under the supervision of the State, which shall also be exclusively responsible for the safeguarding of public order and security. 5. The aforementioned powers of the State shall be exercised within the limits of the Charter, by a governor, whose right and duties shall he determined by law. Law also determines the judicial powers Iischarged by the monastic authorities and the holy community, as vell as the customs and taxation privileges of Aghion Oros.

CHAPTER B

The administrative officers.

Article 123. 1. The civil servants, the employees of the Parliament, legal entities of, public law and the organizations of local government must owe manifest allegiance and devotion to the country and the national ideals, expressed by deed, carry out the will of State, and serve the people. 2. Such capacity of those civil servants referred to in paragraph 1 of this article, is absolutely inconsistent with the ideologies aiming at the overthrow or undermining of the existing political or social order or related to the principles and programs of parties dissolved and outlawed. 3. A law shall regulate the manner in which the provisions of this paragraph shall be implemented.

Article 124. 1. No one may be appointed civil servant to a post not provided for by law and without observing the procedure of selection in accordance with the law. By exception, and for a limited number of specific positions requiring special qualifications, appointment is permitted without complying to the above mentioned procedure, in accordance with the provisions of a special law. 2. The organizational structure of every public service in general shall be established on the principle that the posts of higher and highest civil servants, may not exceed one third of the overall number of posts of the junior public servants. The distribution of higher and highest posts by grades in each service, as to ensure that the posts in each of the said grades will not be in excess of six times the number of posts in the immediate higher grade. 3. The engagement of temporary employees of any type shall be prohibited. By way of exception the engagement of employees under civil law contracts may be permitted in accordance with a special law specifying the exceptional or urgent need as well as the duration of the employment of those to be engaged. 4. A law shall regulate matters concerning temporary employees already serving in any capacity whatsoever.

Article 125. 1. The qualification of the state civil administrative servants, as well as the employees of all of local government organizations or.. other legal entities of public law are specified by law. 2. Civil servants holding organic positions are permanent and stay in office as long as the respective services and posts. exist. With the exception of retirement due to age limit or dismissal as a result of judicial decision they shall not be transferred without a duly supported opinion nor shall they be demoted or dismissed without a specific decision of councils constituted according to the law and composed of regular civil servants by at least two thirds. Such decisions may be appealed before the Council of State, as the law provides. 3. The provisions of the §§ 1 and 2 are also applicable to a) the employees of the Parliament, otherwise governed by • the Rules of the Parliament b) municipal employees, who hold organizational positions, with the exception of the community employees for whom however, the provisions relating to permanency may be extended by law. 4. The civil servants as well as employees of Parliament, referred to in paragraph one of this article shall retire from the service upon completion of thirty five years of actual public service, those however being of grade 4 and above, and those employees of special equivalent grading, at the completion of their 65th year of age, and those of lower grades after completion of their 62nd year. Professors of Universities and of equivalent institutions of advanced education, regardless to number of years of service, shall retire upon completion of their 65th year of age. 5. Those directly appointed as ambassadors or ministers plenipotentiary, ministers resident, secretaries general; prefects or other heads of administrative districts of the State, the governor of Aghion Oros, the Commissioner of the State- to the Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church of Greece, the employees of the Prime Minister's Office and of the offices- of .the Deputy Prime Minister, Ministers of the Government and Under-Secretaries, as well as those of the Speaker's office may be exempted by law from the requirements for permanence, and the application of the provisions of the previous paragraph.

Article 126. 1. No one may be appointed an employee to more than one salaried government post or posts with a local government organisation or other legal entity of public law. By exception, appointment to a second position may be permitted under special circumstances, by

special law, in compliance with the provisions of the following paragraph. 2. Compensations or any other emolument whatsoever, paid to salaried employees in general from the public treasury or from the funds of public or private entities, for those holding a contract with the State or enjoying privileges derived therefrom because of services performed within the country, may not exceed in their totality the regular monthly remuneration of their organizational post. Noncompliance with this condition discovered and determined by Court, entails the definite dismissal of the violator. 3. The incompatibilities prescribed for Deputies under Article 63 shall also apply to the salaried civil servants, who may however be appointed members of the administrative councils. 4. No prior permission of an administrative authority is required for the bringing to trial of civil servants, employees of local government organization or other legal entities of public law.

Article 127. 1. The Parliament at the beginning of each session shall elect a legal expert of prominent professional standing, non-member of Par- liament, as Commissioner to assist with parliamentary control. 2. The Commissioner shall be elected by a two thirds majority vote of the total members of Parliament 3. The Commissioner acts on instructions of the Speaker of Par liament at the request of the Prime Minister or the leader of a recognized Party in accordance with the Rules of Parliament, towards whom he submits reports and findings. 4. The implementation of the provisions of this article shall be determined by law. Article 128. All the personnel in the Royal Court, the Political and Military House and Office of the King, excepting the domestic personnel, are appointed or placed by Royal Decree issued on recommendation of the Prime Minister, for a maximum period of three years. Armed Forces personnel in active service may not be detached for service in the Royal Court for more than one year.

SECTION 6

THE ARMED FORCES

Article 129. 1. The armed forces are composed of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force and have, as their mission, to defend the National Independence, territorial integrity of the state and .the existing political and social system against any insidious attempt. 2. The administration of the Armed Forces shall be exercised by the Government through the Chief of the Armed Forces as more specifically provided by law. He, as well as the Chiefs of Army, Navy and Air Force are selected, from amongst those having the qualifications according to the law, by the Supreme Council for National Defence, constituted as provided for by law.

Article 130. 1. The members of the Armed Forces owe faith and allegience to the Country, the national ideals and traditions and serve the Nation. 2. The mission and the capacity of a military man is absolutely opposed to ideologies aiming at the overthrow or the undermining of the existing political or social order or the corrupting of the national convictions of the Greeks, or connected to the principles and programs of parties which have been dissolved and outlawed. 3. Law determines the manner of application of the provisions of this article. Article -131. 1. Promotions and retirements of the regular officers of the Armed Forces are effected by virtue of Royal Decree, issued on recommendation of the Minister of National Defence, following a decision of service councils constituted of high ranking officers, as provided by Law. 2. If the Minister of National Defence disagrees with the decision of the council, he may within a mandatory time limit of fifteen days, after having taken notice of the decision, submit same to an appellate council of broader composition, by high ranking officers. 3. The assignments and transfers of the senior and high ranking officers of the Armed Forces are effected by service councils composed of ranking officers as provided by law.

4. The decisions of the councils in accordance with the provisions of this article are binding for the Minister of National Defence and the administrative acts issued in execution thereof, are not subject to review by the Council of State. 5. The procedure for application of the provisions of the present article, the constitution of the councils, the jurisdiction thereof, as well as matters relating to promotion, of the regular officers of the Armed Forces, shall be regulated more specifically by law. Article 132. The provision of Article 131 is accordingly also applied to regular officers of the Security Forces, the Port Offices Corps and the FireDepartment. The respective councils being composed of senior and high ranking officers.

PART FOUR
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

Article 133. 1. Laws published to date in accordance with article 104 of the Constitution of January 1st, 1952, are considered as not being opposed to the present Constitution and remain in force. 2. In deviation from Article 21 of the Constitution it shall be permitted by legislation to provide for the adjustment or dissolution of such long term tenancies of fields and quit-rent burdens as may still exist, for the buying off of full ownership by holders of emphyteutic holdings, for the abolition and adjustement of real relations of a peculiar nature and for the taking of measures against the subdivision or reestablishment of small patches of land which is excessively subdivided. Article 134. 1. The Regent, who was appointed by the Proclamation of the Revolutionary Committee, on December 13th, 1967, shall continue to discharge his duties until such time, as the first parliamentary elections in accordance with the Constitution will be held, except if the Government invites the King to return to Greece before that time. prior to the above time limit, the Regent ceases, for any reason to discharge his duties, the Government by decision shall appoint the new Regent.

Article 135. The first parliamentary elections after this Constitution comes into effect, as well as, those immediately thereafter, shall be held on the basis of a law enacted in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 136. The first elections shall be carried out by the National Revolutionary, Government. Article 136. 1. All laws and decrees in so far as they are in conflict with the Constitution are abolished. 2. The Parliamentary Act of 16/29 April 1952 shall remain in force. Constituent Acts, published after April 21st, 1967 and conflicting with the Constitution, shall remain in effect until they are abolished by law, issued in accordance with § 4 of this article, but never beyond the time when the Constitution shall come into full effect. The aforementioned Acts may be amended by law, but the provision so amended must not be in conflict with the Constitution. 3. Articles 1 and 3 of Constituent Act A. of the year 1967 referring to the, exercising of Constituent and Legislative Power and amendment of the Constitution, as well as any provision of identical or similar contents to other Constituent Acts, are abolished. 4. From the time the Constitution comes into effect and until the carrying out of elections and the assembly of Parliament, the person exercising the Royal authority, shall issue on recommendation of the Council of Ministers, legislative decrees which shall not require the ratification of Parliament.

PART FIVE
EFFECT AND REVISION OF. THE CONSTITUTION
Article 137. 1. The provisions of the Constitution which designate the form of the government as a Crowned Democracy, as well as the balance of the fundamental provisions thereof, may never be revised. '2. After the lapse of ten years from the approval of the Constitution by the referendum, the revision of its non - fundamental provisions shall be permitted, whenever the Parliament, through a majority vote of three fifths of its entire membership so requests, by an act specifically designating the provisions to be revised, and voted upon in two ballots which shall be at least one month apart.

3. Once the Parliament has decided on the revision, the subsequent Parliament during its first session, shall decide on the provisions to be revised by absolute majority of its total membership. 4. Every revision of non - fundamental provisions of the Constitution voted on, shall be issued and published in the Government Gazette within ten days of its being passed by the Parliament and shall come into effect by a special Parliamentary Act. Article 138. The present Constitution, after its approval by the Greek People through Referendum, signed by the Cabinet and published in the Government Gazette, comes into immediate effect, with the exception of the provisions of Articles 10, 12, 13 § 1, 14 §§ 1 -3, 18, 19, 25 §§ 2 -3, 58 §§ 1- 2, 60, 111, 112, 121 § 2, the National Revolutionary Government being authorized to place these provisions into effect through acts published in the Government Gazette.

