CONSTITUTION of the REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
March 11, 1945
We, the legitimate representatives of the sovereign people of Guatemala, duly elected and met in Constituent Assembly by the popular will, after interpreting in free and full deliberation the national aspirations, decree and sanction the following CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC 

TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Art. 1. Guatemala is a free, sovereign, and independent republic, organized with the primary purpose of assuring to its inhabitants the enjoyment of liberty, culture, economic well being, and social justice. Its system of government is democratic-representative. Art. 2. Sovereignty is in the people, who delegate its exercise to the legislative, executive, and judicial organs, among which there is no subordination. The principle of rotation in the exercise of the office of President of the Republic is essential to the national political system and the people may have recourse to rebellion when anyone dares to violate the said principle. Art. 3. Guatemala recognizes itself as part of the Central American federation, at present disjoined. It will maintain and cultivate fraternal relations with the other states which formed part of it, and make efforts for the re-establishment of the Central American Union, partially or totally and in a popular and democratic form. Art. 4. The official language of the Republic is Spanish. 

TITLE II NATIONALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 
Art. 5. Guatemalans are divided into those native and those naturalized.

Art. 6. The following are natives: 1. Those born in the territory of the Republic, children of a Guatemalan father or mother, of unidentified parents or of parents whose nationality is unknown;

2. Children of foreign parents, born in the territory of the Republic, if at their birth or during their minority, either of the parents, or even the minors themselves, have their residence in the country;

Children of transient foreigners born in Guatemala who, upon arriving at their majority, have the right to choose and choose Guatemalan nationality; Children of diplomatic representatives are excepted as well as those of persons exercising offices legally comparable; 3. Children of native Guatemalan father or mother, born outside the territory of the Republic, from the moment they establish domicile in Guatemala, and even without this condition, when in accordance with the laws of the place of birth the foreign nationality does not belong to them or they have the right to choose and choose Guatemalan nationality. To choose Guatemalan nationality implies the renunciation of any other nationality, a condition which should be expressly stated. Art. 7. Natives of the other republics which formed the United Provinces of Central America are considered native Guatemalans, unless they expressly reserve their nationality, from the time that they acquire domicile in Guatemala; or when, without even having acquired a domicile in the country, they manifest their desire to be Guatemalans before a competent authority. In both cases they retain their original nationality. Art. 8. The following are naturalized: 1. Foreigners who have obtained papers of naturalization in accordance with the law; 2. Foreigners who, having had a domicile and resided in the country for the time established by law, obtain naturalization papers; 3. Spaniards and Ibero-Americans by birth who are domiciled in the country and declare their desire to be Guatemalans before a competent authority; 4. A foreign woman married to a Guatemalan when she chooses Guatemalan nationality. Persons who become naturalized must expressly renounce all other previous nationality. The State may revoke naturalization which has been granted when it deems it necessary for the defense of its institutions. Art. 9. The following are citizens: 1. Male Guatemalans over eighteen years of age; 2. Guatemalan women over eighteen years of age who know how to read and write. Inherent rights and duties of citizenship are: to elect, to be elected, and to accept public offices. Suffrage is obligatory and secret for citizens who know how to read and write; optional and secret for women who are citizens; optional and public for illiterate citizens. All males of eighteen years of age who know how to read and write are obliged to inscribe themselves in the civic register within the year in which they obtain citizenship. For women and illiterates such inscription is a right. Illiterates may exercise the vote six months after having inscribed themselves. In order to be inscribed in the civic register those who know how to read and write should appear before the respective authority with their documents of identification and sign the inscription; illiterates, as well as presenting the documents referred to above, must be accompanied by two honorable witnesses, citizens and neighbors, who will guarantee the civic capacity of the applicant and his desire to exercise the right of suffrage.


No one may oblige a woman citizen or an illiterate to be inscribed in the civic register or to vote. Neither may any citizen be compelled to vote for a certain person. The functionaries, public employees and employers who violate any of the provisions contained in this paragraph shall suffer the corporal and pecuniary penalties determined by the law and shall be suspended from their rights of citizenship and disqualified for the exercise of public office for the time indicated by the same law. Illiterates are eligible only for municipal offices. Art. 10. Anyone who does not meet the conditions of capacity and integrity, even though he has the quality of citizen, may not discharge any office whatever of the State. A law determines that relative to this subject. Art. 11. Foreigners may have entrusted to them the exercise of public functions that require for their discharge the quality of citizen. In such a case, those who assume them are naturalized and acquire Guatemalan citizenship. Art. 12. Guatemalan nationality is lost: 1. By naturalization in a foreign country. The following are exceptions: (a) naturalization in another Central American country; (b) naturalization in Spain or in an Ibero-American country, in case of reciprocity, or when law or international treaties provide for it; 2. By voluntarily giving service to states that are enemies of Guatemala or to their allies in time of war, provided such services imply treason to the country; 3. By naturalized Guatemalans, if they reside for five consecutive years in their country of origin or absent themselves from the Republic during a period of ten years; 4. By naturalized Guatemalans, when they deny their quality of Guatemalans in any public instrument, or solicit or use a foreign passport; 5. By revocation of naturalization papers decreed in accordance with the law. Art. 13. Guatemalan nationality is recovered: 1. By entering the territory of the Republic with the purpose of establishing domicile, if it is a question of naturalization obtained in a foreign country; and 2. By governmental order in the case expressed in paragraph 2 of the preceding Article. The said order may be issued until the term of the corresponding penalty plus a half has expired. Naturalized persons who lose Guatemalan nationality may not recover it in any case whatever. Art. 14. Citizenship is suspended: 1. By an order of imprisonment issued in a case of a crime punishable by correctional imprisonment without bail excepting political offenses; 2. By a final sentence of conviction issued in the case of a crime; 3. By judicial interdiction; and 4. In other cases indicated by this Constitution. Art. 15. Suspension of citizenship ends: 1. With the order of release that revokes the order of imprisonment; 2. With a stay of proceedings; 3. With a final verdict of acquittal; 4. With the fulfillment of the penalty, when rehabilitation is not necessary; 5. With an amnesty; 6. With rehabilitation.


Art. 16.

Citizenship is lost:

1. By loss of nationality; 2. By aiding another country or a foreigner against Guatemala in any diplomatic claim or before an international tribunal; 3. In other cases determined by this Constitution.

Art. 17.

Citizenship is recovered:

1. By residence in the territory of the Republic during the time fixed by law, after having recovered nationality; 2. By governmental order in the case of paragraph 2 of the preceding Article; and 3. In accordance with the law in other cases.

Art. 18. The following are obligations of Guatemalans: 1. To serve and defend the country; 2. To work for the civic, cultural, economic and social development of the country; 3. To contribute to the public expenses in the manner prescribed by law; 4. To fulfill the Constitution of the Republic and watch that it is fulfilled; 5. To obey the laws and regulations; 6. To respect the authorities. Art. 19. Foreigners, from their entry into the territory of the Republic, are strictly obliged to respect the authorities, to pay the contributions and to fulfill the laws, and they acquire the right to be protected by them. Art. 20. Neither Guatemalans nor foreigners may, in any case, claim any indemnification from the government for damages and prejudices caused to their persons or property by factions. 

TITLE II INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL GUARANTEES
CHAPTER I
INDIVIDUAL GUARANTEES

Art. 21. All persons enjoy the guarantees established by this Constitution without any restrictions other than those that it expresses. With the same reservation any discrimination for reasons of relationship, sex, race, color, class, religious beliefs or political ideas is declared illegal and punishable. Art. 22. It is a function of the State to conserve and improve the general conditions of the nation, to procure the well being of its inhabitants and to increase wealth by means of the creation and encouragement of institutions of credit and social welfare. Art. 23. The State especially protects human life. The authorities of the Republic are instituted for the purpose of maintaining the inhabitants in the enjoyment of their rights, which are primarily life, liberty, equality, and security of person, honor, and property. No person may be prevented from doing that which is not prohibited by law. Art. 24. Officials are not owners but depositaries of authority, subject and never superior to the law and always responsible for their official conduct. In such a concept, no organ of the State or public functionary has more powers or authority than those expressly conferred by the law. The civil responsibility of public functionaries and employees for any transgression of the law, committed in the discharge of their duties, may be invoked at any time as long as the prescription, the term of which will be ten years, has not expired. Criminal responsibility shall be extinguished by the passage of twice the time indicated in the penal law. In both cases, the term of the prescription shall begin to run from the time the public functionary or employee has ceased to exercise the office in connection with which he incurred the responsibility. No public functionary or employee may be molested or harassed for his political, social, or religious opinions. If a functionary or public employee, in the exercise of his office, infringes his duties to the prejudice of a third party, the State or corporation served by him will be subsidiarily responsible for the resulting damages and prejudices. The law will determine anything else referring to the responsibility of functionaries and public employees. The President of the Republic and the president of the judicial organization; the ministers of state; magistrates and attorneys of the courts of justice, magistrates of the contentious-administrative court, and of the tribunal and office of control of accounts; governors; judges of first instance; administrators of revenue; mayors; municipal and specific treasurers, and all kinds of public functionaries and employees determined by the law or managing or administering funds of the State or municipality, must -deposit a declaration of all their property and debts so that, at the end of their functions and even during their exercise, any person may, without incurring any responsibility, draw up charges upon a comparison of property or possessions. Art. 25. Every person has the freedom of entering, remaining in, and departing from the territory of the Republic, except for the limitations established by law. No one may be obliged to change his domicile or residence unless by order of the judicial authority in special cases and with the requirements indicated by the law. No Guatemalan may be expatriated, forbidden entry into the territory of the Republic or denied a passport or other documents of identification. Art. 26. Guatemala recognizes and extends the right of asylum to those politically pursued, provided they respect the national sovereignty and laws. Extradition of prisoners for political crimes is forbidden. In no case will attempts be made to extradite for such crimes Guatemalan prisoners who take refuge in foreign territory. No Guatemalan may be turned over to a foreign government for judgment or punishment, except for grave common crimes included in existing treaties drawn up on a basis of reciprocity. Also it is forbidden to solicit extradition or accede to it for common crimes connected with political ones. When the expulsion of a foreigner from the national territory is agreed to, this will not be effected toward the State which is pursuing him if it is a question of a political exile. Art. 27. Any service which should not be rendered gratuitously by virtue of a law or sentence founded on law should be equitably or legally remunerated.
Art. 28. All may freely dispose of their property provided that in doing so they do not infringe a law. Entails, however, are absolutely forbidden, as well as any institution in favor of mortmain, excepting foundations destined for charitable, artistic, or scientific establishments or purposes, which must be approved by the government. The establishment of trusts whose term does not exceed twenty-five years is authorized; in all cases they must be exercised by a bank or institution of credit empowered to do business in the Republic. This authorization does not extend in any manner to religious or monastic congregations or to priests or ministers of any cult or religion. The term may be extended only when it is a question of caring for incurable invalids or people who are incapable. Art. 29. The profession of all religions is free, as well as the exercise of all cults, without any preference and inside the temples; this right may not be extended to the execution of subversive acts or practices incompatible with the peace and public order nor does it exempt from the fulfillment of civil, social, and political obligations. Religious societies and groups or their members as such and the ministers of cults may not intervene in politics or in questions relating to the organization of labor. Art. 30. The inhabitants of the Republic have the right to direct their petitions, individually or collectively, to the authorities, who are obliged to act upon them in accordance with the law and without delay, and to communicate the decisions to those interested. The armed forces may not deliberate or exercise the rights of petition and suffrage. Art. 31. The right to meet peacefully and without arms is recognized. The law regulates the right of assembly in the open air and of manifestation. Religious manifestations outside the temples are permitted and ruled by the respective law. Art. 32. The right of association for the various purposes of human life is guaranteed in accordance with the law. The establishment of conventual congregations and any kind of monastic institutions or associations is forbidden, as well as the formation and functioning of political organizations of an international or foreign character. Organizations proposed by the Central American Union or Pan American doctrines or those of continental solidarity are not included in this prohibition. Art. 33. Guatemalans have the right to organize in political parties, which should be inscribed in accordance with the provisions of the electoral law. The electoral law should conform to the principle that in the election of collegiate bodies, substantial minorities will enjoy the right of representation, in accordance with the technical system adopted. Art. 34. Any act by which a citizen is impeded or limited in his participation in the political life of the nation or the exercise of his rights as a citizen, except for the restrictions established by this Constitution, is punishable. Art. 35. The correspondence of all persons and their private books and papers are inviolable. Those that are taken possession of will not have validity in litigation. They may be taken possession of or inspected only by virtue of the act of a competent judge and with the legal formalities. Competent functionaries of the treasury may also, by written order, provide for the inspection of private papers and books that relate to the payment of the fiscal taxes. In all cases the seizure or inspection must be effected in the presence of the interested person, his representative or one of his relatives, and, in their absence, before two witnesses, neighbors and of recognized integrity. Art. 36. The expression of thought by any methods of diffusion is free without previous censorship. Whoever abuses this right by failing in the respect of private life or morality is responsible before the law. Denunciations or attacks against functionaries and public employees in the exercise of their office for purely official acts do not constitute crimes of calumny or injury. Those who think themselves offended will have the right to the publication of their defense and rectifications; also they may require that a tribunal of honor, composed in the manner determined by law, declare whether the publication was injurious or calumnious. Functionaries or public employees may not be members of the said tribunal. Printing shops and radio stations, as well as other means of expression of thought and their respective machinery and fixtures, may not be confiscated or put out of commission; neither may their labors be stopped or interrupted because of crime or offense in the expression of thought. A jury will take cognizance of the crimes or offenses referred to in this article, and a special law will determine everything else relative to this right. Broadcasting, within the same guarantees and standards here stated, will also be ruled by a special law. Art. 37. The domicile is inviolable. No one may enter it without the permission of the owner, except by written order of a competent judge, and never after 6 P.m. or before 6 A.M. The law determines the formalities and the exceptions where breaking into a house may be proceeded with. The examination of documents and effects must always take place in the presence of the interested person, of his representative or of a member of his family, and for lack of them, before two witnesses, neighbors and of recognized integrity. Art. 38. All Guatemalans, without distinction of sex, are eligible for public employments and offices, according to their merit and capacity, excepting the incompatibilities which the laws indicate and the limitations established by this Constitution. Art. 39. Obedience in civil matters, or in military matters with respect to orders which affect civilians, has as its limit the obvious illegality of the order. The guard who makes use of arms against a detained person or prisoner who tries to flee will necessarily be guilty and responsible in accordance with the law for the offense he commits. Art. 40. The inhabitants of the Republic have free access to the tribunals to carry out their actions in the form indicated by the laws. Foreigners may not have recourse to diplomatic means unless in a case of denial of justice; denial of justice is not understood to mean that a final judgment is unfavorable to the claimant. Art. 41. No one may be obliged, in a criminal case, to testify against himself, against his spouse or his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity. Art. 42. The defense of the person and his rights is inviolable in justice and no one may be judged by tribunals that have not been previously created by the law. Art. 43. No one may be detained or taken prisoner except for a crime, fault, or judicial compulsion and by means of the written order of a competent authority issued in accordance with the law, except when it is a question of a fugitive prisoner or flagrant crime, in which case a previous order will not be necessary; but those detained must be placed without delay at the disposition of the judicial authority and in centers of provisional detention. For simple offenses or infractions of police regulations, persons whose identity may be established by documents they present or by the testimony of a person known or duly identified should not be detained. In such cases the authority or its agents must limit their action to giving the offender notice to appear before a competent judge within a period of twenty-four hours. The law will prescribe the sanctions incurred and the manner of proceeding against those who do not obey this notice. Imprisonment for debt may not be ordered, except when it is a question of providing food for minor children, destitute parents, incapable spouse or brothers and sisters, when the person responsible has economic possibilities and refuses to fulfill his duty, or, in order to evade his duty, transfers his possessions in favor of third persons. Art. 44. No one may be placed incommunicado for more than forty-eight hours. If this precept is violated, the authority that gives the order and the chief of the prison or the employees who execute it or have it executed will be deprived of their offices and punished with the penalties indicated by the law. Art. 45. The jails are centers which have as their object to secure prisoners and promote their reform, not to mistreat them or subject them to restrictions unnecessary for such security. In no case may tortures, taunts, inconveniences, or any other form of compulsion be inflicted, nor may they be made victims of illegal exactions. If this precept is violated, the authority which gives the order and the chief of the prison or the employees who execute it or have it executed will be deprived of their offices and definitively disqualified for the carrying out of any public employment; they will also suffer the corresponding punishment and be responsible for the payment of the respective indemnification. The places destined for detention and for carrying out of sentences are institutions of a civil character and subordinate to the courts of justice. Imprisonment will only take place in the establishments destined for this purpose. Minors will not be confined in places destined for adults but in reformatories under the vigilance and care of competent persons who will attend to their entire education and medical treatment to achieve their prompt reincorporation in society. The order of confinement should be given by the respective tribunal. Everything relative to the delinquency of minors will be the object of a special law. Art. 46. All detained persons must be interrogated within forty-eight hours; at the time of their examination, they will be informed of the reason for their detention, the person who accuses them, if any, and everything necessary so that they may be aware of the punishable act attributed to them. Isolation shall cease from that time and they may immediately provide themselves with a defender. Detention may not exceed five days; within this period the order of imprisonment must be issued or the order of liberation of the detained person. Art. 47. The order of imprisonment may not be issued unless preceded by a summary charge that a crime has been committed together with sufficient reason according to the law for believing that the person detained is the delinquent. Art. 48. In the summons issued by any public authority, functionary, or employee, the object of the appearance must be stated. Art. 49. Actions or omissions not qualified as crimes or offenses and penalized by a law previous to their perpetration are not punishable. Penal laws will have retroactive effect when they are favorable to the delinquent. Other laws will not be retroactive unless for reasons of public order and social usefulness or national necessity, expressly indicated in the law with the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies forming the Congress. Art. 50. Legal, governmental, or other provisions which regulate the exercise of the rights guaranteed by this Constitution shall be null ipso jure if they diminish, restrain, or alter them. Acts and contracts which violate constitutional standards shall also be null ipso jure. Adequate resistance for the protection of the individual rights above guaranteed is legitimate. The action to prosecute infractions of the principles of this Title is public and may be brought without bond or formality of any kind by a simple denunciation. The enumeration of the rights guaranteed in this Title does not exclude others established by this Constitution or others or an analogous nature or which derive from the principle of the sovereignty of the people, the republican and democratic form of government, and the dignity of man. Art. 51. Every person has the right to request protection in the following cases and for the following purposes:
(a) For maintenance or restitution in the enjoyment of the rights and guarantees established by this Constitution; (b) For declaration, in concrete cases, that a law, regulation or any order of authority is inapplicable to him. Any person illegally imprisoned, detained, or in any way restrained in the enjoyment of his individual liberty, or who suffers indignities even though in his legal imprisonment, has the right to request the immediate production of his body, whether it be with the purpose of restoring his liberty, relieving him of indignities, or putting a stop to the coercion to which he is subjected. If the court decrees the liberty of the person illegally confined, he will be freed in the same act and place. When so requested or when the judge or court deems it advisable, the production referred to in this paragraph will occur in the place where the detained, insulted, or coerced person is to be found, without previous warning or notification to the parties. Art. 52. No one may be condemned -without having been summoned, heard, and convicted in court. The penalty of death may be applied only in pursuance of a sentence issued in court by the tribunals of the Republic and for crimes which the law determines, committed by adult men. Against such sentences-which may never be based on proof of presumptions-there will always be available all existing legal recourses, including those of cassation and grace, excepting in cases of invasion of the territory, besieged place or city, and mobilization for reasons of war. Art. 53. All administrative acts are public and the citizens have the right to request their being made known to them, except when they treat of diplomatic matters or military operations.
Art. 54. The guarantees referred to in Articles 25, 27, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 43, and 48 may be restricted in accordance with the provisions of Article 138 of this Constitution.

CHAPTER II SOCIAL GUARANTEES

Section I
Labor 
Art. 55. Labor is a right of the individual and a social obligation. Vagrancy is punishable. Art. 56. Capital and labor, as factors of production, must be protected by the State. Art. 57. The State will employ the resources at its disposal to provide employment to all those who lack it and to assure them the economic conditions necessary to a decent existence. Art. 58. The laws which regulate the relations between capital and labor will conform to the economic and social circumstances of the country, the particular conditions and customs of each region, and the characteristics and possibilities of different kinds of activities. Respecting agricultural workers, the State will take into account their conditions and needs, the zones in which they work and other circumstances peculiar to this kind of work. The following are fundamental principles of the organization of labor, which should be regulated by the said laws: (1) The regulation of individual and collective labor contracts the fulfillment of which will be obligatory for employers and laborers. Stipulations, even though expressed in a labor agreement or any other pact, which imply the renunciation, diminution or denial of any right recognized by this Constitution or the law in favor of the laborer, will be null and not obligatory upon the contracting parties. (2) The periodic fixing of the minimum salary that laborers of all kinds should receive, paying attention to the possibilities of the employing organizations and the material, moral, and cultural needs of the workers and their duties as heads of families. The laborer or employee has the right to one remunerated day of rest for each six of work. Holidays recognized by the law shall also be remunerated. When, according to an agreement, overtime days and hours are worked, these will be paid for in the proportion established by law. The regulations will set up, in each zone, equalizing commissions presided over by a representative of the State. In piece work, for a job or task, it will be obligatory to calculate reasonably the minimum salary for a day of work. The minimum of all salaries is unalterable, except for responsibilities for food, in the manner which the law will establish. Neither may the instruments of labor belonging to laborers be requisitioned. No discount not authorized by the law may be made in the salary of any laborer. The law will establish the preference of the credits authorized in favor of workers, for wages or salaries earned in the last quarter. The executive may fix prices and wages in case of national emergency. (3) The obligation to pay the laborer's wages in money of legal currency and not in promissory notes, bonds, merchandise or commodities of any kind; however, as regards food substances, the laborer in the country may receive them as pay up to a maximum of thirty per cent of his wages, it being understood that the employer will supply them at cost or less. (4) The maximum effective day of work, which shall be eight hours daily and forty-eight hours weekly. The effective day of work is the time during which the laborer is at the disposition of the employer. The maximum effective night's work, which shall be six hours nightly and thirty-six hours weekly. The law will determine from what hour it is considered night work, as well as the number and frequency of extra days and hours of work, in a manner compatible with the health of the workers. Whoever works less than forty-eight hours a week, by a provision of the law or by agreement with the employer, shall have the right to receive the full wages of the ordinary week. (5) Annual paid vacations for laborers after a year or more of uninterrupted service. The law will regulate their basis, graduation, and extent. (6) Equal salary or wage for equal work in identical conditions, in the same enterprise, without distinction of age, race, sex, or nationality, considering only capacity, efficiency, and integrity. (7) Preference for Guatemalan workers where conditions are the same, fixing the minimum proportion of nationals for each business or enterprise, taking into consideration not only their number but also the total amount of salaries or wages paid. (8) The right of free association, solely for purposes of economic-social defense, of employers, private employees, teachers, and workers in general. The State, in defense of the interests of those associated, will supervise the good management of the funds of the syndical bodies. (9) The regulation of the rights of striking and stopping work. (10) Protection of women workers and minors, regulating the conditions under which they should render service. No difference may be established between married and single women for the purposes of work. The law will regulate the maternity protection of the working woman; she may not be required to do work that requires considerable physical effort during the three months before childbirth. Working mothers will enjoy a remunerated enforced rest one month before and forty-five days after delivery; during the period of nursing they will have the right to two daily periods of extraordinary rest, of a half-hour each, to feed the child. Children under fourteen years of age may not be employed in factories, plantations, or other enterprises. The law will regulate exceptions for reasons of apprenticeship or the need of co-operation in the family economy, compatible with the requirements of education. The law will also regulate the work and maximum day of minors over fourteen years of age. It is forbidden to employ children under sixteen years and women in unhealthful and dangerous work. (11) The obligation of the employer to indemnify the laborer, when he is retired without just reason, with a sum equal to one month's wage or salary for each year of continuous work and, if the services do not extend over a year, in a manner proportionate to the months worked, discounting the first two, which are considered as probationary. The employer is obliged to indemnify in the same manner the laborer or employee who retires from service for lack of probity on the part of the employer or because of ill treatment that lowers his dignity as a man. The employer may not excuse himself from this responsibility when the ill treatment comes from dependents or members of his household who work with his consent or acquiescence. The laborer may not be discharged for his participation in a legal strike or for having represented the laborers in any conflict. (12) The regulation of contracts, apprenticeship, and employment, as well as the conditions to which certain classes of work are submitted, such as domestic servants and those who work in houses.
(13) The benefits which belong to laborers and the cases and periods in which they should receive them. (14) The measures of assistance and social welfare necessary for workers. (15) The conditions of security and hygiene of labor. In establishments of labor the regulations and provisions for hygiene and health shall be strictly observed. Employers are obliged to adopt the measures necessary to safeguard their workers against accidents in the use of machines, instruments, and materials of work. (16) The obligation of enterprises situated outside centers of population to provide for their workers and the families of the latter adequate living quarters, schools, infirmaries, and other services and attentions indispensable for their physical and moral well being. In order to fix this obligation, attention shall be paid to the importance of the enterprise and to the provisions of the law.

Art. 59. Debts for labor contracts may not exceed an amount equivalent to the wages of the number of days which the law stipulates. Anything exceeding this sum received by the laborer may not be required of him. Art. 60. Employers shall be responsible for professional accidents and illnesses suffered by the laborers because of their labor or in its performance, or as a result of their profession, except in cases of the obvious intent of the victim, force majeure not connected with the work, accidents to laborers who work for the employer in their own houses, and accidents due to a proved state of intoxication of the victim. This responsibility shall exist even in the case of an employer contracting for the labor through an intermediary. The corresponding indemnification shall be graduated in the law, according to whether it has caused death or some incapacity. Art. 61. Syndical associations should, before beginning their activities, obtain authorization from the corresponding authority. The inscription will determine the juridical personality of the syndicates. The directing boards and consulting bodies of these associations should be made up exclusively of native Guatemalans. It is forbidden for foreigners to intervene in questions related to labor organizations. Art. 62. With the purpose of making effective the legal precepts in social matters, the State will watch over and inspect enterprises. Art. 63. Obligatory social security is established. The law will regulate its amount, extent and the form in which it should be put into effect. It will include, at least, insurance against invalidism, old age, death, sickness, and occupational accidents. Employers, workers, and the State shall contribute to the payment of the insurance premiums. Art. 64. Conflicts relative to labor are submitted to private jurisdiction. Labor tribunals are judicial organs; the law determines their number and organization. Art. 65. The State will promote the technical preparation of workers and the elevation of their economic and cultural level. Art. 66. The formation of co-operative enterprises has the support of the State, especially consumers' co-operatives in centers of work. Mutuality is recognized as a principle and practice of social living-together. The State will encourage agricultural and rural credit, give effective support to cattle-farming activity, and protect the industrialization of agricultural products. It will take steps to maintain laborers in the fields.
Art. 67. The construction of cheap living quarters and colonies for laborers shall be encouraged. The public administration shall take measures tending to the formation of villages from the living quarters of native workers in country plantations within the same property, for the purpose of their enjoyment of the cultural and sanitary benefits of urban centers. Art. 68. Official obligatory association is established for the exercise of the university professions, under the direction of the university. A law will provide whatever is relative to this subject. Art. 69. The rights and benefits established in this Section are irrenunciable, and their enumeration does not exclude others, deriving from the high principles of social justice, which the law may grant. Section II Public Employees Art. 70. The law will establish the statute of the public employee on the principle that public functionaries and employees are at the service of the nation and of no political party whatsoever. The statute will especially determine the conditions of entry into the administration; rules of advancement; guarantees of permanence, discharge, suspension, or transference; duties of functionaries and employees; recourses against decisions affecting them and the forms of their association. The law will determine in what cases and conditions the right to strike of public employees will be recognized. Public functionaries and employees have the right to benefits granted to workers in general, and their individual relations with the State as employer will be governed by legislation in accordance with the provisions of the Section on labor of this Constitution in that which is applicable. No person may hold at the same time two or more public posts or offices which are remunerated, excepting physicians who give service in hospitals and those who hold teaching posts. Art. 71. Public services and civil institutions may not be made military, except in cases of manifest national calamity or mobilization because of war, and only for their duration. Section III The Family Art. 72. The family, maternity, and matrimony have the protection of the State, which shall also, in a special manner, watch over the strict fulfillment of the obligations arising out of them. Art. 73. The family patrimony is the object of special protective legislation. Art. 74. The State will promote the organization of the family on the juridical basis of matrimony, which rests on the absolute equality of rights for both spouses. The law determines the cases in which, for reasons of equity, the union between persons with legal capacity to contract matrimony should, by reason of its stability and exclusiveness, be made equivalent to civil matrimony. Art. 75. The institution of adoption for the benefit of minors is established. The law will regulate this matter.

Art. 76. Legal inequality among children is not recognized; all, including adopted children, have the same rights. Certifications on the nature of the relationship of child to parent are abolished. No declaration of any kind shall be made differentiating births, or regarding the civil status of the parents, in any act, attestation or certificate referring to such relationship. The law will determine the manner of investigating the relationship of child to parent. Art. 77. It is the function of the State to watch over the physical, mental, and moral health of infancy, creating the necessary and adequate institutes and dependencies. Laws for the protection of infancy are of a public order, and the official establishments destined for this purpose have the character of centers of social assistance and not of charity. Art. 78. Poor parents of families with six or more minor children shall receive the special protection of the State. In cases of equal ability, they shall enjoy preference for the discharge of public offices. Section IV Culture Art. 79. The encouragement and diffusion of culture, in all its manifestations, constitute a primary obligation of the State. Art. 80. It is a cardinal function of education to conserve and increase universal culture, promote ethnic improvement and add to the spiritual patrimony of the nation. Education should cover simultaneously the defense of bodily health, civic and moral development, instruction in and initiation into activities of a practical kind. It is the duty of the teaching profession to preserve and intensify the inherent personal dignity of children and young people, and of the State to give economic, social and cultural dignity to the teacher. Art. 81. There shall be a minimum of common education, obligatory for all the inhabitants of the country, within the limits of law and conforming to the plans and programs fixed by the respective law. Education in official schools is secular and the minimum common education referred to in the preceding paragraph should be imparted freely as well. Private centers of education are subject to the inspection of the State and, for the legal validity of the studies which they impart, must obtain express authorization and comply with the official plans and programs. The training of teachers is a preferred function of the State. Degrees or diplomas of studies other than those granted by the State and by the University of San Carlos of Guatemala and those obtained in foreign universities and schools by persons who fulfil the requirements of incorporation fixed by the law are not officially recognized except as provided in international treaties. Degrees issued by Central American universities and schools shall have official validity in the Republic upon the unification of the plans and programs of study. Art. 82. The following are declared of social usefulness: the campaign of national literacy; gratuitousness of the minimum official, common, agricultural, industrial, artistic, and normal education; the creation of scholarships of cultural and technical improvement and specialization; 
the establishment of pre-vocational and polytechnic institutes, popular and school libraries, day and other cultural centers, and the increase of sports and physical culture. The State must take steps to aid needy Guatemalans to have access to all grades of instruction, considering only vocation and aptitude. The owners of plantations, factories, and other major enterprises are obliged to provide and sustain schools for the rural or working school population of their properties, with the organization, appointment of personnel, and inspection of the same a duty of the State. Art. 83. The development of an integral policy for the economic, social, and cultural improvement of indigenous groups is declared of national usefulness and interest. Laws, regulations, and special provisions for the indigenous groups may be issued for this purpose, taking into account their needs, conditions, practices, usages, and customs. Art. 84. The University of San Carlos of Guatemala is autonomous and is governed in accordance with the respective law and its statutes. The State will contribute to assuring and increasing the university patrimony, and will include annually in the budget a portion destined for the support of the university. Art. 85. The State guarantees freedom of opinion for teachers. Art. 86. All the artistic, historic, and religious wealth of the country, by whomsoever owned, is part of the cultural treasure of the nation and is under the safeguard and protection of the State. Its exportation is prohibited and its alienation or transformation may be prevented when the interest of the country so requires. The State will organize a register of artistic, historic, and religious wealth, assure its custody and attend to its perfect conservation. The State must also protect places and monuments notable for their natural beauty or recognized artistic or historic value. Art. 87. The popular arts and industries are elements of the national culture and shall enjoy special protection, tending to conserve their artistic authenticity and to improve their production and distribution. TITLE IV ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL SYSTEM Art. 88. The State will orient the national economy for the benefit of the people in order to assure to each individual a worthy existence and one beneficial to the community. It is a primary function of the State to encourage cattle-farming activities and industry in general, seeing to it that the fruits of labor benefit preferably its producers and that wealth reaches the greatest number of inhabitants of the Republic. Art. 89. The following are the property of the nation: (1) The public domain; (2) The waters of the maritime zone adjacent to the coasts of the Republic; the borders of navigable lakes and rivers; navigable or floatable rivers and lakes; rivers of any kind that serve as boundaries of the Republic and waterfalls of industrial use, in the manner determined by law, which will also establish the extent and conditions of dominion over all this property; (3) That which constitutes the patrimony of the State and the municipality; (4) The maritime-terrestrial zone of the coasts of the Republic, to the extent fixed by law;




(5) The atmosphere and stratosphere above the national territory. Its transit and use are regulated by the law and international treaties; (6) Fiscal and municipal revenues, by origin and of public right; (7) The subsoil of the nation; deposits of hydrocarbons and minerals, as well as all organic and inorganic substances which the law determines; (8) All other property existing in the national territory which is indicated by law, or which is not private, individual, or collective property. Art. 90. The State recognizes the existence of private property and guarantees it as a social function, without other limitations than those determined in the law for reasons of public necessity or utility or national interest. Art. 91. Large landed estates are prohibited. The law classifies them and will establish the measures necessary for their disappearance. The large landed estates now existing may not be extended for any reason, and, until their recovery for the benefit of the community, shall be the object of taxes in the manner determined by law. The State will see to it that the land be reincorporated in the national patrimony. Only the Guatemalans referred to in Article 6 of this Constitution, societies whose members have that quality, and national banks may be proprietors of immovables within a zone fifteen kilometers wide along the frontiers and coasts. Urban areas included within the said zones are excepted; foreigners may acquire property there with governmental authorization. Art. 92. For reasons of public utility or necessity or social interest legally proved, expropriation of private property may be ordered after indemnification. In case of invasion or attack of the national territory or grave disturbance of internal order, it is not required that the indemnification be previous. Enemy property may be the object of seizure for reasons of war and if it is expropriated, payment of indemnification is reserved for the conclusion of the war. A law will determine the procedure of expropriation. Property may not be limited in any manner whatever by reason of a political crime. The confiscation of property is prohibited. Art. 93. The direct dominion of the State over its property is inalienable and imprescriptible. Surpluses of private property, rights acquired for the purposes of registration and movable property, rights and actions are excepted. The State may grant, under conditions which the law will determine, the usufruct of its rural immovables so that they will be worked, preferably to groups and, for lack of these, to families, to companies other than stock companies-except those organized and participated in by the State-to Guatemalan individuals, or to immigrants under contract with the government. For reason of public necessity or utility or social interest, and in exceptional cases, the State may alienate its urban property or exchange small rural lots to the extent which the law will indicate. Art. 94. The State will provide agricultural groups and co-operatives with technical instruction, administrative guidance, machinery, and capital. Art. 95. Contracts to exploit minerals or deposits of hydrocarbons may be concluded for a term not exceeding fifty years, and those relating
to national waters, for a term not greater than twenty-five years. In both cases the approval of Congress is required. Deposits of hydrocarbons and their derivatives may be exploited only by the State, by Guatemalans, or by Guatemalan companies whose capital is predominantly national. Contracts regarding the cutting of wood must be given by public auction and must be granted preferably to Guatemalan laborers, who may not cede their rights without governmental authorization. The law will determine the form of extraction and exploitation of resins, gums, and other similar products. Art. 96. Ejidal lands and the community lands designated by law are inalienable, imprescriptible, inexpropriable, and indivisible. The State will give the communities preferred support in order to organize labor in them in a co-operative manner, in accordance with the provisions of Article 94, and shall be obliged also to grant lands to communities which lack them. Art. 97. Freedom of industry, commerce, and labor in general is recognized, subject to the limitations imposed by the laws for economic, fiscal, or social reasons in the national interest. The author or inventor enjoys exclusive ownership of his work or invention for a time not to exceed fifteen years. Literary or artistic property is regulated by the provisions of the law and treaties. The law will provide whatever is necessary for the greater efficiency and stimulation of work and the increase of production. Art. 98. Only the executive may grant concessions for a term to exceed ten years to those who introduce or establish new industries in the Republic; but they shall not be of a character prohibitive of analogous or similar industries. For the establishment of public services of great usefulness which require the investment of large amounts of capital, the State may conclude contracts and grant, in such a case, concessions for a term not greater than fifty years. The contracts and concessions referred to in this article must be approved by Congress. A new concession may in no case modify the term and other conditions stipulated in a previous concession, even when the second is an extension of the first. Monopolies and privileges are prohibited. Art. 99. The State will prohibit the creation or limit the functioning of enterprises that absorb or tend to absorb, to the prejudice of the national economy, the production of one or more industrial branches or of a definite commercial activity. A law will determine that relative to this matter. Art. 100. The establishment of co-operative societies of production is declared to be of urgent social usefulness, as well as the legislation organizing and encouraging them. Art. 101. The form and conditions of reversion, revision, and renegotiation of administrative concessions or contracts will be determined by the law. Art. 102.. In every concession granted or contract concluded by the State or municipality for the establishment of works and services of public utility, the condition will be stipulated that these works or services, after a certain time which may not exceed fifty years, or at the expiration of the contract, will pass, in perfect condition for service, to the dominion of the State or municipality, with no indemnification whatever.

TITLE V LEGISLATIVE
CHAPTER I
CONGRESS

Art. 103. The legislative power resides in the people, who, by means of the electoral body, delegate it to the Congress. Art. 104. Congress shall meet each year without need for convocation, the first of March and the first of September. Its ordinary sessions shall last two months and may be extended to one month more in each period. Art. 105. It shall meet in extraordinary session when convoked by the executive or by the permanent commission, and in these cases may occupy itself only with those matters that were the object of the convocation. However, when Congress is met in extraordinary sessions, it may, with the vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies, enlarge the object of the convocation, including other matters which it deems it advisable to consider. Fifteen or more deputies may request of the President of the Republic or the permanent commission the convocation of Congress, for sufficient reasons of public convenience or necessity. Art. 106. All resolutions of Congress must be taken with the concurrence of an absolute majority of the members composing it, except in cases where the law requires a special majority. A meeting of fifteen deputies will, however, be sufficient for the opening and closing of its sessions, for qualification of credentials and to adopt the measures by which those elected take possession of their seats and providing always that there is a quorum in Congress. Art. 107. Deputies, from the day of their election, will enjoy the following prerogatives: (1) Personal immunity against being accused or judged unless the proceeding is previously authorized by Congress, declaring that there are grounds for apprehended; (2) Irresponsibility for all their opinions, for their parliamentary initiative, and for the manner of treating business in the discharge of their office, except in the case of manoeuvres to violate the principle of rotation in power. These prerogatives do not authorize arbitrariness or excess of personal initiative on the part of the representatives. Art. 108. After the declaration referred to in paragraph 1 of the preceding Article, the accused are subject to the competent judge and, if their provisional imprisonment is ordered, they are suspended in their legislative functions, which they may not exercise unless they are absolved. If they are condemned, their seats shall be vacant and new elections shall be ordered. Art. 109. If Congress has not met, the permanent commission will declare whether or not there are grounds for the formation of a case against the deputies. Art. 110. If any deputy is apprehended in flagrant crime, he shall be placed without delay at the disposition of Congress or, if Congress is not in session, of the permanent commission.

Art. 111. Congress is composed of deputies elected in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the electoral law. One representative shall be elected for each fifty thousand inhabitants or fraction in excess of twenty-five thousand. If any department of the Republic could not be represented in accordance with the preceding rule, it will nevertheless have the right to elect one deputy. The deputies represent the people and not their electors; the latter may not give or the deputies accept an imperative and obligatory mandate. Art. 112. To be elected deputy, it is required to be a native Guatemalan, in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, of secular status, and over twenty-one years of age. Art. 113. The following may not be deputies: (1) Functionaries and employees of the executive and judicial organs and of the court and office of control of accounts. Those who perform teaching functions and doctors who give their services in hospitals are excepted; (2) Contractors for public works and enterprises that are paid for with funds of the State or municipality, their guarantors, and those who, as a result of such works or enterprises, have claims pending in their own interest; (3) Relatives of the President of the Republic and of the chief of the armed forces, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity; (4) Those who have administered or collected public funds and have not obtained a certification of solvency; (5) Those who represent interests of companies or individuals who profit by the public services, or their lawyers; and (6) Military men in active service. If any deputy is included in any of the prohibitions contained in this article, his seat shall be considered vacant; but if it is one of those included in the first paragraph, he may choose between continuing to hold his post or the office of deputy. The election of a deputy which falls on the person of the governor, administrator of revenues, or judge of the first instance for the electoral district or department in which he exercises his functions is void. The discharge of temporary or special diplomatic missions and the representation of Guatemala in international congresses are compatible with the office of deputy. Art. 114. Deputies shall have a term of office of four years and may not be re-elected for the following legislative period. Half of Congress shall be renewed every two years.

CHAPTER II
POWERS AND LIMITATIONS OF CONGRESS

Art. 115. The following are powers and limitations of Congress: (1) To open and close ordinary and extraordinary sessions; (2) To scrutinize the votes for President of the Republic and proclaim as popularly elected the citizen who has obtained an absolute majority of the votes; (3) To elect the President from among two candidates who have obtained the greatest number of votes in case there is not a popular election for lack of an absolute majority of votes; (4) To receive the oath of office of the President of the Republic and invest him with the office; (5) To accept or refuse the resignation presented by the President of the Republic, who must in such a case appear before Congress to ratify his resignation before two-thirds, at least, of its members, met in the hall of sessions;
 

(6) To grant or refuse permission to the President of the Republic to absent himself from the national territory or temporarily leave the duties of his office; (7) To grant or refuse permission to the president of Congress or to the vice-president taking his place to absent himself from the national territory; (8) To appoint the following by an absolute majority of the number of deputies forming Congress: the president of the judicial organ, magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the contentious-administrative court, magistrates and attorneys of the court of appeals, the solicitor general of the nation and his substitute, and any other members of the tribunals of justice or autonomous organs whose appointment is the duty of Congress; (9) To invest the members of the judicial organ appointed by Congress with their offices and remove them in cases of notorious bad conduct, negligence, or ineptitude duly proved in accordance with the law. To remove members of the tribunal of the contentious-administrative and all other functionaries appointed by Congress for the same reasons; (10) To accept or refuse the resignations of members of the judicial organ and all other functionaries appointed by Congress and to elect the persons to substitute for them to complete the constitutional term because of acceptance of the resignation, removal, or absolute default of such functionaries; and (11) To refuse, as a matter of obligation, to recognize a President of the Republic who, having completed his constitutional term, continues in the exercise of his office. In such a case the chief of the armed forces will become automatically subject to the orders of Congress, which shall declare itself in permanent session until the restoration of the constitutional order. For the purposes of this article, the chief of the armed forces, for himself and as representing the army, shall in the first sessions of March of each year, take an oath of obedience to Congress and of faithfulness to the principle of rotation in the presidency of the Republic. Art. 116. It is also a power of Congress to declare whether or not there are grounds for the formation of a case against the President of the Republic, the presidents of the legislative and judicial organs, ministers of state, magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the tribunal of accounts, the solicitor general of the nation, the chief of the armed forces and deputies. Every resolution in this regard must be taken by a vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies of Congress. Art. 117. It is the duty of congress to declare the physical or mental incapacity of the President of the Republic, for the exercise of his office, a declaration which must be made by a vote of at least two-thirds of the total number of deputies and after a sworn report of a commission of five doctors appointed by the university council at the request of Congress. Art. 118. It is also a power and obligation of Congress to convoke the elections for President of the Republic in their last sessions of the year in which the presidential term ends, and at least four months previous to the date of the expiration of said term; so that Congress may examine in time the records of the elections and make the corresponding declaration. If for any reason Congress cannot convoke them, the last permanent commission that has been appointed will do so, also as a matter of obligation. In the case of Article 135, if the person who exercises the Presidency of the Republic in the interim does not convoke the elections for President during the term fixed in the said article, Congress must make the convocation and, if Congress has not met or for any reason cannot discharge this duty, the last appointed permanent commission will do so.


 
Art. 119.

The following are also powers of Congress and limitations to which it is subject:
(1) To decree, interpret, amend, and repeal laws. No law may contravene the provisions of the Constitution; (2) To modify or approve, before the closing of the first period of ordinary sessions, the draft of budget presented by the executive by means of the ministry of the treasury. The modifications may be in its entirety, by sections, or by parts; (3) To decree ordinary and extraordinary taxes and imposts when the need requires it, determining the bases for their collection; (4) To approve or disapprove, annually, wholly or in part, the detailed and proved account, which the executive will present in the first fifteen days of the first ordinary period of sessions, of all the income and all the expenses of the public administration during the preceding fiscal year, stating the balance of the said account; (5) To take cognizance of the report which the tribunal and office of control of accounts will present in the first period of its ordinary sessions; (6) To contract, convert, and consolidate the public debt; for this purpose Congress will, in each case, authorize the executive to negotiate loans at home -or abroad or to effect the operations of consolidation or conversion on the bases previously approved. The decree will indicate the amount of operation to be effected, the type or class of the same, its object, the maximum rate of interest and, upon occasion, the rate of amortization, the price of issue of bonds, and any other conditions on which it agrees. To guarantee the payment of the whole or part of any public debt with the income of the nation, it will be necessary for Congress to decree it, indicating what incomes are affected and in what proportion. So that any of the operations referred to in this paragraph will be understood as approved and authorized, the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total of the deputies that form Congress will be necessary (7) To examine the claims against the public exchequer for unrecognized credits when they are not the object of contentious-administrative or judicial jurisdiction and, if accepted, to indicate funds for their amortization; (8) To fix the standard, weight, type, and denomination of money as well as also the system of weights and measures; (9) To approve or disapprove, before their ratification, treaties and conventions which the executive has concluded. A favorable vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies forming Congress is required for approval. No treaty, convention, pact, or agreement may be approved that affects the integrity, sovereignty, or independence of the Republic, or which is contrary to the Constitution, except those that refer to the total or partial restoration of the federation of Central America. To submit questions relative to the boundaries of the nation to any arbitration requires the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies forming Congress; the decree must set forth the bases of the arbitration and explain the matters which form its object. All arrangements for the passage of foreign armies through the national territory, or the use of military bases in case of war, must be approved by the favorable vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies forming Congress;

(10) To decree public honors for great services done the nation, which in no case may be given to the President of the Republic during the term of his government, nor to any other acting functionary. Not less than twenty-five years after the death of a person monuments may be decreed and erected to his memory; (11) To decree the adoption or substitution of the national flag, shield, and hymn; (12) To approve or disapprove by absolute majority of the total number of deputies, necessarily in the immediate sessions, the acts and contracts executed
by the executive in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 98 of this Constitution; (13) To approve or disapprove, by the vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies, the concessions and contracts referred to in the second paragraph of Article 98, as well as those executed by the executive in the exercise of the authorization conferred in accordance with paragraphs 6 and 16 of this Article, and contracts relative to the coining of money, issuance of paper money, public services, colonization, immigration, and irrigation; those concluded for the exploitation of deposits of hydrocarbons and their derivatives, and the others to which the first two paragraphs of Article 95 refer. The contracts and concessions mentioned in this paragraph and the preceding one may not become effective without the previous approval of Congress; (14) To declare war and approve or disapprove treaties of peace; (15) To decree amnesties when required by the public convenience; (16) To authorize the executive to conclude contracts which imply investments not provided for in the budget or which do not correspond to its own administrative functions, being required to indicate in the first case the funds which will serve to cover them. This authority must be decreed by two-thirds of the total number of deputies forming Congress; (17) To confer ranks of brigade or division general, in accordance with that prescribed in Article 159 of this Constitution; (18) Other powers and limitations indicated by this Constitution. Art. 120. It is also in the power of Congress: (1) To elect, at the opening of the first period of ordinary sessions the president, vice-presidents, secretaries, and other functionaries who form the directing board in accordance with the internal regulation. The president and the vice-presidents must be Guatemalans included in Article 6 of this (2) To judge the elections of their respective members and approve or disapprove their credentials; provide that new elections held to fill the vacancies which occur for (3) To accept or refuse the resignations this presented by the deputies or other and reasons; (4) To draw up and decree the regulation 5) To enforce the attendance of absent of its internal system; and deputies and correct the faults or omissions of those present.

CHAPTER III
FORMATION AND SANCTION OF LAWS

Art. 121. Deputies and the executive through the ministry to whose office the subject of the project belongs have the right of initiative in the formation of the laws. In matters within its sphere, the Supreme Court of Justice has initiative. Art. 122. The power to legislate which belongs to Congress may not be delegated. Art. 123. When a project of law is presented and admitted, it will be placed under discussion in three different sessions occurring on different days, and may not be voted until it is considered sufficiently discussed in the third session. Such cases as Congress declares of national urgency by a vote of two-thirds of the total number of deputies are excepted. In all other rituals and proceedings, that which is prescribed by the internal regulation will be observed. Art. 124. Once a project is approved, it will pass to the executive for his sanction and promulgation. Within ten days of receiving the project and after determination in the council of ministers, the President may return it to Congress with the observations he deems opportune. Congress may reconsider the project or leave it for the sessions of the following period if the observations made by the executive are not accepted. In the latter case, if Congress ratifies the project with a vote of two-thirds of the deputies composing it, the executive must sanction and promulgate the law. Art. 125. If the executive does not return the project of law after the ten day period counted from its remission, it will be considered sanctioned and must be promulgated as a law within the eight days following. In case Congress closes its sessions before the end of the ten day period in which its return may be made, the executive must return the project during the first eight days of the ordinary sessions of the next period. Art. 126. Provisions of Congress relative to its internal rule do not need the sanction of the executive, or those relative to the judging of elections and resignation of those elected, the declaration as to whether or not there are grounds for the formation of a case against public functionaries stated in Articles 107 and 116 and other provisions stated in Articles 115 and 120.

CHAPTER IV
THE PERMANENT COMMISSION

Art. 127. Congress, before closing each period of ordinary sessions, will appoint the permanent commission composed of nine members to function during its recess. Of these, eight will be elected and the president of congress will complete it and preside. Three substitutes will be elected in case there are defaults. Art. 128. The permanent commission will meet when convoked by the presiding officer, or when the majority of its members agree to do so. The following are powers of the permanent commission: (a) To declare whether or not there are grounds for the formation of a case against the functionaries referred to in Articles 107 and 116, with the exception of the president of congress, the President of the Republic, and the president of the judicial organ, respecting whom Congress alone may thus declare; (b) To carry through matters which have been pending in Congress; (c) To convoke Congress in extraordinary sessions when national interest so requires and when agreed to by two-thirds of the members of the commission; (d) To present a detailed report to Congress of the work it has completed; (e) To convoke elections during a recess to fill vacancies which occur by the death of any deputy or his acceptance of public offices incompatible with that of deputy; (f) Others expressly indicated in the Constitution.

TITLE VI

EXECUTIVE
CHAPTER I
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

Art. 129. The executive functions of the State are deposited for their exercise in a citizen with the title of President of the Republic, who will act with his ministers individually or in council. Art. 130. To be elected President it is necessary:

(a) To be Guatemalan among those included in Article 6 of the Constitution; (b) To be over thirty-five years of age; (c) To be enjoying the rights of citizenship; and (d) To be of secular status. Art. 131. The following may not be elected to the office of President of the Republic: (a) The leader or any of the chiefs of a coup d'6tat, an armed revolution, or any similar movement, or their relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity, for the period during which the constitutional regime was interrupted and the following one; (b) Anyone who has been minister of state or held a high military command in a de facto Government which has altered the constitutional regime, and his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity for the periods referred to in the preceding paragraph; (c) The person exercising the presidency at the time of the election for said office, or who has exercised it during the past year or for part of it; (d) Relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity of the President, the person charged with the presidency and the chief of the armed forces; (e) Ministers of state and secretaries of the President in office at the time of the election, or during the six months previous to it or part of them; (f) Members of the armed forces in active service or who have been so during the six months previous to the day of election or part of them. Art. 132. The presidential term is six years, which may not be extended, and he who has held the presidency may not be re-elected until twelve years after having ceased to hold it. Art. 133. The author or authors of a proposition which tends in any manner to violate the principle of rotation in the presidency of the Republic, and any person, functionary, or employee co-operating directly or indirectly to this end, whatever the motives they invoke and the means they employ, will incur the crime of treason to the country, cease in the discharge of their respective offices if they have them, remain permanently disqualified for the exercise of any public function, and will also lose automatically all their ranks and honors. The responsibility for acts which violate, restrict, or tend to violate or restrict the principle of rotation in the office of President of the Republic is imprescriptible. Art. 134. The President, upon taking possession of his office will take the following oath publicly before Congress: I swear to discharge with loyalty the office of President; to observe and enforce observance of the Constitution; and I promise on my honor the strict fulfillment of the principle of rotation in the office of the presidency of the Republic. Art. 135. In case of absolute default of the President of the Republic, the president of Congress will immediately take charge of the office, and in his default, or if he does not have the qualities required by this Constitution, the vice-presidents of the same in order. If the vice-presidents of Congress do not fulfill the requirements, or are constitutionally ineligible for the exercise of the presidency of the Republic, the president of the judicial organ will exercise the office. The successor must, within the eight days following the absolute default, convoke elections which will take place within a term not less than two or greater than four months, counting from the date of convocation.

After the election has taken place, Congress will, within twenty days, make the declaration referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 115, and the citizen elected will immediately take possession of the office and his term will be counted from the fifteenth of March following. The interim successor will automatically cease in the functions he discharged within the legislative or judicial organs for the time during which he provisionally assumes the presidency of the Republic. Art. 136. In case of temporary default of the President of the Republic, the same order of succession established in the preceding article will be observed. Art. 137. The following are powers of the President of the Republic: (1) To fulfill and enforce the fulfillment of the Constitution and laws of the Republic; (2) To sanction and promulgate the laws, execute them, and enforce their execution; issue regulations, agreements and orders for the due fulfillment of the same, without altering their spirit, and decrees for the issuance of which he is empowered in an express manner by this Constitution; of (3) To provide for the defense of the national territory and the conservation the public order; (4) To convoke Congress in extraordinary sessions; (5) To present to Congress annually, through the minister of the treasury, the project of the budget; (6) To submit for approval of Congress, before their ratification, the treaties he has concluded; (7) To participate in the formation of the laws, presenting projects to Congress by means of the ministers and exercising the right of veto, except in the cases in which provisions of Congress do not need the sanction of the executive in accordance with this Constitution; (8) To give the assistance necessary for the strict fulfillment and immediate execution of the resolutions of the courts of justice; (9) To commute the greater penalty in the penal scale for that immediately inferior, and to grant pardons in political crimes and common crimes connected with the former; (10) To appoint and remove the ministers of state; (11) To appoint and remove, for the carrying out of other offices instituted by the law, the corresponding functionaries and employees, whose appointment is not within the sphere of other authorities; (12) To appoint and remove diplomatic representatives and the functionaries of the consular corps. Representatives, consuls general, and career consuls must be native Guatemalans; (13) To receive diplomatic representatives and issue and withdraw exequaturs of the commissions of consuls; (14) To direct, develop, inspect, and intensify public education; combat illiteracy and procure the diffusion and improvement of agricultural, industrial, and technical instruction in general; (15) To create and maintain the institutions or dependencies necessary which will concentrate their attention on indigenous problems and guarantee in an effective manner the employment of the services of the government in favor of the resolution of those problems; (16) To watch for the conservation and development of the natural resources of the nation; (17) To administer the public treasury in accordance with the law; (18) To exercise, in accordance with the law, vigilance and control of the banks of issue and other credit establishments; (19) To exercise inspection and vigilance over institutions of common utility so that their incomes may be conserved and properly applied;

  1945. 95 1945


(20) To grant retirements, pensions, and gratuity funds in accordance with the law; (21) To confer decorations on Guatemalans and foreigners upon decisions reached in the council of ministers; (22) To watch over health in the territory of the Republic, placing special attention on endemic and epidemic illnesses, and improving the hygienic conditions of rural and urban housing; (23) To exonerate tax-payers from the fines which they have incurred for not paying their taxes within the legal term, or for acts or omissions in the administrative order; (24) To present annually to Congress in its first sessions of March a written report regarding the course and state of the affairs of the public administration in the previous year; (25) Other attributes indicated by this Constitution and properly administrative ones as determined by law. Art. 138. In case of invasion of the national territory, of grave disturbance of the peace, of an epidemic or any other general calamity, the President of the Republic, in agreement with the council of ministers and by means of a decree, may restrict the exercise of the guarantees mentioned in Article 54 of this Constitution. The decree will specify: (1) The motives which justify it; (2) The guarantee or guarantees which are restricted; (3) The territory affected by the restriction; and (4) The time of its duration. Further, the same decree will convoke Congress so that, within a period of three days, it may consider the said law, ratify it, modify it or invalidate it. Should Congress be in session, it will immediately take cognizance of the decree. The restriction of guarantees may not exceed a period of thirty days for each time that it is decreed. If, before the end of the period indicated by the restriction, the reasons motivating the decree have disappeared, it shall be made to cease in its effects, and in such a case all citizens have the right to urge its revision. Upon the expiration of the term of thirty days, the guarantees will be automatically re-established, unless a new decree of restriction has been dictated. The restriction of guarantees will in no manner affect the functioning of the organs of State, whose members shall always enjoy the immunities and prerogatives guaranteed to them by the law. During the restriction the law of public order will rule for the territory to which the former is applied. Art. 139. The President of the Republic is responsible for his acts before Congress in the cases and in the manner determined by the law of responsibilities. CHAPTER II
MINISTERS OF STATE

Art. 140. In order to be minister of state it is necessary: (a) To be Guatemalan among those included in Article 6 of the Constitution; () To be enjoying the rights of citizenship; (c) To be over thirty years of age and of the secular state. The following may not be ministers: relatives of the President of the Republic, of the president or vice-presidents of Congress or of the chief

of the armed forces, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity; those who have administered or collected public funds while they do not have certificates of the solvency of their accounts; contractors on public works and enterprises paid for with funds of the State or municipality, their guarantors, or those who, as a result of such works or enterprises, have claims pending in their own interest. Ministers may not exercise powers of companies of any kind or represent interests of the same; neither may they exercise mandates of persons or enterprises which are contractors of public works or services. Art. 141. Each minister will have one or more under-secretaries, who will substitute for him in order in cases of absence or temporary default. Art. 142. The President of the Republic will convoke and preside over the council of ministers. All the resolutions of the council shall be taken by a majority and, in case of a tie, the President may vote twice. The council will meet, on the initiative of the President, to take resolutions in all matters which it judges of national importance and to take cognizance of the cases indicated by the law. Art. 143. The ministers in their respective branches will countersign the signature of the President of the Republic on all provisions to which said functionary agrees, without which they will not be valid and in consequence will have no legal effect. The responsibility of the ministers is jointly with the President for all the acts they authorize with their signature. Art. 144. The ministers must annually present to Congress, within the first ten days of March, a report of the work accomplished in their respective offices. Art. 145. The ministers may appear in Congress with power to take part in the debates, but without a vote. They are obliged to present themselves in Congress to answer interpellations put to them for any act of government, except those connected with diplomatic matters or pending military operations. The interpellations may occasion a vote of lack of confidence, which must be requested by at least fifteen deputies. Art. 146. When Congress issues a vote of lack of confidence in a minister, he must resign; but if he believes, in agreement with the President and the council of ministers, that public opinion supports his actions, he may appeal to Congress within a period of eight days, and in such a case the ratification of the vote of lack of confidence will require the approval of two-thirds at least of the deputies who make up Congress. If the vote is ratified, the minister must resign. The same procedure will be followed in case the vote of lack of confidence refers to various ministers when the number does not exceed three. Art. 147. In case of a vote of lack of confidence in one or more of its members, the council of ministers may make it a common cause, proceeding in accordance with the provisions of the preceding Article. Art. 148. The power of expressing lack of confidence in one or more ministers may only be exercised six months after their appointment; and in no case may it occur during the last six months of the presidential term.

CHAPTER III
THE ARMY

Art. 149. The national army is instituted to defend the territorial integrity of the nation, uphold the fulfillment of the Constitution and the
principle of rotation in the presidency of the Republic. It is non-political, essentially professional, obedient, and not deliberative. It is organized as an institution guaranteeing internal and external order and security, and in everything it is subject to military laws and regulations. It may be called by the executive to co-operate in works of communications, reforestation, and increase of agricultural production. Art. 150. All Guatemalans are obliged to give military service in accordance with the law. Art. 151. The President of the Republic is the commander in chief of the army and shall issue his orders through the minister of national defense and the chief of the armed forces. Art. 152. The chief of the armed forces shall be designated by Congress from a list of three names presented by the superior council of national defense. He will remain in office for six years and may be removed by Congress if grounds are declared for the formation of a case, or in the cases and manner determined in the constitutive law of the army. Art. 153. No relative of the President of the Republic, the president of Congress, or the minister of national defense within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second of affinity may be appointed chief of the armed forces. Art. 154. Upon taking possession of his office and annually in the first ordinary sessions of Congress, the chief of the armed forces, for himself and as representative of the army, shall solemnly take before Congress the following oath: We swear: That the armed forces of the Republic will never be an instrument of arbitrary power or oppression, and that none of its members will respect orders which imply the commission of a crime; That we will defend the territorial integrity, the Constitution of the Republic, and the rights and liberties of the people; That we will guarantee the rule of democracy on our soil, and will fulfill our military duties with loyalty and the spirit of sacrifice; That we will defend the principles of free suffrage and no re-election, as well as the duly issued laws and the political and social institutions of the country; and That we will maintain the army as a professional institution, worthy and absolutely non-political; and the oath referred to in paragraph 11 of Article 115. Art. 155. The organization, technical direction, administration, and provisioning of the national army will be exclusively in the charge of the chief of the armed forces and the minister of the national defense. Art. 156. The superior council of national defense is a consulting organ, charged with resolving the questions related to the functioning of the army, and will act as the superior court of the armed forces to judge and take cognizance of matters for which it is convoked by the President of the Republic, the minister of national defense, or the chief of the armed forces. Any member of the army may solicit its convocation in accordance with that stipulated in the constitutive law of the army. It is made up of the chief of the armed forces, the minister of national defense, the chief of staff of the army, the chiefs of military zones or bodies, and the number of military men provided for in the corresponding constitutive law. The council may in no case be made up of less than fifteen members,

  

and its decisions must be taken in the form provided in the constitutive law of the army. The members who must form this tribunal and who are not specifically mentioned, will be designated by secret vote of all high chiefs and officers of the permanent forces. Art. 157. Military appointments will be made by the chief of the armed forces through the ministry of the national defense. When the appointment falls on some person who is incapacitated in accordance with the constitutive law of the army, the superior council of defense may require its immediate annulment. Appointments of an administrative order shall be made by the minister of national defense, and those of the presidential chief of staff, directly by the President of the Republic. Art. 158. Promotions from sub-lieutenant to colonel inclusive will be granted by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the chief of the armed forces through the ministry of national defense and with the approval of the superior council, on a basis of competence and when there is a vacancy. Art. 159. Promotions up to general will be made by Congress on the proposal of the President of the Republic and the chief of the armed forces, through the ministry of national defense and with the approval of the superior council of defense. There will not be more than five divisional generals or ten brigadier generals in time of peace. To be promoted to brigadier general, at least twenty years of military service are necessary, and for promotion to divisional general, at least twenty-five. Only in the case of meritorious service in a campaign may the time that the law provides for any promotion be ignored. Art. 160. In case of temporary absence or default of the chief of the armed forces, the office of chief of the army will be exercised by the minister of national defense, and in the case of definitive default or absence, the superior council of defense will propose a list of three candidates to Congress for its appointment, within eight days following the default or absence. During this lapse of time, the post will be exercised by the minister of national defense and, for lack of the latter, by reason either of default or absence, by the chief of staff of the army. Art. 161. In order to fulfill that prescribed in this Chapter, the superior council of national defense will present the list of three candidates referred to in Article 152 to Congress every six years in, the first days of the month of March. TITLE VII JUSTICE Art. 162. The courts of the Republic exclusively are charged with the exercise of the judicial functions. Their proceedings are public, except when morality or the collective interest requires secrecy. The administration of justice is free. Art. 163. The judicial functionaries who are elected by Congress will remain in office four years and may be re-elected. Their removal may be ordered only in cases of crime, notorious bad conduct, or obvious incapacity. The salaries fixed by the general budget of the nation for judicial functionaries and subordinate employees will be paid to them by the judicial treasury, a dependency which will also cover the expenses of the courts.


The national treasury must each month turn over to the judicial treasury, with sufficient advance, the twelfth part of the budget corresponding to the administration of justice. Art. 164. The following make up the Tribunals of the Republic: Ordinary jurisdiction: The Supreme Court of Justice, which, when so required by public interest,
may have more than one chamber or a number of magistrates exceeding what is necessary to issue sentences. The president of the judicial organ is also president of the Supreme Court of Justice and, as well as the members, is appointed by Congress, which may also remove them; 
The court of appeals, made up of chambers whose number and seat is fixed by law. The president, members, and prosecutors of the chambers of appeals are appointed and removed by Congress;

Judges of the first instance and lower judges, whose appointment, removal, and transfer belong to the Supreme Court of Justice. Municipal functionaries will act as lower Judges in the cases established by law. Special jurisdiction: The tribunal of amparo which will take cognizance of cases of violation of constitutional guarantees and is organized in accordance with the respective law;

The tribunal of administrative litigation, with powers to take cognizance in the case of a dispute caused by purely administrative resolutions or acts. Its members are appointed: one by Congress, one by the Supreme Court of Justice, and the third by the President of the Republic. Substitutes are appointed in the same manner. The recourse of cassation exists against sentences of the court of administrative litigation; The court of conflicts of jurisdiction, which will adjust conflicts occurring between the tribunal of administrative litigation and the public administration, between the latter and ordinary jurisdiction, or between the last named and the public administration. Its members will be appointed in the same manner as that indicated in the preceding paragraph; Military tribunals, as regards crimes and offenses of the personnel of the army. The law of war is applicable only to individuals in active service who belong to the army and exclusively in matters of a military nature. Military tribunals may not, in any case, extend their jurisdiction to persons belonging to the army who are not in active service. Their organization and functions will be adjusted to the military code. The recourse of cassation exists against definitive sentences issued by these tribunals, except in cases of invasion of territory, a besieged place or city, or mobilization of the army because of war or revolution. The common courts will take cognizance exclusively of judicial matters connected with those not directly assigned to services of the army, no matter what the nature of the punishable deed concerned; Special tribunals created by the law, whose judges of the first instance and lower judges will be appointed by the Supreme Court, which will exercise the power of removal and transfer with respect to them that is incumbent upon it with respect to other judges. When circumstances make it necessary, one or more chambers may be created within the court of appeals, which will take cognizance in degree of the resolutions of the special tribunals. Art. 165. A law will organize the public ministry.

Art. 166. Magistrates and judges must be native Guatemalans, of the secular state, and enjoying the rights of citizenship. Those who exercise ordinary jurisdiction as well as the members of the courts of amparo, administrative litigation, and conflicts of jurisdiction, should be lawyers as well. For minor judges, this qualification is not necessary.

The president of the Supreme Court of Justice must be Guatemalan among those included in Article 6 of the Constitution and, like the magistrates of said court, must be over thirty-five years of age and must have discharged the office of judge or attorney in the court of appeals, or exercised the profession of lawyer of the courts of the Republic for eight years; magistrates and attorneys of the court of appeals must be over thirty years of age and must have been judges of the first instance for not less than four years, or have exercised the profession of lawyer in the country for the same period. For the purposes of this article, the time of exercise of the profession of lawyer will be counted from the date of inscription in the respective register. Art. 167. The president of the Supreme Court of Justice, the presidents of the chambers of appeals, magistrates, attorneys and judges, with the exception of military ones and others which the law will determine, may not hold positions in the organizations charged with executive and legislative functions, except teaching positions or technical commissions; but judges of the first instance, for lack of titular councilors, may give legal advice to other administrative or military authorities. Art. 168. The members of the Supreme Court, presidents, members and attorneys of the court of appeals, may not be transferred against their wish from one to another chamber or hall. The expression of the reasons in the case of removal of magistrates, attorneys, and judges, must be made after hearing the interested person. Art. 169. The solicitors of the chambers of appeal and the subordinate personnel of the Supreme Court will be appointed, transferred, and removed by the said Court; the subordinate personnel of the chambers of appeal, by the respective chambers; and that of the tribunals of the first instance and minor courts, by their respective members. Art. 170. The following are functions of the courts: to judge and enforce the execution of the judgment, and to apply the laws in all matters within their cognizance thereunder. Courts of ordinary jurisdiction and that of administrative litigation may declare in concrete cases, and by sentence of the first and second instance and cassation, the inapplicability of any law or decision of the organs which exercise other functions of the public power, when they are contrary to the Constitution. If unconstitutionality is declared, the resolution will be transcribed to Congress and the corresponding ministries and published in the official bulletin. Art. 171. No organ or authority may remove to a higher court the jurisdiction of closed cases. The cases and manner of revision will be determined by law. Art. 172. The common courts will take cognizance of matters in which the public administration proceeds as a party, and when claims for abuse of power are brought against those who exercise executive functions, the procedure will conform to the law of amparo. Art. 173. In no case will there be more than two instances, and the magistrate or judge who has exercised jurisdiction in one of them may not sit on the other, or in cassation, when it treats of the same matter. Art. 174. The magistrates and judges, whatever their denomination or category, are responsible for all infractions of the law. In sentences issued by collegiate courts, it should be stated which of the judges was the chairman.

Art. 175. The order and formalities of judgments and any other judicial proceedings indicated by the laws are to be generally observed by all the inhabitants. Art. 176. The other matters relating to the organization and functions of the courts will be determined by the law. TITLE VIII NATIONAL FINANCES Art. 177. All the revenues of the State will be provided for and its expenses fixed in the budget which will rule during the year for which it has been approved. The budget is single and all the expenses and revenues will appear in it. Art. 178. The minister of the treasury is obliged to present to Congress, for its approval or modification, precisely within the first fifteen days of the first period of ordinary sessions, the project of the budget formulated for the following fiscal year. Congress will modify or approve the budget before closing its sessions. If it closes without approving it, or if a new fiscal year starts without this requirement being fulfilled, the executive will put into effect the budget of the preceding fiscal year. Art. 179. All projects of law which involve expenses for the State should indicate at the proper time, the manner of covering them and the manner of their application. Art. 180. The floating debt which the executive contracts -within the fiscal year should be closed out in the following year. Art. 181. The minister of the treasury, under his own responsibility, has the duty of advancing each month to each minister of state and each of the legislative and judicial organs only the twelfth part of the amount fixed in the annual budget, unless by a provision of the President of the Republic, arrived at in the council of ministers and for extraordinary cases, another amount is fixed in that referring to the ministries. Art. 182. The credits which are consigned under the head of expenditures in the budget will fix the maximum amounts destined for each service and may not be increased by the executive without the previous authorization of Congress. Art. 183. The amounts approved by Congress for each branch of the budget and for each one of the ministries may be transferred only by Congress, at the request of the executive, at any time in the fiscal year. Art. 184. The portions budgeted for unforeseen expenses of the ministries may be spent, in appropriate cases, only after decision by the council of ministers. Art. 185. The revenues of the State constitute a common indivisible and single fund, with which administrative expenses are covered. In consequence all revenues should be included in the common mass, even though some remain as exclusively at the disposal of an organ or dependency. Only the national treasury and its agencies, and banking institutions empowered by the executive, may receive public revenues. Art. 186. The executive is obliged to send annually to Congress, within the first fifteen days of March, the accounts of the State. To this end the ministry of the treasury will liquidate the annual budget within the four months following its expiration and send the report to the tribunal of accounts with the information and evidence necessary. The said tribunal will issue a report within a period not greater than three months, and without prejudice to the effectiveness of its orders will send it to the executive and to Congress within the first fifteen days of sessions. In the report the infractions or responsibilities which, in the judgment of the tribunal, have been incurred, will be stated. It is Congress that approves or rejects the accounts definitively. Art. 187. The liquidation of all credits coming from the treasury, employed in the execution of any work of public service, will be published integrally in the official bulletin as soon as it receives the approval of the corresponding ministry. The liquidation of the credits arising out of public funds will be submitted to review by the office of control of accounts within a period of sixty days after the termination of the works, without prejudice to the liquidations and receipts considered opportune by the administration during the process of the execution of the same. 

TITLE IX TRIBUNAL AND COMPTROLLERSHIP OF ACCOUNTS 
Art. 188. The tribunal and comptrollership of accounts is an autonomous institution which controls and scrutinizes the revenues, expenditures, and other financial interests of the State, of the municipality, of the university, of the institutions which receive funds directly or indirectly from the State, and other organizations determined by the law. Art. 189. The following are functions belonging to the tribunal and comptrollership of accounts: (1) The centralization of fiscal and treasury accounting; (2) The accounting and fiscalization of all accountable operations of the State and of the organizations referred to in the preceding article; (3) Legal analysis and judicial decisions in matters of accounts. Art. 190. The tribunal of accounts is composed of five magistrates, three of them lawyers and the other two preferably doctors in the economic sciences or public accountants or licensed accountants. The Supreme Court of Justice will appoint the president of said tribunal and one other of its magistrates, who must be lawyers. Congress will appoint one lawyer and one doctor in economic sciences or accountant, and the President of the Republic, one doctor in economic sciences or an accountant. The respective substitutes will be appointed in the same manner. Art. 191. In order to be a member of the tribunal of accounts it is necessary: (a) To be over thirty years of age; (b) To be a native Guatemalan and of the secular state; (c) To be exercising the rights of citizenship; (d) To have had at least four years in the exercise of his profession; (e) Not to have been condemned for a crime against property, bribery, breach of trust, deceit, fraud, misappropriation of public wealth, or illegal exactions. Art. 192. The number of magistrates of the tribunal of accounts may be augmented by Congress when it is so required. All the provisions established in Article 190 will be observed for their appointment.

Art. 193. The functionaries who make up the tribunal of accounts will remain in office for four years and may be re-elected. The Supreme Court of Justice may remove them in case of notorious bad conduct, negligence, crime, or ineptitude duly proved, all after legal process and decision. Art. 194. The members of the tribunal of accounts may not form part of another official or autonomous organ that depends directly or indirectly on the State or municipality, nor may they exercise a profession, industry or commerce, nor have material interests, direct or indirect, in agricultural, industrial, commercial, or financial enterprises that are related to the State or municipality. Art. 195. Questions of jurisdiction and conflict of the tribunal of accounts with other institutions will be settled by the tribunal of jurisdictional conflicts. Art. 196. The members who make up the tribunal of accounts will enjoy the same guarantees and prestige as the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 197. The following are powers of the tribunal of accounts: (a) To watch over the application of the budgets of the State and those of the organizations referred to in Article 188, examining and scrutinizing the respective accounts; (b) To countersign, before submission for the signature of the President of the Republic or the corresponding functionary, all orders for expenditure, whatever the ministry or organ from which they proceed, provided that a sufficient balance exists in the respective part of the budget and the legal requirements have been fulfilled; (c) To pronounce on the constitutionality and legality of the decrees that authorize expenditures or establish revenues, being required to submit them upon occasion either to Congress or to the executive for their reconsideration within the term of ten days, counted from the time of their receipt. In such a case the executive may issue a decree of insistence with the signature of the council of ministers, and the tribunal of accounts must give it legal fulfillment; (d) To appoint chiefs, functionaries, employees, auditors, and assistants for the different dependencies of the comptrollership general, after proof of ability and integrity; (e) To inspect generally the charges and expenditures of the State and municipality for the accomplishment of the works as well as for supplies, payment of the personnel, and sales made at auction for those purposes. For this reason it may initiate proceedings to prove whether the payments made correspond effectively to the services granted to the institutions under their supervision; it will be necessary to prove the average cost for the entire work and the average value of the supplies which the State should receive, in accordance with the market. In like manner it may carry through all accusations formulated in connection with these cases. It will deliver an annual report to the President of the Republic of the manner in which the expenses of the institutions under its scrutiny have been made, so that the President may send it with his respective observations to Congress; (f) To request reports from all organs and dependencies subject to its scrutiny, and to appoint a special delegate to carry out the corresponding investigations when the data are not supplied or are deemed insufficient. The tribunal of accounts is obliged to conduct investigations when it is required and to deliver detailed information to the executive and Congress on all the aspects of its operation; (g) To deliver annually to Congress and the President of the Republic a report regarding the state and administration of the public treasury, the national money, the public debt, the budget and its liquidation;
 (h) To publish its annual reports for the general information; (i) To exercise compulsory economic jurisdiction in the Department of Guatemala; (j) Other functions determined by the law. Art. 198. The law establishes the organization of the tribunal and office of control of accounts, its jurisdiction and procedure, the instances and recourses, the number of magistrates required to pronounce sentence in the last degree, the responsibility of the functionaries and employees of the institution, the functioning of the lower courts, and the dependencies which it includes. It will also fix the manner of exercising the functions of control and investigation.

TITLE X
GOVERNMENT OF THE DEPARTMENTS AND MUNICIPALITIES 
Art. 199. The territory of the Republic is divided for its administration into departments, and these in turn into municipalities. Art. 200. The President of the Republic will appoint, for the administration of each department, a governor whose qualifications and powers are fixed by law. The governor is the representative and delegate of the executive. Art. 201. The municipalities are ruled by autonomous municipal corporations, presided over by one or more mayors. The corporations as well as the mayors are elected in a direct and popular manner. Art. 202. The mayors are, in their respective jurisdictions, delegates and representatives of the departmental governor, who is in turn representative of the government. Each municipality will organize its local police, which will be exclusively under the orders of the mayor. Art. 203. The municipalities have the power to establish their excise taxes. The approval of the government will be necessary, in the cases so decided by the law, in order to establish excise taxes and effect expenditures. Art. 204. The organization, functioning, and powers of the municipalities and of their members is the subject of laws. Art. 205. The property and revenues of the municipalities belong exclusively to each of them and enjoy the guarantees granted by law.

TITLE XI AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION 
Art. 206. Complete or partial amendment of the Constitution may be decreed only by a vote of at least two-thirds of the total number of deputies making up Congress; the vote will also indicate the article or articles to be amended. In any case where the total amendment of the Constitution is proposed, or that of Articles 2; 115, par. 11; 131; 132; 133; 135; 136; and the present article, or of one or several of them, it may be decreed only when so resolved by at least two-thirds of the votes above stated, in two different and consecutive periods of ordinary sessions of Congress; and even thus, the Constitutional Assembly may not meet to consider the reform in such a case, except six years after it was decreed. , Amendments to the Constitution may consist of modifications, suppressions, additions, substitutions, or extensions of Articles.

In no case may Articles 2; 115, par. 11; 131; 132; 133; 135; 136; and the present article be declared suspended, nor may their operation and effectiveness be in any way lessened. Art. 207. Once the amendment is decreed, Congress will convoke elections for a Constituent Assembly which should be installed within the sixty days following the date of convocation, except in the case provided in the preceding Article respecting the reform of the said Article and of Articles 2; 115, par. 11; 131; 132; 133; 135; 136; and 206, or of any one of them, and the entire Constitution; in which case the convocation must be made by the Congress functioning the fifth year after the date on which the amendment has been decreed, in order that the installation of the Constituent Assembly may take place at the end of the fixed term of six years. The Article or Articles whose reform has been decreed will be inserted in the convocation. Art. 208. The Constituent Assembly will be composed of one representative for each forty thousand inhabitants, or fraction over twenty thousand. If any department of the Republic cannot be represented, in accordance with the preceding rule, it will nevertheless have the right to elect one deputy. Those elected must have the qualifications required by Article 112, be subject to the prohibitions of Article 113, and enjoy the prerogatives indicated in Articles 107, 108, and the first part of 110 of the Constitution. Art. 209. The meeting of the Constituent Assembly does not hinder the functioning of Congress. Art. 210. Once the amendment has been decreed by the Constituent Assembly, and if there are no other constitutional decrees or laws to issue, it will dissolve itself after the promulgation. 

Art. 211. This Constitution shall not lose its force and vigor, even though a rebellion interrupts its observance. Art. 212. All constitutions and constitutional amendments decreed previous to the present one are without any validity or effect. 

TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 
Art. 1. Guatemala declares that Belice (British Honduras) is part of its territory, and considers of national interest the measures undertaken to achieve its effective reincorporation in the Republic. Art. 2. Those who have acquired Guatemalan nationality before the promulgation of this Constitution shall continue enjoying this quality. Art. 3. The last fraction of paragraph four of Article 9 which says: "Illiterates may exercise the suffrage six months after having been inscribed," will become effective six months after the establishment of the civic register. Art. 4. Guatemalan citizens who know how to read and write and who have obtained citizenship before the promulgation of this Constitution should inscribe themselves in the civic register, whether or not they are inscribed in the present register of citizens. Art. 5. Notwithstanding that stated in the third paragraph of Article 91 of the Constitution, the present owners of immovables lying in the zones of fifteen kilometers along the frontiers and sea coasts shall continue in the enjoyment of their rights, but they may not transmit them by any deed except to a Guatemalan among those included, in Article 6 of this Constitution.


 Art. 6. During the present war against the totalitarian countries, the executive may, by virtue of international conventions, exempt from public auction the contracts and concessions on wood cutting destined for countries allied to the Republic. Art. 7. The Legislative Assembly installed December 3, 1944, will function with the name of Congress which belongs to it according to this Constitution, and its constitutional term will be computed from the first of March of 1945 to the twenty-eighth of February of 1949; half of it must be renewed in accordance with the provisions of this legal instrument as regards the number of deputies forming it, at the end of the first two years. To this effect, in the last ordinary sessions of 1946, lots will be drawn of the departing deputies, after a reform of the electoral tables in accordance with the last census. Lots will first be drawn among those deputies who must cease because the population of the department they represent is not adequate, in accordance with the provisions of Article 111 of this Constitution. Among the remaining deputies further lots will be drawn in order to renew half of the Chamber. Art. 8. Congress will issue the legal provisions necessary for the application of Article 159, in that relative to the number of divisional and brigade generals fixed in it. Art. 9. Until the tribunal and comptrollership of accounts is formed and measures are taken in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, the tribunal and general direction of accounts will continue functioning as at present. Art. 10. For the purposes of Article 201, the first municipal elections, in accordance with this Constitution, must be held during the month of December next. Art. 11. This Constitution shall become effective the fifteenth of March of one thousand nine hundred and forty-five. Passed to the executive for publication and fulfillment. Given in the Hall of Sessions: in Guatemala, the eleventh day of March of one thousand nine hundred and forty-five.



