CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

GUINEA
by BARRY M. DENNIS

Issued February 1973

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

English translation of Constitution was made by the United Nations.

© Copyright 1973 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

GUINEA CONSTITUTION PREAMBLE The people of Guinea, by its overwhelming vote of 28 September 1958, rejected domination and thereby acquired its National Independence and establishes a Free and Sovereign State. The State of Guinea fully endorses the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It proclaims the equality and solidarity of all its nationals without distinction as to race, sex or religion. It affirms its resolve to strive to the utmost to achieve and consolidate the Unity in Independence of the African Fatherland. To that end, it will combat all chauvinistic trends and manifestations, which it regards as serious obstacles to the achievement of that objective. It expresses its desire to establish ties of Friendship with all Peoples on the basis of the principles of equality, mutual interest and respect for National Sovereignty and Territorial Integrity. It unreservedly supports any policy designed to establish the United States of Africa and to safeguard and consolidate World Peace. THE PRINCIPLE OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA IS "GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE, BY THE PEOPLE AND FOR THE PEOPLE" TITLE I SOVEREIGNTY Article 1. Guinea is a Democratic, Secular and Social Republic. The National Emblem shall be Red, Yellow and

1

Green in vertical stripes of equal breadth. The National Anthem shall be: "FREEDOM" The motto of the Republic shall be: LABOUR JUSTICE - SOLIDARITY. TITLE II THE NATIONAL COMMUNITIES Article 2. The Republic of Guinea shall consist of Territorial Communities, viz. the Communes and the Circonscriptions. Article 3. National Sovereignty shall be vested in the People, who shall exercise it in all matters through their Deputies elected to the National Assembly by universal, equal and direct suffrage, and by secret ballot, or by way of referendum. TITLE III PARLIAMENT Article 4. Parliament shall consist of a single National Assembly, whose members shall be elected on the basis of a national list for a term of five years and shall bear the title of Deputies. Article 5. The method of election, conditions of eligibility and grounds of disqualification of members of the National Assembly, and the number of deputies, shall be determined by law. Article 6. The National Assembly shall be sole judge of the eligibility of its members and of the regularity of their election. It may accept their resignation. Article 7. The National Assembly shall meet regularly in two ordinary Annual Sessions not exceeding two months in duration, in March and October. It may meet in Extraordinary Session, if convened by its President at the request of the Government or of two-thirds of its members. 2

Article 8. Elections for the Officers of the National Assembly shall be held at the beginning of each legislative term, and at the beginning of the first Session each year. TITLE IV RELATIONS BETWEEN PARLIAMENT AND GOVERNMENT Article 9. The National Assembly shall alone enact the law. The scope of the law is unlimited. Article 10. No member of the National Assembly may be prosecuted, pursued, arrested, detained or sentenced for opinions he has expressed or votes he has cast in the discharge of his duties. Article 11. No criminal proceedings may be instituted against any member of the National Assembly during his term of office, unless he is taken in flagrante delicto, without the authorization of the Assembly. The detention or prosecution of a Deputy shall be suspended, if the General Assembly so directs. Article 12. The members of the National Assembly shall receive remuneration at a rate to be determined by law. Article 13. The meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. However, the National Assembly may meet in "closed session" at the request of the President of the Government or of more than half of its members. Article 14. The President of the Republic and the Deputies to the National Assembly shall have the sole right to initiate legislation. Article 15. The National Assembly shall examine government and private bills submitted to it in its Commissions, the number, composition and terms of reference of which it shall determine. Government bills and private bills accepted by the Government shall be given priority.

3

Article 16. The draft Budget shall be submitted to the National Assembly and shall be enacted by Parliament. The National Budget shall be enacted not later than 20 November of the preceding year. Article 17. The Deputies to the National Assembly shall have the right to initiate expenditure. However, no proposal for increasing expenditure may be submitted unless accompanied by a proposal for finding the necessary revenue. Article 18. The National Assembly shall control the Nation's finances. A statement of expenditure shall be submitted to it at the end of every half-year for the preceding half-year. Final accounts for the preceding year shall be examined during the October Session and approved by a law. Article 19. The National Assembly may obtain information on Government activities by: - oral questions - written questions - interpellations - hearings by the Commissions - Commissions of Inquiry. The law shall determine the conditions and procedure for the use of these means of information. It shall also determine the time-limits for replies. TITLE V

THE HEAD OF STATE Article 20. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State. He shall be the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. Any eligible citizen not under thirty-five years of age may be elected President of the Republic.

4

TITLE VI THE GOVERNMENT Article 21. The powers of the Government of the Republic shall be exercised by the President of the Republic, assisted by a Cabinet. Article 22. The President of the Republic shall be elected for a term of seven years by universal suffrage, by an absolute majority in the first ballot or by a relative majority in the second ballot. He may be re-elected. Article 23. The President of the Republic shall appoint the Ministers by decree. No member of the Government of the Republic may be arrested or prosecuted without the prior authorization of the President of the Republic. Article 24. In the exercise of their functions, the Ministers shall be responsible for their actions to the President of the Republic, who shall be responsible to the National Assembly for the general policy of his Cabinet. Article 25. The President of the Republic shall ensure the enforcement of the laws. He shall make all appointments to the civil service. He shall make all appointments to military posts and duties. Article 26. All governmental acts shall be signed by the President of the Republic and countersigned by the Ministers responsible for their application. Article 27. No member of the Government may be a Deputy or engage in any professional activity in a private capacity. Article 28. When the office of President becomes vacant, the Cabinet shall continue in office in order to carry out current business pending the election of a new Chief of State.

5

Article 29. Ministers shall have access to meetings of the National Assembly and to those of its Committees. They must be heard on their request. They may attend or be represented at debates in the National Assembly or in Committees, by officials specifically designated to that end. Article 30. In case of necessity, the President of the Republic may delegate his powers to a Minister. TITLE VII INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS Article 31. The Republic of Guinea shall conform to the rules of International Law. Article 32. Subject to the provisions of Article 33, the President of the Republic shall negotiate treaties. Article 33. Treaties relating to international organization, trade treaties, treaties of peace, treaties committing the finances of the State, treaties relating to persons, treaties which modify legislative provisions and treaties involving cession or exchange of, or addition to, the Territory, may be ratified only by enactment of a law. They shall take effect only when ratified. TITLE VIII INTER-AFRICAN RELATIONS Article 34. The Republic may conclude with any African State agreements providing for association or the establishment of a community and involving partial or total relinquishment of Sovereignty with a view to the achievement of African Unity.

6

TITLE IX JUDICIAL AUTHORITY Article 35. Justice shall be administered in the name of the People of Guinea. The President of the Republic shall guarantee the independence of the Judicial Authority. He shall have the right of pardon. In the exercise of their judicial functions, judges shall obey the law alone. Article 36. Justice shall be administered in public except in the special cases prescribed by law. The right of defense is recognized to accused persons. Article 37. The Judicial Authority, as the guardian of personal freedom, shall ensure respect for the rights of citizens as prescribed by law. Article 38. The Judicial Organization of the Republic shall be established by law. TITLE X FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS Article 39. All citizens and persons under the jurisdiction of the Republic of Guinea, without distinction as to race, sex, or religion, shall be entitled to elect and be elected in the manner prescribed by law. Article 40. The citizens of the Republic of Guinea shall enjoy freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association and the right to participate in processions and manifestations, as prescribed by law. Article 41. Citizens shall be ensured freedom of belief by the secular character of the schools and of the State. ily. Article 42. No one may be detained arbitrar7

Article 43. The dwellings of citizens of the Republic of Guinea shall be inviolable The secrecy of the mails shall be guaranteed by law. Article 44. All citizens of the Republic of Guinea shall enjoy the same right to work, to rest, to social welfare and to education. The exercise of trade union rights and the right to strike shall be recognized to workers. Article 45. All acts of racial discrimination and all racial or regionalist propaganda shall be punished by law. Article 46. The Republic of Guinea shall grant the right of asylum to foreign citizens persecuted for having fought to defend a just cause, or for their scientific or cultural activities. Article 47. All citizens of the Republic of Guinea shall have a duty to abide by the Constitution and other laws of the Republic, to pay their taxes and honestly to discharge their social obligations. Article 48. The defense of the Fatherland shall be the sacred duty of every citizen of the Republic of Guinea. TITLE XI AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION Article 49. The right to propose amendments to the Constitution shall be vested concurrently in the President of the Republic and the members of the National Assembly. By decision of a two-thirds majority of its membership, the National Assembly may adopt or submit to referendum a proposed amendment to the Constitution. Article 50. The Republic form of the State may not be jeopardized by any constitutional amendment.

8

TITLE XII TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS Article 51. The Government in office on the date of promulgation of the present Constitution shall continue to exercise executive power until the President of the Republic is elected. Article 52. The present Constitution shall be promulgated by the Chief of State within forty-eight hours of its adoption by the National Assembly. Article 53. The first legislative session of the National Assembly of the Republic of Guinea shall open on the date of promulgation of the present Constitution.

9

