INTERNATIONAL BUREAU OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLICS
WASHINGTON, D. C.

AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONS
A COMPILATION OF THE POLITICAL CONSTITUTIONS OF THE INDEPENDENT NATIONS OF THE NEW WORLD .o• WITH SHORT HISTORICAL NOTES AND VARIOUS APPENDIXES

By JOSE IGNACIO RODRIGUEZ
Chief Translator and Librarian

VOLUME II	

JULY, 1905

WASHINGTON

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1907

The Haitian people proclaim the present Constitution to consecrate their rights, their civil and political guaranties, their sovereignty, and their national independence.
TITLE FIRST. CHAPTER I.

The territory of the _Republic.
ARTICLE 1. The Republic o f Haiti is one and indivisible, essentially free, sovereign, and independent. Its territory and the islands adjacent thereto are inviolable, and can not be alienated by any person or through any convention. These islands adjacent are: La Tortue, La Gonave, L'Isle Vaches, Les Cayemittes, La Navase, la Grande Caye, and all the others to be found within the limits of the zone established by the Law of nations. ART. 2. The territory of the Republic is divided into Departments. Each Department is subdivided into districts (arrondissements), and each district into communes.

The number and limits of these divisions and subdivisions shall be determined by law.

TITLE SECOND. CHAPTER I.

Ilaitians and their rights.
ART. 3. Haitians are: 1. All those born in Haiti or elsewhere of a Haitian father. 2. All those born in Haiti or elsewhere of a Haitian mother, and not recognized by their father. 3. All those born in Haiti of a foreig n father, or, if not recognized'by their father, of a foreign mother, provided that they belong to the African race. 4. All those who up to the present date have been recognized as Haitians. ART. 4. All foreigners may become Haitians by following the rules established by law. ART. 5. A foreign woman married to a Haitian shall follow the condition of her husband. A Haitian woman married to a foreigner shall lose her Haitian character. In case of dissolution of the marriage she may recover her Haitian nationality by complying with the requisites established by law. A Haitian woman who has lost her national character by her marriage to a foreigner shall be disqualified from holding or acquiring by any reason whatever real property in Haiti. The law shall provide for the condemnation of the property owned by her before her marriage. ART. 6. Haitians alone can be owners of real property in Haiti or acquire it by any means whatever. ART. 7. Haitians after being naturalized in due form in a foreign country shall be disqualified from returning to Haiti before the lapse of five years; and if they wish to reacquire their original

nationality they shall be bound to fulfill all the requisites and formalities imposed by law on foreigners.
CHAPTER IL

Civil and _political rights. ART. 8. The reunion of civil and political rights constitutes the quality of citizen. The exercise of the civil rights, independent of the political rights, shall be regulated by law. ART. 9. Every citizen over twenty-one years of age is entitled to exercise his political rights if he has the other qualifications required by the Constitution. Haitians by naturalization shall not be admitted to the exercise of political rights until after they have resided five years in the territory of the Republic. ART. 10. Haitian citizenship shall be lost: 1. By naturalization in a foreign country. 2. By the abandonment of the country at a moment of imminent danger. 3. By the unauthorized acceptance of public functions or pensions from a foreign Government. 4. By any kind of service rendered to the enemies of the Republic or by doing business with them. 5. By final sentence rendered upon proper trial and conviction, imposing penalties perpetual, corporal and infamatory. ART. 11. The exercise of political rights shall be suspended: 1. By the condition of bankruptcy, whether ordinary or fraudulent. 2. By judicial decree, or by the fact that the party concerned has been indicted or declared to be in contumacy. 3. By virtue of a judicial condemnation carrying with it the suspension of civil rights.

4. By virtue of a judicial decision showing that the party referred to has refused to do service in the national guard or in the jury. The suspension shall terminate as soon as the reason out of which it arises ceases to exist. ART. 12. The law shall fix the cases in which citizenship can be recovered and the manner and form in which this can be done.
CHAPTER III.

Public law.
ART. 13. Haitians are equal before the law. They are all admissible to civil and military employments and no one shall be preferred to another except upon personal merit or services rendered to the country. The law shall regulate the conditions of admissibility. ART. 14. Individual liberty is guaranteed. No one can be detained except upon probable cause relating to an act punishable by law and by order of a competent functionary. The warrant of arrest shall not be executed, unless: 1. It formally sets forth the cause of the arrest and the provision of the law which punishes the imputed fact. 2. Notice, together with a copy of the warrant, is given to the accused party at the moment of the arrest. Only in case of ftugrante delicto, the arrest shall be exempted from the forms and conditions above stated. All arrests or detentions made in opposition to this provision and all acts of violence or rigor accompanying the arrest are declared to be arbitrary acts, against which the aggrieved parties may, without previous authorization, complain before the competent tribunal and

cause the authors or executors of the outrage to be prosecuted. ART. 15. No one can be tried by other judges than those established by the Constitution or the law. ART. 16. Domiciliary visits and seizure of papers shall not be made except by virtue of law and in the manner and form provided by it. ART. 17. No law shall have retroactive effect. A law is supposed to be retroactive when vested rights are taken away by it. ART. 18. No penalty shall be established except by law, nor shall any penalty be imposed except in the cases which the law has determined. ART. 19. Property is inviolable and sacred. Concessions and sales legally made by the State shall be irrevocable. No one shall be deprived of his property except for public use and in the cases and in the manner established by law, upon previous payment of a just indemnity. Property shall not be confiscated for political reasons. ART. 20. The penalty of death for political offenses is abolished. The law shall fix the penalty to be imposed in place thereof. ART. 21. Everyone has the right to express his opinions on all matters, and to write, print, or publish what he thinks. Writings shall not be submitted to previous censorship. Abuses of the liberty of the press shall be defined and punished by law, without thereby abridging in any way whatever the freedom itself. ART. 22. All kinds of worship are equally free. Everyone has the right to profess and freely practice his religion, provided that the public order is not disturbed thereby.

ART. 23. The Government shall fix the territorial limits of the parishes served by the ministers of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion. ART. 24. Teaching is free.

Primary instruction shall be compulsory. Instruction shall be gratuitous in all its degrees. The freedom of teaching is exercised under the law and the high supervision of the State. ART. 25. Trial by jury is established in all criminal cases, and also for political offenses, and offenses committed through the press. Nevertheless, when a state of siege has been legally proclaimed, the offenses against the interior and exterior safety of the State, and, in general, all political offenses committed through the press or otherwise, shall be tried by the competent criminal or correctional tribunals, without the assistance of a jury. ART. 26. Haitians have the right to assemble peaceably and without arms, even for discussing political matters, provided that they comply with the laws regulating the exercise of. this right. No pre- ' vious authorization shall be required for the holding of these meetings. This provision shall not be applicable to meetings in public places, which shall be subject in, all respects to the police regulations. ART. 27. Haitians have the right to join and form associations. The exercise of this right shall not require any previous permit. ART. 28. The right of petition is personally exercised by one or several individuals, never in the name of a body. The petitions may be addressed either to the legislative power or to each legislative chamber.

ART. 29. The secrecy of private correspondence is inviolable. The law shall determine the responsibility to be incurred for the violation of correspondence entrusted to the mails. ART. 30. The employment of the languages used in Haiti is optional. This employment can not be regulated except by law, and this only for official purposes and in judicial matters. ART. 31. No previous authorization shall be required to prosecute public functionaries for offenses committed by them during their administration; but the provisions herein made in regard to the secretaries of state shall be, nevertheless, observed. ART. 32. Nothing shall be added to the Constitution, or taken away from it, by means of a law. The letter of the Constitution shall always prevail.
TITLE THIRD.
CHAPTER I.

The National Sovereignty and the Powers to which, the Exercise Thereof is delegated.
ART 33. The national sovereignty is vested in the universality of the citizens. ART. 34. The exercise of this sovereignty is delegated to three powers. These three powers are the legislative, the executive, and the judicial. They form the Government of the Republic, which is essentially democratic and representative. ART. 35. The three powers are independent from each other in the exercise of their own functions, which they perform separately. Neither of them can delegate its faculties, nor go beyond the limits ascribed to it. Responsibility is involved by every act of the three powers.

ART. 36. The legislative power is vested in two representative chambers: One called the Chamber of Representatives and the other, the Senate, which form by their union the legislative body. ART. 37. Both chambers shall meet in joint session and form the National Assembly in the cases provided by the Constitution. The powers of the National Assembly are limited and can not embrace other subjects than those especially attributed to it by the Constitution. ART. 38. The Executive power is vested in a citizen who takes the title of "President of the Republic of Haiti," and shall receive no other title whatever. ART. 39. The judicial power is vested in a supreme court, courts of appeals, civil courts, tribunals of commerce, and justices of the peace. ART. 40. Individual responsibility is formally attached to all public functions.

The law shall regulate the manner of proceedings to be followed in the prosecution of public- functionaries for the acts of their administration.
CHAPTER II.

The legislative power.
SECTION I.

The Chamber of Representatives. ART. 41. The Chamber of Representatives shall consist of representatives of the people directly elected by the Primary Assemblies of each commune in the manner established by law. ART. 42. The number of representatives shall be fixed according to the population of each commune.

Until a census of the population is taken and the law provides the number of citizens to be represented by each deputy in the Chamber of Representatives, there shall be three representatives for the capital of the Republic, two for each chief town of Department, two for each one of the cities of Jacmel, Jeremie and Saint Marc, and one each for the other communes. ART. 43. No one shall be a representative of the people who is not: 1. Over twenty-five years of age. 2. In the enjoyment of his civil and political rights. 3. Owner of real property in Haiti, or engaged in an industrial pursuit or in the practice of a profession. ART. 44. The representatives of the people are elected for terms of three years. They are reeligible indefinitely. The renewal of the Chamber of Representatives shall be complete. ART. 45. In case of death, resignation or disqualification of a representative of the people the Primary Assembly provides for the appointment of his successor only for the rest of the term which he had to serve. ART. 46. During the session of the Legislative Body each representative of the people shall receive from the public treasury a remuneration of three hundred dollars per month. ART. 47. The functions of representatives of the people are inconsistent with all other functions remunerated by the State.
SECTION II.

The Senate.

ART. 48. The Senate shall consist of thirty-nine senators, who shall serve for six years.

ART. 49: The senators shall be elected by the Chamber of Representatives out of two lists of candidates, one to be furnished by the electoral assemblies at meetings held in the chief towns of each district at the time fixed by law, and the other by the Executive power at the session in which the renewal decreed by article 51 should take place. The names of the senators who should constitutionally represent each Department of the Republic shall be taken exclusively out of the two lists furnished for that Department, by the electoral colleges and the executive power. The number of senators to be elected, as above provided, shall be as follows: Eleven for the Department of the West, nine for the Department of the South, six for the Department of Artibonite, and four for. the Department of the Northwest. Senators who have left one Department shall be replaced by citizens of the same Department and no others. ART. 50. The following qualifications shall be required to be a Senator: 1. To be over thirty years of age. 2. To be in the full enjoyment of civil and political rights. 3. To be the owner of real property in Haiti or be engaged in industrial pursuits or in the practice of a profession. ART. 51. The Senate shall be renewed by thirds every two years. In consequence thereof, it shall be divided by lot into three groups of thirteen senators each. Those of the first group shall leave the Senate after two years of service; those of the second group at the expiration of four years; and those of the third group when the six years have expired. Therefore, at the end of each period of two years an election of thirteen senators shall be held.

ART. 52. Senators are reeligible indefinitely. ART. 53. In case of death, resignation or disqualification of a senator, the Chamber of Representatives shall proceed to fill his place for the balance of his term of office only. The election shall take place from the last lists furnished by the Executive power and by the electoral assemblies. ART. 54. The Senate shall not meet when the legislative body is not in session, except in the cases provided by articles 63 and 64. ART. 55. The functions of senators are incompatible and inconsistent with all other functions remunerated by the State. ART. 56. The Senate' shall, before adjourning, appoint a permanent committee. This committee shall consist of seven senators, and shall have no other power than that of calling the National Assembly to convene in the case set forth in article 64. ART. 57. Each senator shall receive from the public treasury a remuneration of one hundred and fifty dollars per month.
SECTION 111.

The National Assembly.

ART. 58. At the opening and closing of each annual session the Chamber of Representatives and the Senate shall convene in joint session and constitute the National Assembly. ART. 59. The President of the Senate shall be the President of the National Assembly. The President of the Chamber of Representatives shall be the Vice-president. The Secretaries of the Senate and the Chamber of Representatives shall be the Secretaries of the National Assembly.

ART. 60. The powers-of the National Assembly shall be: 1. To elect the President of the Republic and to administer to him the constitutional oath of office. 2. To declare war, upon the report of the Executive power, and to provide for everything relating to this matter. 3. To approve or disapprove treaties of peace. 4. To amend the Constitution when its amendment may become necessary.
SECTION IV.

The exercise of the legislative power.

ART. 61. The residence of the legislative body shall be the capital of the Republic. It may be moved to another place according to political circumstances. Each Chamber shall meet in its own building, except in case that they meet in joint session to constitute the National Assembly. ART. 62. The legislative body meets every year without need of express convocation on the first Monday of April. The session lasts three months. In case of necessity this period may be extended to four months, either by the legislative body or the Executive power. ART. 63. In the interval between the sessions, in case of urgency, the Executive power can call the Chambers or the National Assembly to meet in extra session. The Executive power shall explain to them, by means of a message, the reason for the call, ART. 64. In case of vacancy of the office of President of the Republic, the National Assembly is bound to meet within ten days at the latest, with or without convocation by the permanent committee of the Senate. ART. 65. The members of the legislative body represent the whole nation.

ART. 66. Each Chamber is the judge of the election of its members, and shall decide contests which may arise on the subject. ART. 67. The members of each Chamber shall individually take the oath to maintain the rights of the people and to be faithful to the Constitution. -ART. 68. The meetings of the Chambers or the National Assembly shall be public. Nevertheless, each one of these bodies may resolve itself into a secret committee at the request of five members. The body shall decide thereafter by absolute majority whether or not the meeting should continue to be held in public. ART. 69. The legislative power enacts laws on all subjects of public interest. The initiative of legislation belongs to each Chamber and to the Executive power. Nevertheless, the appropriation laws and laws concerning the assessment, distribution and manner of payment of taxes, creation of revenue or increase of the expenses of the Government, shall be first voted by the Chamber of Representatives. ART. 70. The authoritative interpretation of the laws belongs to the Legislative power alone. That interpretation shall be given in the shape of a law. ART. 71. Neither Chamber shall take any measure without a quorum consisting of two-thirds of its members, as fixed by articles 42 and 48. Should it happen that in the general elections for the formation of the Chamber the result of the vote does not give a sufficient number to make the legal two-thirds, the Executive shall be bound to order an election to be held immediately in the Communes which are not represented.

ART. 72. Every act of Congress shall be passed by an absolute majority of votes unless otherwise provided by the Constitution. ART. 73. Members shall vote either by standing or remaining seated. In case of doubt a yea and nay vote shall be taken. ART. 74. Each Chamber has the right to investigate every subject which may come before it. ART. 75. No bill can be adopted by one Chamber without having been voted article by article. ART. 76. Each Chamber has the right to amend and divide the articles and the amendments proposed thereto. The amendments voted by one Chamber shall not be made a part of the bill until after they have been voted by the other Chamber. The organs of the Executive power have- the right to propose amendments to the bills under discussion, even when they have been introduced by the members of the Chambers. They also have the power to withdraw any bill introduced by the Executive before it is finally adopted by the two Chambers. The same power belongs to every member of either Chamber who has introduced a bill, provided that the withdrawal of the bill is not made after it has been voted by the Chamber to which the author of the bill belongs. ART. 77. Every bill passed by the two Chambers shall be immediately sent to the Executive, who, before promulgating it, has the right to make such objections thereto as may be deemed proper. In this case it shall return the bill to the Chamber in which it originated, together with the objections thereto. If the latter are

concurred in the bill shall be amended accordingly by the two Chambers. If they are rejected the bill shall be sent again to the Executive in: order that it may be promulgated. The rejection of the objections shall be voted by secret ballot by a two-thirds majority. If this majority is not obtained the objections shall be considered accepted. ART. 78. The right to object shall be exercised within the following periods: 1. Within three days for bills of urgent character, but in no case shall the objection refer to the urgency. 2. Within eight days, Sundays excepted, for all other bills. Nevertheless, if Congress adjourns before the expiration of this period, all action on the bill shall be postponed. ART. 79. If within the period established in the preceding article the Executive does not make any objection to the bill, it shall be immediately promulgated as law. ART. 80. A bill rejected by one Chamber can not be reintroduced during the same session. ART. 81. The laws and all the other acts of the legislative body become official through the publication thereof in the Moniteur," and they shall be preserved, printed each one with its respective number of order, in the " Bulletin of Laws." ART. 82. The date of a law is that on which it was officially adopted by the two Chambers; but no laws become obligatory until after their promulgation, which has to be made according to law. ART. 83. The Chambers shall correspond with the Executive power on everything affecting the administration of public business. They shall likewise correspond with each other in all the cases set forth in the Constitution.

ART. 84. No one has the power to personally present petitions to the Chambers. Each Chamber has the right to refer to the respective Secretaries of state the petitions addressed to it. The Secretaries of state are bound to give explanations of the contents of said petition whenever the Chambers may order it. ART. 85. The members of the legislative body shall be inviolable from the day of their election until the date of the expiration of their term of office. They can not be expelled from the Chamber of which they forth a part, or prosecuted and molested at any time for their opinions and votes, whether in the exercise of their functions, or by reason of that exercise. ART. 86. During their term of office the members of the legislative body shall be free from Judicial bodily coertion. ART. 87. No member of the legislative body shall be prosecuted or arrested in criminal, correctional, or police matters, even in cases of political offenses, during his term of office, without permission of the Chamber to which he belongs, except in case of fiagrante delieto and when the offense is punishable by corporal or infamatory. penalty. In the latter case the matter shall be submitted to the Chamber without delay on the opening of °the legislative session. ART. 88. The members of the legislative body shall be indicted, in criminal matters, by the Chamber to which they belong, and the indictment shall be tried before the criminal court of their domicile with the assistance of a jury. ART. 89. Each Chamber shall make proper rules for the transaction of its business and the determination of the method under which it must exercise its functions.

CHAPTER III.
The Executive power.

SECTION I.

The President of the Republic. ART. 90. The President of the Republic is elected for seven years. He shall be inaugurated on the fifteenth of May. He can not be, reelected until after an interval of seven years. ART. 91. The election of the President of Haiti is made by the National Assembly. This election is made by secret ballot and by a majority of two-thirds of the members present. If after the first count no candidate has secured the number of votes required, a second ballot shall be taken.

If on this second ballot a majority of two-thirds is not secured the election shall be concentrated on the three candidates who have obtained the greatest number of votes. If after three days of balloting none of these three candidates has obtained the two-thirds majority, the election shall be made from among the two who received the greatest number of votes, and the one who secures an absolute majority shall be proclaimed President of Haiti. If the votes for the two candidates are equally divided, the election shall be decided by lot. ART. 92. No one shall be elected President of Haiti who has not the following qualifications: 1. To have been born of a Haitian father and to have never renounced the Haitian nationality. 2. To be over forty years of age. 3. To be in the enjoyment of his civil and political rights. 4. To be the owner of real estate and have his domicile in Haiti.

ART. 93. In case of death, resionation, or disability of the President, the one who takes his place shall fill it for seven years, his functions ceasing in all cases on the fifteenth of May, even if the seven years of his term have not been completed. During the vacancy the Executive power is vested in the Secretaries of state in council assembled, and shall be exercised by them under their responsibility. ART. 94. If the President becomes unable to exercise his functions, the council of Secretaries of state shall take charge of the Executive authority and exercise it as long as the impediment exists. ART. 95. The President shall, before entering upon his duties, take before the National Assembly the following oath: " I swear before God and the Nation to observe and cause others to observe faithfully the Constitution and the laws of the Haitian people, to respect the rights of the latter, to maintain the national independence and the integrity of the territory." ART. 96. The President shall cause the seal of the Republic to be affixed to all laws, and shall promulgate them, immediately after their receipt, in the manner and form set forth in article 189. He shall cause in the same way the acts and decrees of the National Assembly to be sealed and promulgated. ART. 97. He is entrusted with the duty of enforcing the laws, acts, and decrees of the legislative body and the National Assembly. He has the power to issue all the rules and decrees necessary for that purpose, provided that nothing in said rules or decrees implies the suspension or interpretation of the laws, or interferes with their enforcement. ART. 98. The President has the power to appoint and remove the Secretaries of state.

ART. 99. He shall command the forces on land and sea. He shall make appointments in the army in the manner and under the conditions of promotion established by law. ART. 100. The President makes his appointments for all public positions, only by virtue of the Constitution, or of some express provision of law, and under the conditions therein established. ART. 101. He shall conclude treaties of peace, subject to the approval of the National Assembly. He shall conclude treaties of alliance, neutrality, commerce, and all other conventions, subject to the sanction of the legislative body. ART. 102, The President provides, according to law, for the interior and exterior safety of the State. ART. 103. He has the right to grant amnesties, pardons and commutations of sentences, in all matters, subject to the provisions of law., ART. 104. All Measures taken by the President of Haiti shall be previously discussed and considered in the council of the Secretaries of state. ART. 105. No act of the President, except the decrees making, the appointments of Secretaries of state or revoking said appoint- ' ments, shall have effect of any kind whatever if it is not countersigned by one secretary of state who, by this mere fact, becomes responsible for it with the President. ART. 106. The President of Haiti is not responsible for the abuses of power or any other illegalities in any branch of the administration depending upon a Secretary of state in the actual exercise of his functions and which the said Secretary has not repressed. ART. 107. The President has no other powers than those formally given him by the Constitution and the laws enacted under the authority of the same Constitution.

ART. 108. At the opening of each session the President shall. , transmit to the National Assembly a Message in writing, giving an account of his administration during the preceding year, and explaining the general situation of the Republic, both at home and abroad. ART. 109. The Chamber of Representatives has the right to impeach the President and cause him to be tried before the Senate, in cases of abuse of authority and power, treason, or any other crime committed during the exercise of his functions. The Senate can not impose other penalties than removal from office, and disqualification to exercise any other functions during a period of not less than one year and not more than five. Should there be occasion to impose other penalties. or decide upon the exercise of a civil action, the matter shall be referred to the ordinary tribunals, either by accusation, admitted by the Chamber of Representatives, or by direct complaint of the wronged parties. Neither the resolution directing the impeachment, nor the declaration of guilt, can be passed, except by a majority of two-thirds of the votes. ART. 110. The law shall regulate the manner of proceedings against the President in the cases of crimes or offenses committed by him whether in the exercise of his functions or outside thereof. ART. 111. The President of Haiti shall receive from the public treasury an annual salary of , twentyfour thousand dollars. ART. 112. The President shall reside in the national palace of the capital.

SECTION II.

The Secretaries of state.

ART. 113. There are six Secretaries of state. The Government departments shall be: Interior, Agriculture, Public works, Justice, Public instruction, Worship, Treasury, Commerce, Foreign relations, War, and the Navy. The departments to be placed in charge of each Secretary of state shall be determined by the decree of the President of Haiti making the appointments. ART. 114. No one shall be a Secretary of state if he is not over thirty years of age, does not enjoy his civil and political rights, and is not the owner of real property in Haiti. ART. 115. The -Secretaries of state shall assemble in council presided over by the President of Haiti or by one of their number designated for that purpose by the President. All their deliberations shall be recorded in a book and shall be signed by the members of the council. ART. 116. The Secretaries of state shall correspond directly with the authorities subordinate to them. ART. 117. They shall have the right to the floor of each Chamber for the purpose of supporting the • bills introduced by the Executive, 'as well as the objections made by it to any act of Congress. The Chambers can summons to their presence the Secretaries of state and interpellate them on all the acts of their administration. The Secretaries of state to whom the interpellation is made shall be bound to give the explanation desired. If they declare that the explanation is incompatible with the interests of the State, they shall request that the explanation be given in secret session.

ART. 118. The Secretaries of state are respectively responsible for the acts of the President which they have countersigned, and for all the acts of their own departments. Also for any failure in the execution of the laws. In no case shall an oral or written order of the President relieve a Secretary of state from his responsibility. ART. 119. The Chamber of Representatives has the right to impeach, before the Senate, the Secretaries of state in case Of malversation, treason, abuses, or excesses of power, and all other crimes or offenses committed by them in the exercise of their functions. The Senate can not impose other penalties than removal from office, and disqualification from fulfilling any public function during a period of not less than one year nor more than five. If other penalties are to be imposed, or if any decision is to be given in regard to the exercise of a civil action, the matter shall be referred to the ordinary courts, which shall act upon it, either on the indictment admitted by the Chamber of Commons, or by direct prosecution by the injured parties. The resolution of impeachment and the declaration of guilt shall be passed by the chamber to which they belong, respectively, by absolute majority of votes. ART. 120. Each Secretary of state shall receive from the public treasury, in full remuneration of their services, an annual salary of six thousand dollars.
SECTION III.

District and communal institutions.

There shall be: One council for each district. One communal council for each commune. The powers of these bodies shall be at the same time civil and financial.

ART. 121.

The district council shall be presided over by a citizen to be called president of the district council, who shall take part in the deliberations, but shall have no vote; and the council of the commune shall be presided over by a citizen to be called communal magistrate. The functions of both bodies shall be regulated by law. ART. 122. The district councils shall be elected by the electoral district assemblies appointed by the primary assemblies of each commune. The number of district electors shall be fixed by law. ART. 123. The President of Haiti shall appoint the presidents of the district councils, but he shall appoint them from among the members thereof. The communal magistrates and their substitutes shall be elected by the communal councils from among their own members. ART. 121. The organization of the district and communal councils shall be based upon the following principles: 1. The election by the primary assemblies for the communal councils shall be held every three years; and the election in the second degree for the district councils every four years. 2. The district and communal councils shall be respectively entrusted with all that may be of interest to the district or the commune, subject, however, to subsequent approval of their acts in the cases and in the manner determined by law. 3. The publicity of the meetings of the councils, within the limits established by law. 4. The publicity of budgets and accounts. 5. The intervention of the President of Haiti or of the legislative power, to prevent the councils from going beyond their powers and doing injury to the general interests.

ART. 125. The salaries of the presidents of the district councils shall be paid by the State. The salaries of the communal magistrates shall be paid by their own communes. ART. 126. The editing of the entries on the registers of the civil state and the keeping of these registers shall be in charge of special citizens appointed by the President of Haiti, to be known as officers of the civil state. CHAPTER IV.

The judicial power.
ART. 127. The cognisance of all disputes in regard to civil rights shall belong exclusively to the courts of justice. ART. 128. The cognizance of all disputes in regard to political rights shall also belong to the courts of justice, except in some cases established by law. ART. 129. No tribunal or jurisdiction of any kind shall be established, except by virtue of a law. No extraordinary tribunals, whatever their names may be, and especially Courts-Martial, shall be established. ART. 130. There shall be a Supreme court for the whole Republic. It shall consist of at least two chambers, and shall reside in the capital. ART. 131. This Tribunal shall not pass upon the merits of the cases. Nevertheless, in all cases, except such as have been passed upon by a jury, when presented again by the very same parties before the supreme court, for a rehearing, the Tribunal may, at their request, instead of remanding the case, pass a decision upon its subject-matter, provided that this is done in f ull bench. ART. 132. There shall be a Court of appeals in each one of the De-

partments of the North, the Northwest, the Artibonite, the West, and the South. There shall be at least a Justice of the peace in each commune. There shall be a civil court for one or several districts. The law shall determine the extent of the powers and jurisdiction of these Courts and Tribunals, and the place where they shall be located. ART. 133. The Justices of the peace and their substitutes, judges of the civil courts and their substitutes, justices of the courts of appeals and their substitutes, and the justices of the supreme court, shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, according to rules established by the respective organic laws. ART. 134. The Justices of the Supreme court and those of the Courts of appeals, as well as the judges of the civil courts, shall be appointed for life. They shall not be transferred from one court to another, or entrusted with other functions, even if superior, without their formal consent. They shall not be removed except for cause legally proved; nor shall they be suspended, unless formally impeached. They shall not be placed on the retired list except in case that, owing to some grave and permanent disability, they find themselves unable to exercise their functions. ART. 135. The justices of the peace can be removed. ART. 136. No one can he appointed judge or agent in the Attorney-general's office if he is not over thirty years of age when he is to serve in the Supreme court, or twenty-five years when he is to serve in any other court.

ART. 137. The President of Haiti has the power to appoint and remove the agents of the attorneygeneral's office in the supreme court, and in all other courts. ART. 138. Judicial f unctions are incompatible with all other functions. Incompatibility resulting from relationship shall be regulated by law. ART. 139. The salaries of the judicial functionaries shall be fixed by law. ART. 140. There shall be Tribunals of Commerce in the places determined by law. The latter shall provide for their organization, their powers, the manner of election of their members, and the time for which the latter shall serve. ART. 141. Special laws shall provide for the organization of military tribunals, their powers, the rights and obligations of their members, and the time for which they shall serve. ART. 142. Civil offenses committed by a military man, unless committed in camp or in campaign, shall be tried and punished by the ordinary criminal courts. The same shall happen in all cases against a military man when a civilian is implicated therein. ART. 143. The sittings of the courts shall be public, unless it is deemed that publicity is detrimental to public order or morals. In that case a declaration to that effect shall be made by the court. The hearings in cases of political offenses, or of offenses committed through the press, shall never be secret. ART. 144. Every judicial decree or decision shall set forth the grounds upon which it is rendered. It shall be rendered in open court. ART. 145. The decrees and decisions of the courts shall be rendered and enforced in the name of

the Republic. They are mandates which the. agents of the attorneygeneral's office and of the public force must obey. Notarial acts admitting of judicial enforcement shall be in the same predicament. ART. 146. The supreme court shall take cognizance, in the manner established by law, of all cases of jurisdictional conflicts. It has, also, the right to revise the decisions rendered by military tribunals, when objected to, for lack of jurisdiction. ART. 147. The courts shall refuse to apply an unconstitutional law. Neither shall they apply the Executive regulations and decrees which are not in accordance with the laws. ART. 148. All judicial functionaries, as well as all agents of the attorney-general, may, in case of malfeasance in office, be impeached by one of the chambers of the supreme court. If the impeachment embraces all the members of a court, it has to be resolved by the supreme court in full bench. If the party to be impeached is the supreme court itself, or any of its chambers, or any of its members, the proceedings shall be conducted by the chamber of Representatives. In this case the trial and decision belong to the Senate. The decision in each chamber shall be rendered by a majority of twothirds of the members present. The penalty to be imposed by the Senate can not go beyond the removal from office and the disqualification from serving public functions for a certain time; but if any other penalty is required by law, the case shall be referred to the ordinary courts for proper action. ART. 149. The law shall regulate the course of proceedings to be followed in the prosecution of judges for crimes or offenses committed by them whetherin the exercise of their functions or otherwise.

CHAPTER V.

Primary and electoral assemblies.
ART. 150. Every citizen over twenty-one years of age has the right to vote in the primary assemblies, if he is the owner of real property, or the lessee of some revenue of the State for a time not less than five years, or if he practices a profession or industry, or fills a public office. ART. 151. The primary assemblies shall meet without previous convocation in their respective communes, on the tenth of January of every year, in the manner and form established by law. ART. 152. The primary assemblies have for their object to elect at the time fixed by the Constitution the representatives of the people, the members of the communal councils, and the members of the district electoral assemblies. ART. 153. All elections shall be made by secret ballot and by majority of votes. ART. 154. The electoral assemblies shall meet every year, without previous convocation, on the fifteenth of February, in the manner and form established by law. They have for their object to elect the members of the district councils and make the list of nominees for the Senate, which is to be forwarded to the chamber of Representatives. ART. 155. No election shall take place in an electoral assembly if there is not a quorum of at least two-thirds of the electors. ART. 156. The primary and electoral assemblies shall not do any other business than the electoral one entrusted to them by the Constitution. They are bound to adjourn sine die, as soon as this object is accomplished.

TITLE FOURTH.

Finances.
ART. 157. The finances of the Republic are decentralized. A law shall fix immediately the shares of the public revenue allotted to the district and communal councils. ART. 158. No tax for the benefit of the State shall be levied except by law. No district or communal charge or impost shall be levied except upon consent of the respective district or municipal council. ART. 159. The taxes for the benefit of the State shall be annually decreed or assessed. The laws levying said taxes shall be in force for no more than one year unless they are reenacted. No issue of money of any kind shall be made unless by virtue of a law which shall determine the use to be made of it, and its amount, which in no case shall be exceeded. ART. 160. No discrimination in regard to taxes shall ever be made. No exemption, increase, or decrease of taxes shall be made ex cept by law.	 ART. 161. Beyond the cases formally specified by law no disbursement of money shall be demanded from the citizens, unless it is under the head of taxes for the benefit of the State, the district, or the commune. ART. 162. No pension, gratuity, allowance, or subsidy of any kind, to be paid by the public treasury, shall be granted unless by law. ART. 163. The simultaneous holding of several offices, paid by the Government, is formally forbidden. Positions in the public schools, secondary or superior, are excepted.

ART. 164. The-budget submitted by each secretary of state shall be divided into chapters. No sum of money allowed in one chapter shall be paid out of funds belonging to another chapter, nor shall it be disbursed for any other purposes unless so provided by law. The Secretary of the Treasury shall be bound on his personal responsibility not to disburse each month for the benefit of a Department more than one-twelfth of the amount appropriated in its own budget; but in extraordinary cases and by decision of the council of secretaries an exception may be made to this rule. The general accounts of the Government receipts and expenditures shall be kept by double entry by the Secretary of the Treasury, who shall submit them to the Chambers, together with the books and vouchers, and a balance sheet showing the situation of the Treasury at the end of each fiscal year. Nothing received or expended shall be omitted in the general accounts. The fiscal year shall commence on the first of October and end on the thirtieth of September of the following year. ART. 165. No measure involving the expenditure of money shall be taken in either Chamber, without first consulting the Secretary of the Treasury as to the possibility of making the payment without disturbing the equilibrium of the budget. The Secretary of the Treasury may ask to be provided with funds to meet the expenditure, before taking upon himself the responsibility of executing the measure. ART. 166. The Chambers shall every year pass upon: 1. The accounts of the receipts and expenditures in the preceding year, or years, in the manner and form established by article 164.

2. The general budget of the State, and the appropriations annually made to meet the expenses of each Department. But no resolution amending the budget to the effect of reducing or increasing the salaries of public functionaries or of military officers already fixed by special laws, shall be allowed to be introduced. ART. 167. The general accounts and the budgets provided for in the preceding article shall be submitted to the Chambers by the Secretary of the Treasury at the latest within eight days of the opening of the legislative session; and the Chambers have the power to postpone all legislative work until the said accounts are presented to them. They shall also have the power to refuse to exonerate the Secretaries of State, and even to approve the budget, when the accounts submitted do not furnish by their own text or by the vouchers accompanying them, all the elements necessary for their being properly audited. ART. 168. The tribunal of accounts shall consist of nine members appointed by the Senate, out of two lists of candidates, to be furnished, one by the Executive power and the other by the Chamber of Representatives. Each list shall have two names for each seat in the tribunal. ART. 169. The tribunal of accounts is entrusted with the examination and liquidation of the accounts of the employees of the General Government, and of all other offices accountable to the Treasury; and it shall see that no expense be made in excess of the appropriations and that no moneys appropriated for one purpose be expended for another. This tribunal shall pass upon the accounts of the different adminis-

trative bodies of the State, and shall gather for that purpose all the necessary information and evidence. The general account of the State shall be submitted to the Chambers, together with the remarks made in regard thereto by the tribunal of accounts. The tribunal of accounts shall be organized by special law. ART. 170. An accounting system uniform for all the financial offices of the Republic shall be established by law. ART. 171. The law shall fix the title, weight, value, stamp and denominations of the national coins. TITLE FIFTH.

The public force.
ART. 172. The public force has been established to defend the State against foreign enemies and to assure at home the preservation of order and the execution of the laws. ART. 173. The army is essentially obedient. No armed corps can or should deliberate. ART. 174: The army shall be placed on a peace footing and its strength shall be fixed every year. The law passed to this effect shall be in force only for one year unless it is renewed. No one can receive military salary if he does not belong to the army. ART. 175. The manner of recruiting the army shall be determined by law. The law shall also regulate the promotion of the respective officers and the rights and obligations of military men. No privileged military body shall ever be created; but the President of Haiti shall have his own personal guard, which shall be submitted, nevertheless, to the same

military rule as the other bodies of the army. The strength of this guard shall he fixed by the Chambers. ART. 176. No civilian shall, ever be promoted to a military rank except in case that he had rendered eminent services to the country. ART. 177. The organization and the powers of the police in the cities and the country shall be the subject of a law. ART. 178. The national guard shall consist of all the citizens who do not belong to the regular army, except when otherwise provided by law. All positions in the national guard shall be elective; but the superior officers shall be appointed by the chief magistrate of the Nation. The national guard is placed under the immediate authority of the communal councils. ART. 179. Every Haitian citizen from eighteen to fifty years of age, inclusive, not serving in the army, is bound to serve in the national guard. ART. 180. The national guard shall be organized by law. It can not be mobilized, either wholly, or in part, except in the cases provided by its organic law. When mobilized, it shall be immediately placed under the authority of the military commandant of the commune, and as long as the mobilization lasts it shall be considered as a part of the army in active service. ART. 181. Military men can not be deprived of their ranks, honors, and pensions, except in tie manner determined by law. TITLE SIXTH.

General provisions.
ART. 182. The national colors shall be blue and red, horizontally placed.	

The coat of arms of the Republic shall consist of a palm tree surmounted by a cap of liberty adorned by a trophy with the legend: " L'union fait la force." ART. 183. The city of Port au Prince is the capital of the Republic and the present seat of the Government. Under grave circumstances the National Assembly shall, at the suggestion of the Executive power, authorize the transfer of the seat of Government to another place in the Republic. ART. 184. No oath shall be required from anyone except by virtue of a law. The law shall determine the cases in which the oath shall be required and the form thereof. ART. 185. Every foreigner within the territory of the Republic shall enjoy the same protection as is granted to Haitian citizens in regard to their persons and property, subject, however, to the exceptions established by law. In regard to losses sustained by virtue of civil and political troubles no Haitian citizen or foreigner. shall be entitled to claim indemnity. The injured parties, however, shall have the right, if they choose, to prosecute before the courts according to law the individuals recognized as authors of the wrongs perpetrated, and seek in this way the proper legal reparation. ART. 186. The law shall establish a uniform system of weights and measures. ART. 187. The national festivities shall be: that of the independence and the heroes of Haiti, the first of February; and that of Agriculture, the first of May. The legal holidays shall be determined by law. ART. 188. A law shall determine the rewards to be annually granted on the first of May to the farmers

and agricultural laborers, for the excellence of the products exhib ited by them. The law shall also regulate the manner and form of these exhibitions. ART. 189. No law, decree, or. rule of the public administration shall be obligatory until it is published in the manner and form established by law. ART. 190. No place or section of territory in the Republic shall be declared in a state of siege except in case of civil disturbances or of imminent foreign invasion. The decree of the President of Haiti proclaiming a state of siege shall be countersigned by all the Secretaries of State, and submitted to the Chambers at the opening of their session. ART. 191. The effects of the state of siege shall be regulated by a special law. ART. 192. The Codes of civil, commercial, and penal laws, those of criminal procedure, and those of all other classes of laws, shall be maintained in force in everything which is not contrary to the present Constitution. All provisions of said laws, decrees, rules, and other legislative acts proving to be contrary to the Constitution, are hereby abrogated. But the decrees and resolutions passed by the central revolutionary committee of Port au Prince and the first provisional government (from August twentyfourth to September twentyeighth, eighteen hundred and eighty-eight), and by the revolutionary committees of the Artibonite, the North and the Northwest, and by the last provisional government (from October sec ond, eighteen hundred and eightyeight, to October eight, eighteen hundred and eighty-nine, inclusive), shall nevertheless contin ue to be in force until legally abrogated.

ART. 193. The Constitution can not be suspended, either wholly, or in part, in any part of the territory. Its preservation is entrusted to the patriotism and courage of the great bodies of the State and of all the citizens. TITLE SEVENTH.

Reform of the constitution.
ART. 194. The legislative power has the right to resolve, at the suggestion of either Chamber, or of the Executive power, that any constitutional provision indicated in the resolution requires amendment. This resolution, which can not be passed except at the last meeting of a session of the Chamber of Representatives, shall be published ds throughimmediately afterwar out the whole Republic. ART. 195. In the following session the two chambers sitting in joint session, as National Assembly, shall take up and discuss the proposed amendment. ART. 196. The National Assembly on not take up this matter without a quorum of at least twothirds of their members elect. No declaration or amendment shall be made except by a majority of two-, thirds of the votes. TITLE EIGHTH.

Transient provisions.
ART. 197. The President of Haiti shall be elected the first time by the Constitutional Assemby. This Assembly shall administer to him the oath of office and place him in possession of his office. ART. 198. The National Constitutional Assembly shall exercise the legislative powers in all cases of urgency until the reunion of the two Chambers.

ART. 199. The council of state is hereby abolished. ART. 200. The primary and electoral assemblies shall be called to convene on the date established by law for the election of the members of the district and municipal councils, of the deputies of the communes, and of the candidates for the Senate. ART. 201. The National Constitutional Assembly shall move to the capital immediately after the administration by it to the President of Haiti of his oath of office. ART. 202. The present Constitution shall be published and executed through the whole extent of the Republic. Given at Gonaives on the ninth of October, eighteen hundred and eighty-nine, the eighty-sixth of the independence.

