Constitution of the REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS 1957

Legal Division DEPARTMENT OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 1958

Decree N° 21 We, Deputies to the National Constituent Assembly, in the exercise of the sovereignty which the people have delegated to us, invoking the name of God and placing our faith in the democratic destiny of Honduras, hereby decree and sanction the following

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC

TITLE I THE STATE AND ITS FORM OF GOVERNMENT Sole Chapter Art. 1. Honduras is a sovereign and independent State, erected as a democratic Republic, to ensure the enjoyment of freedom, justice, social and economic well-being, and the individual and collective betterment of its inhabitants. Art. 2. Sovereignty resides in the people, who may exercise it directly or through the public power created by their freely expressed will. Art. 3. The government, through the democratic, republican, and representative system, is exercised by three complementary and independent powers: Legislative, Executive, and Judicial. Art. 4. No immediate reelection (alternabilidad) in the exercise of the Presidency of the Republic is compulsory. Violation of this rule gives the right to popular insurrection. Art. 5. The officials are the depositaries of the authority of the State, and in swearing to faithful compliance with the Constitution and the laws, they bind themselves to exercise such authority in the public service. This service function renders a public servant directly liable for action or omission. The right to action to render the liability of officials of the State effective, for punishable acts or omissions, is public and imprescriptible. Any act performed outside the law is null and void. Art. 6. The territory of Honduras is situated between the Atlantic and PaIts cific Oceans and the Republics of Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua.	 boundaries with the Republic of Guatemala are those established by the arbitration

award issued at Washington, United States of America, on January 23, 1933; with the Republic of Nicaragua, those established by the Mixed Honduran-Nicaraguan Boundary Commission, in 1900 and 1901, according to the description of the first section of the dividing line, contained in the second act of June 12, 1900, and in later acts, to Portillo de Teotecacinte, and from that place to the Atlantic Ocean, in accordance with the Arbitration Award issued by His Majesty the King of Spain on December 23, 1906. With the Republic of El Salvador, the boundary line is to be determined by direct arrangement or by arbitration, in the light of documentation supporting its right, the respective treaties to be submitted to the Legislative Power for ratification. THE FOLLOWING BELONG TO HONDURAS: 1. The territories located on the mainland within its territorial limits and the islands and cays in the Gulf of Fonseca, the rights to which are established by titles issued during the Spanish Colonial Regime. 2. The Bay Islands, the Swan Islands, Santanilla or Santillana, Viciosas, Misteriosas and the cays: Gorda, Vivorillos, Cajones, Becerro, Cocorocuma, Ca-. ratasca, Falso, Gracias a Dios, Los Bajos, Pichones, Palo de Campeche and all others located in the Atlantic which historically and juridically belong to it. 3. The air space, the stratosphere, the territorial sea, the bed and subsoil of the submarine platform, continental and insular shelf and other underwater areas adjacent to its territory outside the zone of territorial waters and to a depth of two hundred meters or to the point where the depth of the superjacent waters, beyond this limit, permits the exploitation of the natural resources of the bed and subsoil, also belong to the State of Honduras and are subject to its jurisdiction and control. In the cases referred to in the three preceding paragraphs, the domain of the nation is inalienable and imprescriptible, and concessions may be granted only by the Republic to individuals or civil or commercial companies organized or incorporated under Honduran laws, subject to the condition that regular undertakings be established for exploitation of the elements mentioned and that requirements prescribed by law are met. In the case of petroleum and solid, liquid, or gaseous hydrocarbons, a special law shall determine the manner in which exploitation of these and similar products is to be undertaken. 4. As a consequence of the foregoing declarations, the State reserves the right to establish the boundaries of zones for the control and protection of national resources in the continental and insular seas which are under the control of the Government of Honduras and to change such boundaries according to circumstances that may arise by reason of new discoveries, studies and national interests that may occur in the future. 5. The present declaration of sovereignty does not ignore similar legitimate rights of other States on a basis of reciprocity, nor does it affect the rights of free navigation by all nations, in accordance with international law. Art. 7. No authority may make agreements, treaties, or conventions, or grant concessions that will compromise the sovereignty and independence of the Republic. Anyone who does so will be tried for treason to his country. Any persons who have entered into such agreements or contributed to their execution maybe held accountable at any time.

Art. 8. Foreign states may only acquire, in the territory of the Republic, on a basis of reciprocity, such real estate as may be necessary for the seat of their diplomatic representation, without prejudice to the provisions of international agreements. Art. 9. Any treaty or convention entered into by the Executive Power relating to the national territory or the political organization of the country, shall require approval by the National Congress by a vote of not less than three fourths of its members. Art. 10. Honduras is a State separated from the Republic of Central America. Consequently, it recognizes the primary necessity of restoring a union with one or more States of the former Federation. To this end, the Legislative Power is authorized to ratify treaties aimed at accomplishing this partially or in full, provided this is proposed in a fair and democratic manner. Art. 11. Honduras considers as its own the principles and practices of international law directed toward the solidarity of humanity, with respect to the sovereignty of peoples, and the assurance of universal peace and democracy. Art. 12. Within its policy of continental solidarity, Honduras proclaims as inescapable the validity and execution of arbitration awards. Art. 13. The national symbols are the Flag, the Coat of Arms and the (National) Hymn. The law shall regulate their use. Art. 14. The official language of the Republic is Spanish.

TITLE II NATIONALITY AND CITIZENSHIP Chapter I Hondurans Art. 15. Nationality is the spiritual and material bond that unifies Hondurans by ties of common traditions, interests, and aspirations. Art. 16. Honduran nationality is acquired by birth or by naturalization. Art. 17. The following are Hondurans by birth: 1. Persons born within the territory of the Republic, regardless of the nationality of their parents, with the exception of the children of diplomatic agents or of transient foreigners; 2. 3. 4. Children born abroad of a Honduran father or mother; Persons born on board Honduran merchant or war vessels or airplanes; An infant of unknown parents found in Honduran territory.

Art. 18. Also considered as native-born Hondurans are natives of the other Republics of Central America who, after one year of residence in the country, indicate in writing before a competent authority their intention to be Hondurans and who fulfill the legal requirements, provided that reciprocity exists in the country of origin and to the extent it exists. Art. 19. The following are Hondurans by naturalization: 1. Spaniards and natives of American countries who have one year of residence in the Republic; 2. All other foreigners who have resided in the country more than two consecutive years. In both cases, the applicant must previously renounce his nationality and indicate his desire to adopt Honduran nationality before a competent authority; 3. Persons who obtain a certificate of naturalization issued by the National Congress; 4. Immigrants forming a part of selected groups brought in by the government for agricultural or industrial purposes, who after one year of residence in the country meet the requirements of law. Art. 20. No Honduran by birth shall have any other nationality while he resides in the territory of the Republic. Art. 21. No naturalized Honduran may hold official positions in representation of Honduras in his country of origin. Art. 22. Neither marriage nor its dissolution shall affect the nationality of the spouses or of their children. Art, 23. Honduran nationality is lost: 1. 2. By voluntary naturalization in a foreign country; By cancellation of the naturalization certificate.

Art. 24. Every Honduran is bound to defend his country, to respect the authorities, and to contribute to the maintenance and moral and material betterment of the nation. Chapter II

Foreigners
Art. 25. From the time they enter the territory of the Republic, foreigners are bound to respect the authorities and obey the laws. Art. 26. In Honduras foreigners enjoy all the civil rights of Hondurans, with such restrictions as may be established by law for reasons of public order, security or national interest. They are subject to all regular and extraordinary charges of a general nature to which Hondurans are subject.

Art. 27. They may not file claims nor demand indemnity of any kind from the State, except in the manner and in the same cases in which Hondurans may do so. Foreigners may not resort to diplomatic channels except in cases of denial of justice. For such purposes, a decision that is unfavorable to the claimant is not to be taken as a denial of justice. Persons who contravene this provision shall lose the right to reside in the country. Art. 28. Foreigners may only hold positions in teaching the sciences and the arts, except directive positions, or render technical or advisory services to the State, when there are no Hondurans to fill such positions or to render such services. Art. 29. Extradition may be granted only by virtue of a law or treaty, for common crimes and never for political crimes, even if a common crime is a result thereof. Art. 30. The laws shall establish the manner and cases in which a foreigner may be refused entry into the country. The Executive Power has the exclusive power to cause any foreigner whose presence is deemed unsuitable to leave the national territory, in conformity with the law. Art. 31. Foreigners have the same individual and social rights and duties as Hondurans, with the exceptions and limitations established by this Constitution and the laws. Art. 32. They may not engage in political activities of a national or international character, under penalty of punishment prescribed by law. Art. 33. Foreigners shall be subject to a special law. Chapter ELI Citizens Art. 34. Citizenship is the juridical condition that confers rights and imposes duties of a political and patriotic character on Hondurans. Art. 35. All Honduran men and women over eighteen years of age are citizens. Art. 36. The following are rights of citizens: to vote and to be elected to office; to meet together to form political parties, according to law; to join or to withdraw from those already constituted; to hold public positions, according to their capacities; and all others recognized by law in accordance with the functional operation of a democracy. Active members of the Army or the Police may not vote, but they may be elected to office in those cases not prohibited by law.

Art. 37. The duties of a citizen are: to comply with the Constitution and see that it is complied with and to serve the State in accordance with the law. Art. 38. The status of citizen is suspended, lost, and restored on the basis of the following principles: It is suspended: 1. 2. By commitment to jail, or ordered held for trial; By a final judgment depriving a person of political rights;

3. By civil interdiction, by declaration as a fraudulent debtor, or for legally declared vagrancy; 4. For refusal to hold an elective public office, without justifiable cause. In this case, the suspension endures for the length of time the office refused should have been occupied. It is lost: 1. allies; For rendering services, in time of war, to an enemy of Honduras or her

2. For aiding a foreigner or a foreign government in any diplomatic claim or before an international court, against the Nation; 3. For holding employment of a military or political character for a foreign country, within the country, without due permission; 4. For accepting, without due permission, decorations implying obedience or submission to the government that awarded them; 5. For hindering the freedom of suffrage, for mutilating electoral documents or employing fraudulent means to frustrate the public will; and 6. For inciting, promoting or supporting continuation in office or reelection of the President of the Republic. It is restored: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. By confirmed dismissal of charges; By final judgment of acquittal; By fulfilment of punishment; By amnesty or pardon; By rehabilitation according to law.

TILE

SUFFRAGE AND POLITICAL PARTIES Chapter I Art. 39. Suffrage is a primary civic function. Its exercise may not be renounced' by citizens as a right nor evaded as a duty. Art. 40. Voting shall be direct, equal for all, and secret. Art. 41. Political parties are associations organized according to law,. by Honduran citizens in the full exercise of their civic rights, for electoral purposes and for political orientation. Art. 42. Legally organized and registered political parties are institutions under public law, the existence and free functioning of which are guaranteed by this Constitution. Art. 43. Political parties must regulate their organization, functioning, and activity in accordance with the democratic and republican principles affirmed by this Constitution. Art. 44. Honduran citizens have the right to establish political parties as prescribed by this Constitution and the Electoral Law. Art. 45. The Electoral Law shall fix the number of members necessary for the organization and registration of political parties. Art. 46. Any act which prohibits or limits a citizen from participating in the political life of the Nation shall be punished. Art. 47. The formation or functioning of political parties that advocate or practice doctrines contrary to the democratic spirit of the Honduran people or which by their ideological programs or international connections threaten the sovereignty of the State is prohibited. In such cases the National Congress shall act on the matter on the basis of a report by the National Elections Council. This prohibition does not include organizations that advocate Central American union or the Pan American doctrines of continental solidarity. Chapter II The Electoral Function Art. 48. For all matters relating to electoral acts and procedures, there shall be a National Elections Council whose organization and powers shall be established by the Electoral Law. Art. 49. The National Elections Council shall have jurisdiction throughout the Republic, it shall be absolutely independent, and shall report directly to the Public Powers.

Art. 50. Without prejudice to any other powers prescribed in the Electoral Law, the National Elections Council shall have the following: a) To direct and supervise the preparation of the National Electoral Census; b) To register political parties and candidates who meet the requirements established by law; c) To call elections of the supreme and municipal authorities; d) To order the filling of vacancies that occur in the Legislative Power; e) To organize, direct, and supervise the electoral process; f) To propose to the Executive Power the budget of expenditures for the electoral boards; g) To receive reports of the canvass of votes; to declare the election of citizens chosen by the vote and to issue their credentials; h) To act in first instance on nullification of elections; i) To hear and settle complaints and questions regarding elections; j) To appoint the members of departmental electoral boards, and see that those making up local boards meet the conditions and have the prerogatives prescribed by the Electoral Law. Art. 51. The National Elections Council is to be appointed by order of the Executive Power; the term of office is six years; and members shall be subject to the same conditions, immunities, and disqualifications as Deputies. The National Elections Council shall consist of the following: a) One principal member and one alternate designated by each of the duly registered political parties; b) One principal and one alternate designated by the associations of merchants, industrialists, farmers, and stockraisers. The Electoral Law shall regulate the manner in which these associations shall make the designations referred to above; c) One principal and one alternate proposed separately by the professional associations, the Federation of Honduran Women's Associations, the Federation of University Students, the Honduran Teachers' Federation, and labor unions. Each of the groups indicated herein shall propose to the Executive Power one principal and one alternate, and the Executive Power shall select from among the proposed names, the principal member and alternate who shall sit on the National Elections Council. Art. 52. The Electoral Law shall determine the composition and functioning of all other electoral boards.

Art. 53. The National Electoral Census is permanent and unalterable; the registration of citizens shall commence on January 2 each year and close on April 30. Changes that occur due to death, change of residence, and suspension or loss of citizenship shall be made at such times and according to such rules as are specified in the Electoral Law. Art. 54. For the election of Deputies to the National Congress or to the National Constituent Assembly a system of proportional representation is adopted, on the basis of quotients and remainders. For the election of members of the Municipal Corporations, the system of simple majority is adopted. Art. 55. Criminal action against electoral offenses established by law is a public right and prescribes in six years. Art. 56. Electoral offenses and misdemeanors shall be tried in the regular courts, in accordance with ordinary law, without privileged status.

TITLE N INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES Sole Chapter Art. 57. The dignity of the human being is inviolable; all men are equal before the law. The inhabitants of the Republic of Honduras have the right to be protected, without discrimination of any kind, in the enjoyment of their life, safety, honor, freedom, labor and property. Art. 58. The rights of each man are limited by the rights of all the rest, by the security of all and by the just demands of the general well-being and of democratic progress. Art. 59. The declarations, rights and guarantees enumerated in this. Constitution shall not be construed as a denial of other rights not specified which spring from the national sovereignty, from the republican and democratic form of government, and from the dignity of man. Art. 60. Laws and governmental provisions or provisions of any other kind that regulate the exercise of rights and guarantees recognized by this Constitution shall be void if they diminish, restrict or pervert such rights and guarantees. Art. 61. The right to life is inviolable. Capital punishment is hereby abolished in Honduras. Art. 62. No person shall be subjected to torture, infamous punishment, or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. No one may be arbitrarily held, imprisoned or exiled. Any force that is not limited to detention of a guilty or accused person is prohibited. Jails are establishments for security and protection of society. They shall strive for the social reha bilitation of delinquents.

Art. 63. A statement obtained by means of violence is void or may lead to charges of liability against the official who committed it. charges of liability against the official who committed it. Art. 64, Every person accused of crime has the right that his responsibility shall not be prejudged. Art. 65. No person shall be subjected to interference in his private life, his family, •his home, or his correspondence. Telephonic communications may not be intercepted. The right of the people to protection of their persons, their homes, their papers and effects against arbitrary search, attachment or seizure shall not be violated. Orders authorizing search, seizure, or arrest may be issued only by a judicial authority, and by this authority only when there exists a case in which there is a reasonable indication that a search or seizure of things and the detention of persons is necessary. Art. 66. Private correspondence, papers and books are inviolable and may be seized or searched only by order of a judge having jurisdiction in civil, commercial, labor or criminal matters specified by law, the search to be made in the presence of the possessor or, in his absence, in the presence of his agent or of two witnesses, with all papers having no bearing on the matter in question to be returned. Those that are otherwise removed may not serve as evidence in a trial. Art. 67, Every person has the right to demand protection against any threat or arbitrary action of which he is the victim, and to render effective the exercise of all guarantees established in this Constitution whenever he is unduly restrained in the enjoyment thereof by laws or acts of any authority, agent or public official. Art. 68. The Constitution recognizes the guarantee of habeas corpus. Any person illegally held, imprisoned, or restrained in any way from the enjoyment of his individual freedom, or who suffers molestation, even if his imprisonment or detention is based on law, or any one else in his name, without need of power of attorney, has the right to petition the respective court, orally, by telegraph, or in writing, for his immediate exhibition so that he may either be restored to freedom, or the molestation or coercion to which he was subject be stopped. If the court decides for freedom of his person, he is thereupon free. Whenever it is so requested or a judge or court deems it pertinent, the exhibition sought shall be made at the place where the detained person is held, without prior announcement or notification of the parties concerned. The guarantee of habeas corpus shall be granted free of charge. The personal exhibition of the detained person in whose behalf this recourse has been presented cannot be evaded. Any authority who orders and agents who undertake the concealment of the detained person, or who in any other way thwart this guarantee, shall be guilty of the offense of illegal detention. Art. 69. An order of detention which is not issued by a , competent authority or which has been made without fulfilling the legal formalities, is contrary to law. Detention for questioning may not exceed six days. A person shall not be held incommunicado for more than twenty-four hours. Violation of these principles shall incur criminal liability, without prejudice to other sanctions imposed by law.

Art. 70. Commitment to jail may not be ordered unless full evidence has been submitted that a crime or simple offense has been committed that is punishable by deprivation of freedom and unless there is a reasonable indication of who was its author. Indictments (declaratorias de reo) shall be issued in the same manner. Art. 71. No one shall be compelled to incriminate himself by his own statement in criminal or police matters, nor to testify against his spouse or against relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. Silence of the guilty party shall not be taken into account nor held against him. Art. 72. No one shall be imprisoned for debts. Art. 73. No one may be tried a second time for the same punishable acts for which a previous trial was held. Art. 74. No one may be committed to jail, even by order, nor detained therein, if he offers sufficient bail, when the punishment for the offense involved is not more than three years. Art. 75. No one may be punished without a previous trial based on a law enacted prior to commission of the act for which he was tried, nor may he be held or imprisoned elsewhere than places specified by law. Art. 76. A "superior order" issued without legal formalities is contrary to law. Both the official who issued it and the subordinate who carried it out incur such criminal liability as may be determined by law. Art. 77. A guilty person caught in flagrante may be apprehended by any person and at any place, to be handed over to competent authority. Art. 78. The right to a defense is inviolable. No one may be convicted without having been summoned, heard, and defeated in a trial, by proceedings that ensure the necessary guarantees for his defense. No person may be tried by special commissions nor by judges other than those designated by law. There is still a court martial for offenses and wrongs against military discipline, but military courts may in no case and for no reason extend their jurisdiction to persons who do not belong to the Army. If an offense or wrong of a military nature involves a civilian or a discharged soldier, the case shall be heard by appropriate civil authority. Art. 79. The State shall appoint solicitors or defenders for indigents to look after the defense of the persons and interests of minors and other incompetents, and to give legal advice to persons with insufficient resources and to represent them judicially in defense of their individual freedom and rights as workers. Art. 80. Every person or gathering of persons has the right to address petitions to the legally constituted authorities, who must act upon them and make known their corresponding decisions.

Art. 81. No person may be disturbed or prosecuted for his opinions. Private actions which do not disrupt the public order or which do not cause damage to others shall always be beyond the action of the law. Art. 82. The domicile and any other private residence of the inhabitants of the Republic are inviolable. However, they may be entered by virtue of a written order by a competent judge, either to prevent the commission of or escape from crime or to prevent serious damage to persons or property, subject to provisions of law. Whenever the residence to be searched is not that of the guilty party being sought, the authority or his agents shall first obtain the permission of the occupant. Search of a residence may not take place between six o'clock in the evening and six o'clock in the morning, without prior permission of the head of the house. Art. 83. Freedom of expression, of thought, and of information are inviolable; this right includes that of not being molested because of one's opinions, the right to do research and receive information, and to transmit it and disseminate it by any means of expression. No law which restricts these rights shall be approved. The Law on Expression of Thought shall specify the liabilities that are incurred by those who abuse this freedom to the detriment of the honor, reputation, or interests of persons or entities. Art. 84. Printing shops, radio broadcasting stations, and any other means for the expression of-thought and their respective machinery and equipment may not be attached, seized, or confiscated; nor may their work be closed down or interrupted by reason of an offense or wrong relating to expression of thought. The buildings in which are installed shops engaged in publication of any kind may be expropriated by a prior judicial declaration of public necessity and use in accordance with procedure prescribed by law. Even in such cases, expropriation may be carried out only after suitable premises have been found for the publication, in which to install the shop and equipment to continue operating. Art. 85. The State recognizes the right of peaceful assembly without arms. Outdoor meetings and public manifestations cannot be restricted or restrained. The law shall regulate the exercise of this right for the sole purpose of guaranteeing public order. All inhabitants have a similar right to join together freely to promote, exercise and protect their political, economic, trade union, religious, cultural and other such interests, provided they uphold the rule of democracy in the Republic. Art. 86. Honduras recognizes the right of asylum in case of persecution not resulting from a common offense, in accordance with international conventions to which it is a signatory. Art. 87. The expulsion of Hondurans from the national territory is contrary to law. Violation of this principle constitutes an offense, and may at any time incur criminal and civil liability on the part of the official who violates this guarantee. The law shall define this offense and the penalty to be imposed.

Art. 88. Every person has the right to circulate freely and to choose his within the national territory. No person shall be compelled to change his residence, except by judicial order based on a law.
residence

Every Honduran has the right to obtain a passport, to leave the country and to return to it without any restriction whatever.

Art. 89. Every person has the right to an education which will promote the full development of his personality and the strengthening of his respect for human rights.
Art. 90. The inhabitants of the Republic may possess and carry arms in accordance with provisions of law. Art. 91. Usury is prohibited. A law fixing the maximum interest rate on money is one of public order. This same law shall specify the penalties to be applied to offenders. Art. 92. No law has retroactive effect, except in criminal matters whenever the new law favors the guilty or convicted party. Art. 93. Any service that is not required to be rendered gratuitously, by virtue of a law or a sentence based on a law, must receive remuneration. Art. 94. Only a regular Congress may impose taxes or other public charges. Art. 95. Ministers of the various religious sects may not hold elective public offices. Art. 96. No one is required to pay charges or taxes which have not been legally enacted. Art. 97. The police force is a purely civilian State institution, entrusted with looking after the preservation of the public order, protecting persons and property, and enforcing the legal rulings, provisions, orders and decisions of the public authorities and officials. The Executive Power may place the civilian police under the military regime whenever it becomes necessary to maintain the public order and to protect democratic institutions. Art. 98. Action to prosecute violations of the rights and guarantees established in this Chapter is a public right, without posting a bond or formality of any kind, and by simple accusation.

TITLE V SOCIAL GUARANTEES Chapter I The Family Art. 99. The family, marriage, and motherhood are under the protection of the State. The juridical equality of spouses is guaranteed. Art. 100. Only a marriage authorized by an official competent to perform it is valid. Art. 101. De facto marriage between persons having legal capacity to marry is recognized; the law shall indicate the conditions under which it shall have the effect of a civil marriage. Art. 102. Classifications concerning the nature of filiation are abolished. No statement of any kind as to differentiations in births or the marital status of the parents shall be contained in birth registrations or in any document, affidavit, or certificate relating to filiation. Consequently, no inequality among children is recognized, all having the same rights and duties. Art. 103. The right of adoption is recognized. A special law shall regulate this institution. Art. 104. Investigation of paternity is authorized. The procedure will be determined by law. Art. 105. Parents of poor families with five or more minor children will receive special protection from the State. Under circumstances of equal aptitude, they shall be entitled to preference in being given public positions. Art. 106. Parents are obligated to feed, assist, and educate their children. The State shall oversee compliance with these duties. Art. 107. The State has the duty of looking after the physical, mental, and moral health of childhood, by creating the necessary and adequate institutions and agencies. Laws for the protection of childhood are of public order, and the government establishments designed for this purpose have the status of Social Welfare Centers. Social welfare centers created by private initiative are declared to be of public usefulness and will be entitled to support by the State. Art. 108. Mentally or physically defective minors, orphans, the aged, abandoned persons, delinquents, and would-be delinquents shall be subject to special legislation for their supervision, rehabilitation and protection. The admission of a minor under eighteen years of age to a jail or prison will not be allowed. Art. 109. The family patrimony shall be the subject of special protective legislation.

Art. 110, Divorce as a cause for dissolution of the marriage on	 nized. Chapter II Labor and Social Welfare

recog-

Art. 111. Every person has the right to work, to choose his occupation freely, and to give it up, under equitable and satisfactory labor conditions, and to protection against unemployment. Art. 112. Laws governing the relations between employers and workers are of public order. Any provisions or agreements that contravene or restrict the following guarantees shall be null and void: 1. The regular daytime working day may not exceed eight hours a day or forty-eight hours a week, equivalent to forty-eight hours of wages. The regular nightime working day may not exceed six hours a day or thirty-six hours a week. Overtime work shall be remunerated in the manner specified by law. These provisions shall not apply in the well-defined cases of exception, indicated by law. A worker shall be entitled to one day of rest, preferably Sunday, for each six days of work. 2. Equal work shall receive equal wages, without distinction of any kind, provided that the position, the working hours, conditions of efficiency, and length of service are also equal. 3. Wages must be paid in money of legal tender.

4. The amount of wages, indemnity compensation, and social benefits are a privileged credit in the event of bankruptcy or insolvency of the employer. 5. Every worker is entitled to a minimum wage fixed periodically by participation of the State, workers and employers, sufficient to meet the normal material, moral, and cultural needs of his home, in accordance with the standards of- each kind of work, the peculiar conditions of each region and type of work, the cost of living, the relative skills of workers and the payment systems of enterprises. A minimum wage shall also be fixed for those activities that are not regulated by a collective contract or agreement. The minimum wage shall be exempt from attachment, compensation or discount except as prescribed in laws governing family and trade union obligations. 6. In the installation of his establishments, an employer must observe the legal provisions concerning health and hygiene and the adoption of adequate measures to prevent accidents in the use of machines, instruments and working materials, and must organize in such a way as to provide the greatest guarantee of health and safety compatible with the nature of the undertaking, subject to such penalties as may be established by law. Special protection shall be given to women and to minors under eighteen years of age.

7. Minors under fourteen years of age, and those above that age who are subject to schooling by virtue of national legislation, may not be employed in any kind of work. The authorities entrusted with supervising the labor of such minors may authorize their employment when this is deemed indispensable for their maintenance or for the support of parents or brothers and sisters and providing their labor does not hinder their compliance with the minimum requirement of compulsory education. For minors under sixteen years of age the working day, which must be daytime work, may not exceed six hours a day or thirty-six hours a week, for any kind of work. 8. A worker is entitled to annual paid vacations, the duration and time of which shall be regulated by law. In the event of unjustifiable discharge, the employer shall pay in cash for that part of the vacation period corresponding to the period worked, in addition to other compensation prescribed by law. 9. Workers are entitled to leave with pay for holidays specified by law; the law shall also specify what kinds of work shall not be governed by this provision, but in such cases workers shall be entitled to overtime. 10. A woman is entitled to leave before and after childbirth, without loss of employment or of wages. During the nursing period she is entitled to extra rest periods each day for nursing her child. A pregnant woman may not be discharged from employment except for the justifiable causes specifically indicated by law. 11. Employers are .required to indemnify their workers for work accidents and occupational diseases, according to law. 12. The right to strike or a shutdown is recognized. The law shall regulate their exercise and may subject them to special restrictions in specified public services. 13. Workers and employers are entitled to associate together freely for purposes exclusively related to their economic and social activities, by forming trade unions or professional associations. The law will regulate this right. 14. The State shall protect individual and collective contracts between employers and workers. Art. 113. The law guarantees stability for workers in their employment, in accordance with the characteristics of industries and occupations, and just causes of separation. Whenever an unjustifiable discharge occurs, the worker shall be entitled to due remuneration during the suspension of work and to indemnity or resumption of work, at his option. Art. 114. Labor at home is recognized as a juridical situation analogous to that of all other workers, with due consideration for the peculiarities involved. Art. 115. Domestic workers shall be protected by social legislation. Persons rendering services of a domestic nature in industrial, commercial, social, and like enterprises, shall be considered manual workers and have the rights granted to them:

Art. 116. The law shall regulate contracts for railroad, mine, merchant ne, and aviation workers, taking into account the peculiar features involved. Art. 117. Independent intellectual workers and the results of their activities must be covered by protecting legislation. Art. 118. A worker is entitled to the independence of his moral, civic, and political conscience. The law guarantees that he will not have any interference from his employer in this respect. Art. 119. The labor laws shall be based on harmony between capital and labor, as factors of production. The State must protect the rights of workers but at the same time protect capital and private enterprise. Art. 120. Under equal conditions Honduran workers shall be given preference over foreign workers. The law shall fix the percentage of Honduran workers for enterprises or employers which in no case shall be less than ninety percent, with such exceptions as are specified. The Executive Power may change this percentage whenever the requirements of agriculture or national needs so demand, and may establish exceptions for Central American workers, on a basis of reciprocity. Art. 121. In order to enforce these guarantees and labor laws, the State shall supervise and inspect enterprises. Art. 122. A labor jurisdiction is established, to which will be submitted all disputes arising from relations between capital and labor. The law shall establish rules governing this jurisdiction and the agencies by which it is to be put in practice. Art. 123. The State has an obligation to promote conciliation and arbitration for the peaceful settlement of labor disputes. Art. 124. The State shall promote the technical training of workers and the raising of their cultural and economic level. It is a duty of industrial enterprises, within the spheres of their specialties, to establish schools for promoting vocational education for the children of their workers or associates. The law shall regulate this matter. Art. 125. The State shall promote the construction of homes and housing projects for workers and see that they meet health conditions. To this end it shall be empowered to inspect housing constructed by enterprises and to enact necessary measures in accordance with general health regulations. Art. 126. The law shall determine what enterprises and employers, according to the number of their workers and the size of their capital, shall be required to provide their workers with suitable housing, schools, infirmaries, and other services and attention helpful to the physical and moral well-being of a worker and his family. Art. 127. Every person has a right to the security of his economic means of support in the event of incapacity for work or to obtain paid employment. Social

security services shall be furnished and administered by autonomous entities and shall cover cases of illness, maternity, family subsidies, old age, orphanhood, forced shutdowns, work accidents and occupational diseases, and all other contingencies affecting the capacity to work and consume. The law shall endeavor to establish such services, to the extent that social needs may demand. The State shall establish social welfare and social security institutions. Art. 128. The law shall regulate the extent, scope, and functioning of the social security system. The State, employers, and workers are required to contribute to the financing and to facilitate the improvement and expansion of social security. Art. 129. Enactment of a social security law is considered to be a matter of public benefit. Art. 130. The law shall regulate the formation of cooperative enterprises, whether commercial, agricultural, industrial, consumer, or any other kind, without evading or altering the labor system established in this Constitution. Art. 131. The State shall protect rural workers and to this end shall legislate concerning, among other matters, an unattachable family patrimony exempt from all taxes, agricultural credit, compensation for loss of crops, producer and consumer cooperatives, welfare funds, agricultural training schools, experiment stations, irrigation works, and rural means of communication. Art. 132. The rights affirmed in this chapter cannot be renounced. Any stipulations that restrict or surpress them shall be null and void. Art. 133. The rights and guarantees enumerated in this chapter do not exclude those emanating from the principles of social justice accepted by our country in international conventions. Art. 134. Enactment of a Labor Code is a matter of public benefit, to regulate the relationships between capital and labor, on a basis of social justice in such a way that a worker may be guaranteed conditions necessary for a normal life and capital a fair return on its investment. Chapter III Culture Art. 135. Education is an essential function of the State, for the preservation, development, and dissemination of culture, which must extend its benefits to society without discrimination of any kind. Art. 136. The State has an obligation to develop the fundamental education of the people, by creating the necessary technical agencies directly subordinate to the Ministry of Public Education. Art. 137. The State shall maintain and increase the organization of preschool, elementary, and secondary education, including prevocational, vocational, and art schools. In addition, it shall promote the development of education outside the schools through libraries, cultural centers and other means of disseminating culture.

Art. 138. The technical direction of education pertains to the State. Public education is free and nonsectarian and elementary education is compulsory as well., at the expense of the State. Art. 139. The training of teachers for education is a primary function of the Stale. Art. 140. A teacher is entitled to such privileges and immunities as may be fixed by law. Principally to wages that are socially, economically, and culturally adequate to the dignity of his important mission. Art. 141. The law shall establish a Teachers' Roster that will guarantee stability, advancement, and efficiency, Art. 142, Private education is subject to inspection and regulation approved by the State. Art. 143. The practice of teaching requires accredited qualification in the manner prescribed by law. Art. 144. In all public or private educational centers the teaching of the Constitution, civics, national history and national geography shall be entrusted to native-born Honduran teachers. The freedom of teaching is guaranteed. Art. 145. The teaching of morals as an independent course shall be compulsory in all elementary and secondary schools of the country, public and private. Art. 146. The National University is an autonomous institution, with juridical personality. It has the exclusive privilege to organize, direct and develop higher and professional education; it shall contribute to scientific research, to the general diffusion of culture, and shall cooperate in the study of national problems. The law and the by-laws of the University shall fix its organization, functioning, and attributes. Only academic degrees granted or recognized by the Autonomous National University shall have official validity. The Autonomous National University is the only one empowered to pass upon the qualification of professional men graduated from foreign universities. Degrees that are non-university in character and that are granted by the State will also be recognized. Only persons who hold a valid degree may engage in professional activities. Art. 147. The State shall contribute to the maintenance, development and enlargement of the Autonomous National University, as the rector of culture, with a required annual appropriation of two percent of the budget of net revenues of the Nation, excluding loans. The University is exempt from any form of taxes or contributions.

Art. 148. The State shall provide scholarships for professional studies, arts, and crafts and for the training or specialization of post-graduates who by vocation, capacity or other merits deserve this benefit. This matter shall be regulated by law. Art. 149. The State shall promote and contribute to the maintenance of schools for the blind, deaf-mutes, and the mentally retarded. Art. 150. The State shall contribute to the support of indigent students in accordance with a special law. Art. 151. Compulsory professional collegiation is established. Its organization and functioning shall be regulated by law. Art. 152. Archeological, artistic, and historical treasures are under the vigilance and protection of the State. Their exportation is prohibited and their alienation or transformation may be prohibited whenever the country's interest so demands. Art. 153. The arts and handicrafts of the people are elements of the national culture and shall be entitled to special protection in order to preserve their artistic authenticity and improve their production and distribution. Chapter IV Property Art. 154. The State recognizes, promotes, and guarantees private property. Art. 155. No one may be deprived of his property except by virtue of a law or by a judgment based on law. Art. 156. The expropriation of property on grounds of public need or benefit must be accomplished through a law or a judgment based on law, and shall not take place without prior compensation. In the event of war or internal disorder, it is not necessary that the compensation be paid in advance; however, the corresponding payment shall be made not later than two years after the end of the state of emergency. Art. 157. The social function of private property is recognized. The limitations established by law shall be based on grounds of public need or benefit or on the social interest. Art. 158. The right to own property shall not prejudice the eminent right of the State within its territorial limits, nor may it be placed above the rights held by national institutions or national works. Art. 159. Land of the State, commons, community property, or private property located in zones adjacent to the boundaries with neighboring States, those located along the shores of the two oceans, to a width of forty kilometers toward the interior of the country, and the lands in islands, cays, reefs, cliffs, rocks, shoals, and sandbanks may be acquired in full or less-than-full ownership only by

native-born Hondurans, by companies composed entirely of Honduran members, and by State banks, under penalty of nullification of the pertinent act or contract. Registrars of Property are prohibited from recording documents which violate provision. Urban property is excepted. Art. 160. Every author, inventor, producer, or merchant is entitled to temorary exclusive ownership of his work, invention, trademark, or commercial acn e, according to law. Art. 161, The right to reclaim confiscated property is imprescriptible. Art. 162. No person who has the free administration of his property can be deprived of the right to terminate his civil affairs by compromise or arbitration.

TITLE VI Sole Chapter Suspension of Guarantees Art. 163. The guarantees established in articles 66, 68, 69, 74, 76, 82, 83, 85, 88 and 90 of this Constitution may be temporarily suspended throughout the Republic or a part thereof whenever the security of the State so requires, in the event of grave danger by reason of internal disorder or foreign war; because of disturbance of the public order threatening the peace and tranquility of the Republic; due to epidemic or any other disaster. Art. 164. The National Congress may decree the suspension of individual guarantees indicated in the preceding article, for a period up to sixty days. Art. 165. When the National Congress is not in session, the Executive Power may suspend the guarantees to which article 163 refers, for a period up to thirty days. In this case he must report to the National Congress at its next session, on the reasons which brought about the suspension of these guarantees and of acts performed during the period. Art. 166. The territory in which the guarantees are suspended shall be governed, during the suspension, by the Law on State of Siege; but neither this law nor any other may provide for the suspension of any guarantees other than those enumerated in article 163. Art. 167. During the period of a state of siege, no Honduran nor any active journalist of the spoken or written press shall be subject to deportation or prosecuted in any way for their opinions. Art. 168. In case of international war the censorship of correspondence may be established. Art. 169. Offenses committed during a period of suspension of guarantees against the structure of the institutions and security of the State shall be tried by the respective courts,

Art. 170. The Executive Power is prohibited from detaining any person for more than ten days, during a period of state of siege, without turning him over to an appropriate court. Art. 171. Likewise, during a state of siege no new offenses may be declared or new penalties imposed other than those established by laws in force at the time the suspension was decreed. Art. 172. If the Executive violates any of the provisions contained in this chapter, the injured party or any other person acting in his name may seek the remedy of amparo (protection against arbitrary authority).

TITLE VII POWERS OF GOVERNMENT The Legislative Power Chapter I Its Organization Art. 173. The Legislative Power is exercised by. a Congress of Deputies who are elected by direct suffrage. The National Congress shall meet in the capital of the Republic regularly on the twenty-first of November each year without the necessity of convocation. Deputies must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, over twenty-five years of age, Hondurans by birth or horn abroad of Hondurans by birth who retained their nationality, and they must be natives or residents of the Department by which they are elected. Art. 174. Sessions of the National Congress shall last for one hundred business days and may be extended for an additional one hundred days, whenever matters of national interest so demand; Congress shall decree the extension at the initiative of one or more of its members or at the request of the Executive Power. Art. 175. Congress may also hold extraordinary sessions whenever one more than half of the members so agree, or when convoked by the Executive. In such cases it shall deal only with matters stated in the respective decree of convocation. Art. 176. On November 17 each year the deputies shall meet as a preparatory board, and by the attendance of at least five members shall organize the directorate in order to take the steps necessary for the inauguration of Congress. Art. 177. One more than half the number of members comprising Congress shall be a quorum for its installation and for holding sessions. Art. 178. Neither Congress itself nor any other authority of the State may prevent the installation of Congress or order its dissolution.

Violation of this provision constitutes a crime. Art, 179. Five or more deputies may convoke Congress into extraordinary session anywhere in the Republic whenever the Executive has prevented its installation or the holding of its meetings.

Art. 180. Deputies shall be elected for a term of six years, counted from otw hedna hich the National Elections Council declared them elected, in accordance with provisions of the respective law, and they may not be reelected. In the event of the permanent absence of a deputy the alternate called by Congress shall complete his term.
Art. 181. Deputies are under obligation to meet in assembly on the dates fixed in this Constitution and to attend all sessions of Congress except in case of duty proven major incapacity. Art. 182. Deputies holding office or those who have credentials issued by the National Elections Council who fail to attend meetings without justifiable cause awl thus break the quorum, will be expelled from Congress and will lose the right to hold public office for ten years. The Internal Regulations shall govern this principle. Art. 183. Deputies may not abstain from voting or vote in blank. Art. 184. The following may not be elected as deputies: 1. 2. The President of the Republic. The Secretaries and Under-secretaries of State.

3. Officials and employees of the Executive Power, except those engaged in purely teaching positions. 4. Officials and employees of the Judicial Power.

5. The Comptroller General of the Republic, the Assistant Comptroller, and other members of the Comptroller's Office. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. The Attorney General of the Republic. Members of the military in active service. Active members of the National Police. Members of the National Elections Board. Diplomatic and consular agents.

11. Members of the board of directors of the Central Bank and of the National Bank of Development and directors of other autonomous institutions. 12. Relatives of the President of the Republic and of the Secretaries of State, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity.

13. Persons who have contracts pending for concessions from the State for the exploitation of national resources or public service enterprises, and representatives or agents of such persons or of foreign companies in the same position. 14. Delinquent debtors of the National Treasury and persons having accounts pending covering the administration of national funds. Art. 185. Beginning on the day they are declared elected; deputies will be entitled to the following prerogatives: 1. Personal immunity against being held, accused, or tried, even during a state of siege, unless Congress first declares that there are grounds for a trial; 2. 3. and 4. Exemption from civil suit from a date fifteen days before until fifteen days after a regular or extraordinary session of Congress, except as to counterclaims. Art. 186. The election of deputies to the National Congress shall be on the basis of one principal and one alternate for each thirty thousand inhabitants or fraction over fifteen thousand. In those Departments that have a population of less than thirty thousand inhabitants, one principal and one alternate shall be elected. In accordance with increases in the population, Congress may alter the basis for the election of deputies. Art. 187. Deputies in office may not obtain salaried positions during the term for which they have been elected, except in education or professional services relating to social welfare. They may also hold positions as Secretary or Under-Secretary of State or as Diplomatic Representative. In such cases they will be reinstated in Congress when these functions terminate. Alternate deputies may hold public positions or employment, local or departmental, without loss of their status as alternates. Chapter II Powers of Congress Art. 188. The National Congress has the following powers: 1. To open, suspend, and close its sessions; Exemption from military service without their consent.; No liability due to their parliamentary opinions or initiatives at any time;

2. To convoke extraordinary sessions on the initiative of one or more of its members or at the request of the Executive Power; 3. To incorporate its members in accordance with their credentials and to receive the constitutional oath from them; 4. To call the respective alternate, in the event of permanent absence or legitimate impediment of his principal;

5. 6.

To accept the resignation of members for duly proven legal reasons; To enact its internal regulations;

7. To examine the votes and declare the election of the President, Presidential Designates, and Deputies to the National Congress, whenever the National Elections Council has not done so. If the same person has been elected to different offices, priority will be determined in the following order: 1. President of the Republic; and 2. Deputy to the National Congress. Election as principal shall have priority over election as alternate; 8. To elect for the constitutional term beginning December 21, five Principal Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and three Alternate Magistrates. Incases of permanent absence of any of these, to elect those necessary to complete the term; 9. To elect the Comptroller General, Assistant Comptroller General, Attorney General and Assistant Attorney General of the Republic; 10. To receive the constitutional oath of the President of the Republic and Presidential Designates declared elected and of any other officials it elects, and to accept or refuse to accept their resignations; 11. To grant permission to the President of the Republic if he is to leave the country for more than thirty days; 12. To change the residence of the State Powers for serious reasons;

13. To declare whether or not there are grounds for impeachment of the President and Presidential Designates, Deputies, Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, members of the National Elections Council, Secretaries of State, and Diplomatic Agents, during their term of office; 14. To grant amnesty for political offenses or common offenses connected with political ones. Except in such cases Congress may not make decisions on pardons; 15. To award prizes and to grant temporary privileges to authors and inventors and to persons who have introduced new industries' of public benefit or who have improved those already existing; 16. To grant or refuse permission to Hondurans to receive decorations or employment from another State; 17. To approve or disapprove contracts which involve fiscal exemptions, privileges, or concessions, or any other contract which is to take effect in the succeeding presidential term; 18. Power; To approve or disapprove of the administrative conduct of the Executive

19. To declare a suspension of guarantees in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, and to ratify, modify, or disapprove measures enacted by the Executive Power, according to law;

20. To confer all ranks from Major to General of Division, at the initiative of the Executive Power and Chief of the Armed Forces; 21. To permit or refuse the passage of troops of another country through the Republic; 22. To declare war and to make peace;

23. To approve or disapprove treaties and conventions signed by the Executive. But in treaties concerning commercial intercourse made with other countries, based on lists of articles, the Executive, whenever it may be suitable to the interests of the nation, may make changes in such lists by mere exchange of diplomatic notes, if such has been agreed upon in the respective treaty; 24. To make the selection of the Chief of the Armed Forces;

25. To settle differences that may occur between the President of the Republic and the Chief of the Armed Forces; 26. To fix the number of personnel in the Permanent Army;

27. To create and abolish positions and to award honors and pensions for significant services to the Nation; 28. To fix annually the General Budget of Expenditures and Revenues, on the basis of the proposal submitted by the Executive Power, and to decide on amendments at the suggestion of the latter; 29. TO determine the weight, fineness, and rate of the national currency and the standard of weights and measures; 30. 31. To impose taxes, contributions and other public charges; To decree loans;

32. To establish, through a law, those cases in which subsidies or subventions may be granted for purposes of public benefit or as an instrument of economic development; 33. To approve or disapprove finally the accounts of public expenditures, on the basis of reports submitted by the Comptroller General of the Republic and reservations thereto made by the Executive Power; 34. To regulate the payment of the national debt, at the initiative of the Executive Power; 35. To exercise ultimate control over the public revenues;

36. To approve or disapprove the alienation of national property or its application to public uses; 37. 38. To open ports of entry and establish or abolish custom houses; To create free ports at the initiative of the Executive Power;

39. 40. 41. 42.

To regulate maritime, land, and air trade; To enact, interpret, amend, and repeal secondary laws; To establish the national emblems; Any others expressly conferred by law.

Art. 189. The Legislative Power cannot supply or declare the civil status of persons, or grant professional degrees, even if honorary. The studies and formalities required by appropriate laws for obtaining such degrees cannot be waived, except by a general amendment of the law. Art. 190. The functions of the Legislative Power cannot be delegated, except se relating to the inauguration of high officials of State. Chapter III The Permanent Committee Art. 191. The National Congress, through its Directorate, prior to closing its sessions, shall appoint from among its members seven principals and seven alternates to form a Permanent Committee, which at its first meeting shall elect its chairman and secretary. Art. 192. The powers of the Permanent Committee, during the adjournment of Congress, are the following: 1. To enact its internal regulations;

2. To render decisions and complete action on pending business, to be considered at the next legislative session; 3. To prepare, for submission to consideration by Congress, proposed changes in the secondary laws of the country and other bills that in its opinion the needs of the country may require; 4. To receive from the Executive Power the decrees enacted during the last ten days of sessions of Congress, with or without his sanction; 5. To receive denouncements of violations of this Constitution;

6. To keep in its custody and under its responsibility the files of the Secretariat of Congress; 7. To publish an edition of all decrees and resolutions enacted by Congress at its previous sessions, within three months following its adjournment; 8. To convoke Congress into extraordinary sessions, at the request of the Executive Power, or whenever the situation may require; 9. To submit to Congress a detailed report of its work during the year;

10. To elect ad interim the Comptroller General, the Assistant Comptroller General, the Attorney General, and Assistant Attorney General of the Republic; 11. To call in other deputies as members, to fill vacancies in the membership of the Committee; 12. During adjournment of Congress, to hear differences that may arise between the President of the Republic and the Chief of the Armed Forces; 13. To grant permission to the President of the Republic to leave the national territory for more than thirty days, when Congress is not in session. The Executive Power Chapter W Organization Art. 193. The Executive Power is exercised by a citizen who is named President of the Republic, and in his absence by one of the Designates. Art. 194. The President of the Republic and the Presidential Designates shall be elected jointly and directly by the people, by a simple majority of votes. The election shall be declared by the National Elections. Council or, if it does not do so, by the National Congress. Art. 195. The presidential term will be six years and will begin on December 21. Art. 196. A citizen who has held the office of President under any title may not be President or Designate in the following presidential term. Art. 197. Any official who violates the preceding article or who advocates amending it, and those who directly or indirectly support him, shall immediately cease to hold their respective offices and shall be disqualified from the exercise of any public function. Art. 198. To be President of the Republic or Presidential Designate it is required: 1. 2. 3. 4. To be a Honduran by birth; To be over thirty years of age; To be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; To be a layman.

Art. 199. The following may not be elected President of the Republic for the succeeding term: 1. Any citizen who has held the Presidency by right or ad interim during the course of a term;

2. Secretaries of State who are holding or who have held office within six prior to the holding of the elections; Members of the National Elections Council, and representatives or agents if concessionaires of the State or of enterprises operating public services; 4. Relatives of the President and Designates who have held the office of President during the immediately preceding term, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. Art. 200. The President of the Republic may not leave the national territory for more than thirty days without permission of the National Congress or its Permanent Committee. Art. 201. If the absence of the President is absolute, a Designate chosen by lot by the National Congress shall exercise the Executive Power for the time remaining in the constitutional term. If he is unable to serve, he shall be replaced by another of the Designates chosen in the same manner as prescribed in this article.

But if the three Designates are permanently lacking, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the Council of Ministers, which must call presidential elect ions within the next fifteen days, to be held within a period of not less than two nor more than four months, counting from the date of the call. When the election has been held, the National Elections Council, or if not functioning, the National Congress, shall make the corresponding declaration within twenty days, and the Citizen elected shall immediately take office, counting his presidential term from the following December 21. During temporary absences of the President, he may call upon any of the Designates to replace him, at his option. If the absence is less than thirty days the Executive Power may be entrusted to the . Council of Ministers. Art. 202. If at the beginning of a constitutional term the President-elect does not present himself, the Executive Power shall be exercised by a Presidential Designate chosen by lot by the National Congress, from among those elected for the corresponding term, until the President-elect presents himself. Art. 203. If the election for President and Designates has not been held and declared before December 21, the Executive Power shall be exercised by the Council of Ministers, which shall proceed in the manner prescribed in article 201 of this Constitution. Art. 204. The oath required by law from substitutes of the President of the Republic shall be given before the president of the National Congress, if it is in session; if not, before the President of the Supreme Court of Justice. Chapter V Powers of the Executive Power Art. 205. The President of the Republic is in charge of the general administration of the country.

The following are his powers: 1. To direct the policies of the State and to represent it;

2. To maintain unharmed the independence, the honor of the Republic, and the integrity and inviolability of the national territory; 3. 'To maintain the peace and internal security of the Republic and to repel any attack or external aggression; 4. To restrict the exercise of guarantees, in agreement with the Council of Ministers, subject to what is provided in this Constitution; 5. To give to officials of the Judicial Power such assistance and forces as may be necessary to enforce its decisions; 6. eral; 7. To watch over the official conduct of public officials and employees, for the security and prestige of the Government and the State; 8. To declare war and make peace during adjournment of Congress, which is to be convoked immediately; 9. To permit or refuse, during adjournment of Congress, the passage through the Republic of land, naval or air troops of another country; 10. To exercise the ultimate direction of the Security Police; To exercise the office of Chief of the Armed Forces as Commandant Gen-

11. To organize, direct, and promote public education; to combat illiteracy and endeavor to disseminate and improve agricultural, industrial and general technical training; 12. To see that the revenues of the State are collected and regulate their expenditure according to law; 13. To authorize credit operations made necessary by seasonal fluctuations in revenues and expenditures; 14. To publish quarterly a statement of income and expenditures of the public revenues; 15. To authorize, in Council of Ministers, long-term credit operations, made by the State to finance development projects; 16. To dictate all measures and orders which are legally within his scope to promote full development of agriculture, as the basis of the wealth of the nation; 17. To exercise supervision and control over banking institutions and other credit establishments, in accordance with the law; 18. To submit annually to Congress, within eight days after its installation, through the respective Secretary of State, the proposed General Budget of Expenditures and Revenues of the Public Administration;

	 To contract loans and submit them to consideration by Congress for 19. ap¬pr oval, arnendment, or disapproval; 20. To promote immigration for agricultural, industrial and cultural proposes, according to law; 21. To dispose of the Military Forces, organize them and distribute them according to law; 22. To confer military ranks from Second Lieutenant to Captain, inclusive;

23. To see that the Army is non-partisan, essentially professional, obedient non-deliberating; 24. To direct foreign affairs. To appoint the diplomatic representatives and consular officials of the Republic, who must be Hondurans by birth; 25. To receive diplomatic agents and issue and withdraw the exequatur of consuls of foreign nations; 26. To make treaties, which are to be submitted to Congress for ratifica-¬ ion, and to undertake without delay the exchange and deposit of the instrument of ratification, without prejudice to whatever is set forth in the respective treaty with respect to the time and form of exchange and deposit; 27. To make any other kind of economic or cultural convention;

28. To submit at the installation of a regular session of Congress a general port of the acts of his administration and of plans for the following fiscal period; 29. To organize, guide, and complete plans for development and economic coordination, directed toward improvement of the living conditions of the Honduran people; 30. To submit, through the respective Secretaries of State, within the first fifteen days after the installation of Congress, in its regular sessions, a detailed report or memorandum of each branch of the Public Administration; 31. To submit to Congress any decree concerning the suspension of guarantees, as prescribed in article 165 of this Constitution; 32. To participate in the enactment of laws by submitting bills to Congress, through the Secretaries of State; 33. To sanction laws passed by Congress in these words: "Therefore: To be executed" (Por Tanto: Ejecutese). To use the veto in appropriate cases, and to promulgate legislative provisions that do not require sanction by the Executive, by the following phrase: "Therefore, to be published"; 34. law; 35. To comply with and enforce the Constitution and the laws, issuing orders and regulations to that end, without altering their spirit; To grant or cancel certificates of naturalization, in accordance with the

3636. To maintain public health and improve the hygienic conditions of the coun-

try and its inhabitants, to the extent and with the efficacy that necessity may demand; 37. 38. 39. 40. To confer decorations, according to law; To create and abolish public services; To grant pensions and awards, according to law; To grant pardons and commute sentences, according to law;

41. To appoint and remove the Secretaries and Under-Secretaries of State and other officials and employees whose designation is not assigned to other authorities; 42. To convoke Congress into extraordinary sessions, through the Permanent Committee, or to propose the extension of regular sessions; 43. Any other powers conferred by the Constitution and the laws. Chapter VI Secretaries of State Art. 206. For the general administration of the country there shall be at least nine Ministries or Secretariats of State, among which are to be distributed the matters of Government, Justice, Foreign Affairs, Economy, Finances, National Defense, Public Health, Social Welfare, Public Education, Communications and Public Works, Labor and Social Security, Natural Resources, Publie Security and any others which by law may be considered necessary. Art. 207. The decrees, regulations, resolutions, orders, and executive acts of the President of the Republic must be authorized by the Secretaries of State in their respective branches or by the Under-Secretaries in their absence. If this requirement is not met they do not have legal force. The Secretaries of State and the Under-Secretaries shall be jointly and severally liable with the President of the Republic for the acts that they authorize. In Council of Ministers, the Ministers present shall be responsible for decisions taken unless they have voted against the measure, with an explanation thereof. Art. 208. To be a Secretary of State the same qualifications are necessary as to be President of the Republic. Art. 209. The following cannot be Secretaries of State: 1. Relatives of the President of the Republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity; 2. Persons who have administered or collected public assets until after they have rendered a final account thereof; 3. Contractors for public works, services or enterprises which are paid for from State or municipal funds, their sureties, and persons who as a result of such

works or services have claims pending in their own interest

services; or agents

. Also representatives of concessionaires of the State or of enterprises , operating public

4. Persons owing money to the Public or Municipal Treasury. Art. 210. Secretaries of State may attend the debates of Congress, without the right to vote. At the initiative of a deputy, Congress may call upon them and they must appear to answer interpellations made to them concerning matters relating to their administration; except with respect to matters relating to diplomatic or military activities in which secrecy is deemed necessary. Art. 211. The President of the Republic convokes and presides over the Council of Ministers. All decisions of the Council shall be by majority vote, and in case of a tie , the President shall have two votes. The Council shall meet at the

initiative of the President to take decisions on all matters deemed to be of national importance and to consider cases specified by law: Art. 212. The Secretaries of State must submit to Congress annually, within fifteen days following its installation, a report of the work accomplished in their respective offices. The Secretary of State for Economy and Finance shall also Administration. submit the proposed General Budget of Expenditures and Income of the Public

Art. 213. The Under-Secretaries of State must have the same qualifications Secretaries and shall replace them by action of law. Judicial Power Chapter VII Organization Art. 214. The Judicial Power of the Republic is exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, by the Courts of Appeals, and by the Courts established by law. The Supreme Court of Justice shall sit in the capital of the Republic and shall consist of five principal Magistrates and three alternates. Art. 215. To be a Magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice it is required: to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, a Honduran by birth, a lawyer before the courts of the Republic, over thirty years of age, a layman, and to have held the position of judge (Juez de Letras) or Magistrate of a Court of Appeals for at least one year, or to have practiced his profession for five years. Art. 216, To be Magistrate of the Court of Appeals it is required: to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, Honduran, lawyer, over thirty years of age, a layman, and to have held the position of civil judge for at least one year or to have practiced law for five years. Art. 217. The Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be elected by the National Congress.

Art. 218. Persons who have any of the disqualifications indicated for Secretaries of State, and relatives of each other within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity, may not be elected or appointed as Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice or of the Courts of Appeals. Art. 219. No trial shall have more than two instances, and the Magistrate or Judge who has exercised jurisdiction in one instance may not hear the other, even in cassation, in regard to the same matter, without incurring liability. Likewise, judges who are relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity may not hear the same case. Art. 220. The position of Magistrate or Professional Judge (Juez de Letras) is incompatible with the practice of law or holding office or employment under the other Powers, except as a teaching professor or diplomat on a temporary mission. Art. 221. The term of office for Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be six years and they shall take office on . December 21. Art. 222. The Justices of Peace shall be appointed by the Professional Judges (Jueces de Letras). Art. 223. The administration of justice is free of cost. Art. 224. Magistrates, Judges, and Officials of the Public Ministry may not be compelled to perform military-service, nor to appear for military exercises or practice. Art. 225. The courts of justice may request assistance of the Armed Forces to enforce their decisions and if this is refused or is not available, they may require this of other citizens. Anyone who refuses to give assistance, without justifiable reason, shall incur liability. Art. 226. It is an exclusive power of the Supreme Court, Courts of Appeals, and other courts of justice to judge cases and to execute their judgments. They apply the law in concrete cases that are submitted to them for trial. Art. 227. The law shall regulate the organization and powers of the various courts (tribunales y juzgados) and of officials of the Public Ministry. Art. 228. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be presided over by one of the proprietary Magistrates. The term of the President of the Court shall be one year, counted from December 21, the Magistrates serving in turn in the order of their election. Art. 229. Positions in the Judicial Power shall be remunerated, without exception. Art. 230. Magistrates and Judges cannot be removed from office except for commission of an offense, the investigation of which has resulted in an order of commitment or trial, for bad conduct or for noncompliance with the obligations of his office. These circumstances shall be determined by the Supreme Court of Jus tice on the basis of summary information and a hearing of the accused. Transfers of Judges and Magistrates of the Courts of Appeals shall be regulated by law.

Art. 231. To cooperate in the administration of justice ere s a •ea ea police directly subordinate to officials of the judiciary. A special law shall regulate its organization and functioning. Chapter VIII Powers of the Supreme Court of Justice Art. 232. The Supreme Court of Justice, in addition to those powers conferred by law, shall exercise the following: 1. Enact its internal regulations; 2. Try official and common offenses of the high officials of the Republic whenever the National Congress has declared there are grounds for impeachment; 3. Authorize lawyers and notaries to practice their profession; suspend them hind rehabilitate them, according to law; 4. Declare that there are or are not grounds for trial of such officials and employees as are specified by law; 5. Try cases of prizes, extradition, and others that it must try according to international law; 6. Hear cases of cassation, according to law; 7. Hear cases of protection against authority (amparo) and review, according to law; 8. Appoint the Magistrates of the Courts of Appeals, the Professional Judges (Jueces de Letras), Labor Judges, Registrars of Property, and officials of the Public Ministry; 9. Publish the "Gaceta Judicial";

10. Accept or refuse to accept the resignation of officials appointed by it, and grant leave to such officials and to its own members; 11. Declare laws to be unconstitutional in the manner and in those cases provided for in this Constitution; 12. Prepare the proposed budget of the Judicial Power and submit this in due course to the appropriate authority for inclusion in the General Budget of Expenditures and Income. Chapter IX Disbursement Office for Judiciary Funds Art. 233. A Special Disbursement Office for Justice (Pagaduria Especial de Justicia) shall have charge of the payment of salaries to officials and employees of the Judicial Administration and its expenses.

Art. 234. To comply with the provisions of the foregoing article, the General Treasury of the Republic shall make quarterly allotments of funds in advance, to meet such payments. Art. 235. The Special Disbursement Office shall be immediately subordinate to the Supreme Court, which appoints the Disbursing Officer. The disbursing officer must furnish bond to cover his liability, in accordance with the law.

TITLE VIII Sole Chapter Unconstitutionality and Review Art. 236. Laws may be declared unconstitutional by reason of their form of contents, in accordance with the provisions of the following articles. Art. 237. The Supreme Court of Justice has original and exclusive jurisdiction over hearing and deciding such matters and must render its decisions in accordance with the requirements governing final judgments. Art. 238. A declaration of the unconstitutionality of a law and the non-applicability of provisions affected thereby may be petitioned by anyone who considers himself injured in his direct, personal and legitimate interest: 1. 2. By legal action, to be filed before the Supreme Court of Justice; By entering an exception, which may be done in any judicial proceeding;

3. A judge or court during any judicial proceeding may also directly request a declaration as to the unconstitutionality of a law and its non-applicability before rendering a decision. In this case and as provided in the preceding numeral, the proceedings are to be suspended and the case transmitted to the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 239. A decision of the Supreme Court of Justice shall refer exclusively to a concrete case and shall have effect solely with respect to the proceedings in which' it was rendered. Art. 240. No power or authority may take jurisdiction over pending causes or reopen closed proceedings, except as provided in the following article. Art. 241. In criminal matters, cases already decided may be reviewed at any time in favor of the persons convicted, on their own request or the request of any other person, or of the Public Ministry, or on the court's own motion (de oficio). Such an appeal shall be taken to the Supreme Court. The law shall regulate the cases and the form of review.

TITLE IX Sole Chapter Enactment, Sanction and Promulgation of Laws Art. 242. Deputies, the President of the Republic through the Secretaries of state and the Supreme Court of Justice in matters within its jurisdiction, have the exclusive right to initiate laws. Whenever Congress deems the enactment of a law to be necessary, it may appoint a committee from among its members to prepare the appropriate bill. Art. 243, No bill shall be voted upon finally until after it has been debated on three different days, except in case of an emergency determined by one more than half of the votes. Art. 244, Every bill that has been approved by Congress shall be sent to the Executive Power within not more than three days after it was voted upon, in order 1 that the latter may sanction it and order it promulgated as law. Art. 245. Sanction of a law shall be made in the following form: "Therefore: To be executed". Art. 246. If the Executive Power finds that it is not desirable to sanction a bill, he shall return it to Congress within ten days with the phrase: "Return to Congress", explaining the grounds on which his disapproval is based. If he does not indicate objection within the period indicated, the bill will be considered as sanctioned and he shall promulgate it as law. Whenever the Executive returns a bill, it shall be again debated in Congress; and if it is ratified by a two-thirds vote, it will be again sent to the Executive Power with this phrase: "Constitutionally ratified", and it must be published without delay. If the veto is based on grounds that the bill is unconstitutional, it cannot be su bmitted again to debate before first obtaining an opinion from the Supreme Court of Justice. The Court shall issue its opinion within a period indicated by Congress. Art. 247. When Congress passes a bill at the conclusion of its sessions and Executive believes it undesirable to sanction it, the latter is required to give the immediate notice to Congress so that it may remain in session for another ten days, counted from the date on which Congress receives the bill, and if this is not done, the bill must be taken up during the first eight days of the sessions of the succeedLag Congress. Art. 248. Sanction is not necessary and the Executive Power cannot veto the
;all owing acts and resolutions:

1.

Elections that the Congress makes or declares or resignations that it

accepts or disapproves;
2. Declarations that there are or are not grounds for a trial;

3. 4.

Decrees that relate to the conduct of the Executive Power; Regulations issued for its internal procedure;

5. Resolutions to transfer its seat to another place temporarily and to suspend its sessions or to convoke extraordinary sessions; 6. 7. The Budget Law; Treaties and contracts disapproved by Congress.

In such cases the Executive shall promulgate the law with this phrase: "Therefore: To be published". Art. 249. Whenever a bill which was not initiated by the Supreme Court of Justice is intended to amend or repeal any provisions contained in the Codes of the Republic, it cannot be discussed without hearing the opinion of that Court. The Court shall render its opinion within the period indicated by Congress. This provision does not include laws of a political, economic, or administrative nature. Art. 250. No bill rejected in part or in full may be discussed again in the same legislative period. Art. 251. A law is compulsory by virtue of its promulgation and after twenty days have elapsed following completion of its publication in the official newspaper "La Gaceta".

TITLE X Chapter I Economy Art. 252. The economic system of Honduras must follow principles of efficiency in production and of social justice in the distribution of the national income, and is based on the recognition and the harmonious coexistence of the following factors and institutions: a) Private enterprise and property, and state and municipal enterprise and property; The individual producer, consumer and worker, and associations of producers, consumers' societies, and workers' trade unions; and c) All other associations recognized by law. The law shall determine the form and requirements for the organization of such associations. Art. 253. Labor and capital, as factors of production, enjoy the protection of the State.

Cooperatives are declared to be of social advantage and benefit. Art. 254. The State shall undertake the protection and conservation of natural resources and shall regulate their use, enjoyment, and appropriation, in accordance with the social interest. Art. 255, The State recognizes and guarantees the freedom of consumption, savings and investment, occupation, initiative, trade, contracts and enterprise. The enunciation of these freedoms does not exclude the recognition of any others that emanate from the democratic and liberal principles affirmed by this Constitution. Art. 256. The State, for reasons of public order and of social interest, may reserve to itself the exercise of specified basic industries, exploitations, and services of public interest, and may enact economic, fiscal, and public security laws and measures in order to direct, stimulate, and supplement private initiative, on the basis of rational and systematic economic planning. Art. 257. Intervention of the State in the economy shall be based on the pubinterest and limited by the fundamental rights and freedoms recognized by the Constitution. Art. 258. The principal objective of the State in the stimulation of economic activity shall be to contribute and promote a growing and orderly level of production, employment, and income, the latter to be equitably distributed among the factors contributing to its formation, under conditions of reasonable monetary stability, for the purpose of providing the entire, population with a worthy and proper existence. Art. 259. The State shall conduct its external economic relations on the bases of international cooperation, Central American economic integration, and respect for treaties and conventions it has signed, wherever they are not opposed to the national interest. Art. 260. Foreign private capital shall be subject to the same obligations and limitations as the law prescribes for domestic capital, and shall be entitled to the same rights and privileges. The law may, however, grant preferential treatment or reserve specific fields of investment to Honduran or Central American capital, in accordance with the national interest. Art. 261. The direction and coordination of the general economic policy of the State pertains to the Executive Power, with the assistance of a superior economic planning agency and other competent technical agencies. The Secretaries of State and the autonomous and semi-autonomous agencies shall adjust their programs and projects to the general economic policy of the State, so as to ensure a minimum of unity and consistency in general objectives and partial objectives. Special laws shall establish rules governing the creation and functions of the agencies referred to in the first paragraph of this article.

Art. 262. The right to issue currency belongs exclusively to the State, which it shall exercise through the Central Bank of Honduras, an autonomous public service institution, which shall be governed by its organic law and its regulations. The banking, monetary, and credit system shall be determined by law. The Central Bank shall be entrusted with the formulation and development of the monetary, credit, and exchange policy of the country. Art. 263. In agrarian policy the State shall promote primarily the development of the family type rural property, which constitutes an economic unit of production, and the establishment of agricultural credit and educational services, preferably favoring Honduran families. The size of units of production shall be determined regionally on the basis of the agricultural, livestock, or mixed exploitation that the State deems suitable to promote in an area, under appropriate technical and economic conditions. The law shall fix the conditions for acquisition and the obligations of the recipient. Art. 264. The law may establish special restrictions, requirements or prohibitions for the acquisition, transfer, use, and enjoyment of state and municipal property, for reasons of public order, social interest or national advantage. Art. 265. The State may not grant or authorize monopolies in favor of private persons. The temporary privileges granted to inventors, discoverers, or authors as rights in scientific, literary, artistic or commercial property, patents of invention, or trademarks, are not to be considered as such. Enterprises which by the nature of their activities constitute de facto monopolies shall be subject to special legislation. Art. 266. The law shall determine the juridical system by which the exploitation and utilization of forests, petroleum deposits, organic and inorganic substances, and other natural resources found underground and in the submarine shelf are to be governed. Chapter II Financial System Art. 267. State and municipal fiscal charges must be based on principles of uniformity and equity and on the paying capacity of the taxpayer. Art. 268. The municipal tax system must be harmonized with the state tax system. Public Wealth Art. 269. The following comprise the public wealth: a) All real and movable property of the State;

b) All, its active credits; and r) its available funds. Art. 270. The financial obligations of the State are: a) Debts contracted for current expenses or for public investment originating in the execution of the Budget; and b) All other debts legally recognized by the State. Art. 271. Administration of the public funds pertains to the. Executive Pow-

For the collection, custody, and expenditure of these funds there shall be a general treasury service. The Executive Power, however, may delegate the functions of collector and depositary to the Central Bank.
Budget
Art. 272. The financial resources of the State are: a) Revenues received from taxes, fees, contributions, royalties, gifts, or by any other title; b) Revenues derived from state enterprises; and c) Extraordinary revenues derived from the public credit or from other sources.

Art. 273, All fiscal expenditures and revenues of the Government and its agencies shall be set forth in the General Budget, which is to be voted annually. Art. 274. All ordinary fiscal revenues shall be kept in a single fund. Ordi nary revenues may not be created to be set aside for a specific purpose. However, the law may set aside revenues for service on the public debt and provide that the proceeds of specific taxes and general contributions are to be d ivided between the National Treasury and the municipalities, in proportions or amounts specified in advance. The law may also authorize specified state or mixed enterprises to receive, administer or invest financial resources derived from their corresponding economic activities. Art. 275. The computation of the fiscal revenues to be voted in the Budget
may not exceed the amount resulting from a technical estimate of the probable

corresponding revenues, extraordinary revenues, and the surplus of the immediately preceding period. Art. 276. No engagement or payment may be made other than the appropria-tions voted in the Budget. Any amount demanded, invested, or paid from the Budget without legal approval will render the official who ordered the payment or expenditure civilly and criminally liable; the person who executes the transaction will also be held liable unless proved innocent.

Art. 277. The Executive Power on his own responsibility and provided that the National Congress is not in session, may contract loans, vary the destination of an authorized item, or open additional credits, in order to meet urgent or unforeseen needs in the event of war, internal disorder, or public disaster, or to meet international engagements; all of which must be accounted for in detail at the next sessions of the National Congress. Art. 278. The Budget is to be voted by the Legislative Power on the basis of the proposal submitted by the Executive Power. Art. 279. The proposed Budget shall be submitted by the Executive Power within fifteen days after the installation of the National Congress. Art. 280. The Organic Budget Law shall establish all details relating to the preparation, voting, execution, and liquidation of the Budget. If at the close of a fiscal period the Budget has not been voted for the new period, the budget corresponding to the previous period shall continue in effect. Art. 281. Contracts for the execution of public works made by the State Powers, the Municipalities, and the autonomous institutions, purchases made with funds of these entities, and sales or rentals of property belonging to them, shall be done by bids, according to law. Contracts for the purpose of supplying needs due to a state of war and those which by their nature can only be made with a specified person are excepted from this provision. Art. 282. There shall be a General Supply Office (Proveedurfa) of the Republic. The law shall determine the requirements for its organization, powers and functions. Art. 283. An Office for the Administration of National Property is created which is to be entrusted with the control and supervision of real and movable state property. The law shall determine its organization and powers. Chapter III Auditing Art. 284. Preventive auditing of the execution of the General Budget of Expenditures and Revenues of the Republic shall be entrusted to the Executive Power who shall in particular: 1. Confirm that collections are made and supervise the custody, engagement and expenditure of public funds; and 2. Approve every expenditure of public funds in accordance with the Budget. The law shall establish the procedure and scope of this supervision.

Art. 285. Preventive auditing of the autonomous agencies, of the. Central District, and of the municipalities shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of pertinent laws. Art. 286. For the a posteriori auditing of the Public Treasury there shall be an auxiliary agency of the Legislative Power, known as the Office of the Comp troller General of the Republic to be governed by its own organic law and with functional and administrative independence. Its powers shall be: I. To review the administration of public funds and property and audit the accounts of officials and employees who handle them; 2. To audit the financial activities of the agencies of the Public Administration , autonomous and semi-autonomous institutions, governmental establishments, the General District, the Municipalities, and entities supported by funds from the national revenues or that receive a subsidy or subvention therefrom; 3. To examine the books kept by the State and the accounts rendered by the Executive Power to the National Congress relating to the Public Treasury, and to report to the Congress on the result of this examination; and 4. To exercise any other functions prescribed in its organic law.

Art. 287. The a posteriori auditing of the Central Bank of Honduras, with respect to its handling of State funds, shall be entrusted to the Office of the Comp-trollerGeneral of the Republic, which is to submit a report of such audit to the National Congress. The a posteriori auditing of other credit institutions that receive State funds, with respect to the application of these funds to strictly banking operations, or business shall be undertaken by the Office of Superintendent of Banks, and in other cases by the Office of the Comptroller General of the Republic. Art. 288. The Office of the Comptroller must submit to Congress, within the first forty days after the close of a fiscal year, a report on the work it has accomplished during that year, with a statement of opinions and suggestions deemed necessary to achieve greater efficiency in the handling of public funds and property. This report, which is to be submitted at the same time to the President of the Republic, must be published by the Comptroller's Office in detail or in summary, with the exception of items relating to military secrets or other matters which might affect the national security. Art. 289. The Office of the Comptroller General shall be headed by a Comptroller General and an Assistant Comptroller elected by the National Congress, who shall have the same disqualifications and be entitled to the same prerogatives as Deputies. Art. 290. To be the Comptroller General or Assistant Comptroller it is required: to be a Honduran by birth, over twenty-five years of age, a citizen in the enjoyment of his rights, of recognized honesty and competence, and to hold a degree in law, economy or public administration or as a commercial appraiser and public accountant.

Art. 291. The functions of the Comptroller General and Assistant Comptroller shall continue for one year after the expiration of the term of the Powers of State. They may not be reelected for the succeeding term. Art. 292. The organization and the powers of the Office of the Comptroller General of the Republic shall be specified by the law governing its functions, which shall also prescribe the procedure to be followed for the preparation, approval, and execution of its budget. Art. 293. The Comptroller General and Assistant Comptroller shall be responsible to the National Congress for acts performed in carrying out their functions and may be removed only on grounds related thereto, when there is proof of serious irregularities or offenses. Chapter IV The Attorney General of the Republic Art. 294. To represent the interests of the State there is created the Office of the Attorney General (Procuraduria General) of the Republic, the organization and powers of which shall be determined by law. Art. 295. There shall be an Attorney General and Assistant Attorney General, who are to be elected by the National Congress for a term of six years and who may not be reelected for the succeeding term. Art. 296. To be Attorney General or Assistant Attorney General of the Republic it is required to be a Honduran by birth, over twenty-five years of age, a citizen in the exercise of his rights, of recognized honesty and competence, and to be the holder of a degree in law. Art. 297. The Attorney General of the Republic shall have the same prerog atives and disqualifications as prescribed by this Constitution for Deputies. Art. 298. Civil and criminal actions that result from the intervention of auditors of the Office of the Comptroller General shall be entered by the Attorney General, with the exception of those pertaining to the Central District and the Municipalities, which will remain under the jurisdiction of officials indicated in the respective laws. Chapter V Autonomous Institutions Art. 299. For a greater efficiency in the administration of national interests, to guarantee that the collective needs of public service will be met, without aims of profits, and in general, to achieve greater efficiency in administration, autonomous agencies based on decentralization from the public administration are recognized. The autonomous agencies form a part of the general machinery of administration, and the degree of autonomy of each agency shall be determined in the law creating it, according to the nature and purposes of its respective functions.

300. The autonomous institutions of the State are entitled to independence with respect to their government and administration, and their directors are liable for their actions. Art.

Art. 301. Existing autonomous institutions and those that may be created will be governed by their (respective) laws and regulations. Art. 302. In the discussion and approval of laws affecting an autonomous institution, the National Congress shall first hear the opinions of the agency in question.

Art. 303. The creation of new autonomous institutions must receive a twoth irds vote of the members of the National Congress. Art. 304. The autonomous agencies shall be required to present to the Government , through the respective Secretary of State, the net proceeds of the finan-cialtvyofheprdngiscal. Art:. 305. The net proceeds from financial activity referred to in the pre-a ceding rticle shall be included in the final balance of the General Budget of E xpenditures and Revenues of the Nation, with the exception of those of the Central Bank of Honduras.

TITLE XI Sole Chapter Civil Service Art. 306. A Civil Service system is established for the purpose of regulating the labor relationship between public servants and the State; to govern the personnel administration by scientific methods based on the merit system; to achieve efficiency in government operations; to protect its servants; and to create an admin-istrative career. Art. 307. The General Administration of Civil Service (Direccion General del S ervicio Civil) is created, in charge of a Director subordinate to the President of the Republic, without dependence on any particular Ministry. A Council consisting of three members, appointed by the Executive Power, will govern its functions according to law. Transitory Art. 308. The Executive Power must submit a draft Civil Service Law for consideration by the first regular National Congress, in accordance with articles 106 and 307. The The Civil Service system shall be installed gradually as soon as th e law mentioned takes effect.

TITLE XII Sole Chapter Liability Art. 309. Every public official shall take the following oath upon assuming office: "I promise to be faithful to the Republic, comply with and enforce the Constitution and the laws". Art. 310. Public officials and employees are liable for their acts. Art. 311. Notwithstanding the approval that Congress may give to the conduct of the Executive Power, the President of the Republic and the Ministers of State may be impeached for offenses in office. The period of limitations on such actions shall begin to run five years after the functions of the accused have terminated. Art. 312. Public officials and employees who violate any of the rights and guarantees affirmed in this Constitution shall be civilly and criminally liable; they may not receive a pardon or commutation during the current terra nor in the succeeding term. Art. 313. Public officials and employees may not make use of their positions to enrich themselves without cause. Art. 314. Unlawful enrichment is presumed whenever the increase in the capital of an official or employees, from the date on which he took office until the date he leaves it, is notably greater than he could normally have from salary and emoluments legally received and from income from other. sources. In determining this increase, the capital and-income of the official or employee and that of his spouse and of his children shall be considered jointly. A declaration of property of officials and employees shall be made according to law. If a public official who has been separated from office, or against whom grounds for trial were indicated, is found to be innocent, he shall be restored to office.

TITLE XIII Sole Chapter The Armed Forces Art. 315. The Armed Forces of Honduras are a permanent, national institution, essencially professional, non-political, obedient, and non-deliberative. They are instituted in order to defend the territorial integrity and the sovereignty of the Republic; to maintain peace, the public order, and the rule of this Constitution; and

above all to see that the principles of free suffrage and non-continuity of the office , of the office of the Presidency of the Republic are not violated. Art. 316. They shall be subject to the provisions of the Constitutive Law of the Armed Forces and any other laws and regulations governing their functioning. They shall cooperate with the Executive Power in tasks of literacy, education, agriculture, conservation of natural resources, highways, communications, land settlement , and emergency activities, provided that the service is not impaired. Special legal jurisdiction is established respecting military offenses. A rt. 317. Military service is compulsory for all citizens and will be regulated by a special law. In case of international war all able-bodied Hondurans will be compelled to military service, without distinction of any kind. perform
. 318. The Armed Forces shall be under the direct command of the Chief , of the Armed Forces; through him the President of the Republic will exercise his constitutional function respecting this institution. Merely administrative functions shall be entrusted to the Secretary of State for Defense. Art.

A rt. 319. Orders given by the President of the Republic to the Armed Forces, its Chief, must be obeyed. Whenever any difference arises, this must be to Congress for consideration, which shall decide by a majority of votes. t hit; decision is final and must be obeyed. through Art. 320. The Chief of the Armed Forces must be an officer of superior rank , a Honduran by birth, and will be designated by the National Congress from a toil ()I three proposed by the Superior Council of National Defense. His term of of-fice will be six years and he may be removed only by the National Congress when I grounds therefor have been declared by a two-thirds vote of its members, and in any other cases specified in the Constitutive Law of the Armed Forces. No relative of the President of the Republic or of his legal substitutes, with in the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity, may be appointed 'Mel of the Armed Forces. Art. 321. The Chief of the Armed Forces, on taking office, shall take the following solemn oath before the National Congress: "In my name and in the name ourselves of the Armed Forces of Honduras, I solemnly swear that we shall never convert into instruments of oppression; that even if they come from our superiors rank, we shall never obey orders that violate the letter or spirit of the Constitution; that we shall defend the national sovereignty and the integrity of our terthat we shall respect the rights and liberties of the people; that we shall ritory; maintain the non-political status and professional dignity of the Armed Forces; and that we shall defend the effectivity of the free suffrage of citizens and the principle of non- continuity of the office of the Presidency of the Republic". 322. In case of temporary absence of the Chief of the Armed Forces his functions will be assumed by the Secretary of Defense. In the event of permanent absence or lack, the Superior Council of National Defense shall, within the next fifteen days, propose a list of three candidates from which the National Congress shall name one to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term of th e person being replaced.
Art.

Art. 323. The General Staff of the Armed Forces is an organ of the Chief's Headquarters and shall have such functions as the law prescribes. Art. 324. The Superior Council of National Defense will be an advisory organ on all matters relating to the Armed Forces and shall serve as its highest tribunal in matters submitted for its cognizance and decision. Art. 325. The Superior Council of National Defense shall be composed of the Chief of the Armed Forces, the Secretary of Defense, the Chief of the General Staff, the Chiefs of Military Zones, the Commandants of the Military Corps of the Capital and any others that the constitutive law may establish. It shall have its seat in the capital city and may be convoked by the President of the Republic, by the Chief of the Armed Forces, by the Secretary of Defense, and by any member of the Armed Forces, according to provisions of law. Art. 326. Appointments of chiefs, commandants, and other military appointments shall be made by the Chief of the Armed Forces through the Secretary of Defense. Those of an administrative nature, those of the Presidential General Staff, and the Presidential Guard shall be made by the President of the Republic, through the same Secretary. Art. 327. For greater efficiency of the service, the territory of the Republic is to be divided into Military Zones. Each zone shall be in command of a superior officer appointed by the Chief of the Armed Forces and shall function in accordance with the provisions of the respective law. Art. 328. Military ranks are acquired only by strict promotion, they must be conferred in accordance with length of service, training, and special services rendered to the country. The military cannot be deprived of their rank, honors, and pensions in any other manner than is prescribed by law. Promotions from Second Lieutenant to Captain, inclusive, shall be conferred by the President of the Republic at the proposal of the Chief of the Armed Forces. Promotions from Major to General, inclusive, shall be conferred by the National Congress at the joint proposal of the President of the Republic and the Chief of the Armed Forces. A prior requirement of all promotions is a statement of aptitude issued by the General Staff of the Armed Forces. Art. 329. There is created the Military School of Honduras in which the cadet corps (Caballeros Cadetes) are to be trained, as aspirants to officers in. the Armed Forces. The Secretariat of Defense shall be entrusted with the organization of this school and shall defray the expenses incurred in its operation. The office of the Chief of the Armed Forces shall organize and supervise special training centers for the different branches of the service. Art. 330. The administration of funds appropriated for the Defense Department shall be entrusted to the Disbursement Office of the Armed Forces.

Art. 331. In the event of war, declaration of a state of siege, or a national emergency, every armed body that normally functions under some other agency shall thereupon come under the direct command of the Chief of the Armed Forces for the duration of the war, state of siege or emergency.

TITLE XIV THE DEPARTMENTAL AND MUNICIPAL REGIME Chapter I The Departmental Regime Art. 332. For purposes of public administration, the national territory is divided into departments, the creation and boundaries of which shall be decreed by the National Congress. Art. 333. Departmental officials must be Hondurans by birth, over twentyfive years of age and citizens in the exercise of their rights. Employees must be over eighteen years of age and must meet the other qualifications prescribed for officials. Chapter II The Municipal Regime Art. 334. For purposes of administration, the departments are divided into autonomous municipalities (municipios) represented by municipal councils (municipalidades) elected by the people, in the manner prescribed by law. As a basis for their economic autonomy there is created the Autonomous Municipal Bank, the organization and functions of which shall be determined by law. The Central District (Distrito Central), comprising the municipalities of Tegucigalpa and Comayagttela, shall be governed by a special law. Art. 335. The law shall regulate the organization and powers of the municipal councils. These powers may only be economic and administrative. Art. 336. In the exercise of their exclusive functions, the municipal councils shall be absolutely independent of the other powers, but without contradicting in any way the general laws of the country; and they shall be held liable before the courts of justice, for abuses committed individually or collectively. Art. 337. The municipal councils shall freely appoint the employees of their offices and police officers who are paid from their funds. Art. 338. The members of a municipal council may not hold any municipal position in the same municipality during the succeeding term.

Art. 339. Partial amendment of this Constitution may be decreed by the National Congress in its regular sessions, by a two-thirds vote of all its members. The decree shall indicate the article or articles that are to be amended, and this must be ratified by the following regular legislature, by the same number of votes, in order to take effect. In no case may articles 4, 195, 196, 199 and this article be amended by the foregoing procedure. Chapter II Inviolability of the Constitution Art. 340. This Constitution shall not lose its effect and force, even if, due to some rebellion or coup d'êtat, Congress does not meet on the date indicated herein, or if for any other reason its observance is interrupted. In such cases the Power that continues functioning legally, Legislative, Executive, or Judicial, is under obligation to dictate without delay the measures necessary to obtain due compliance with provisions that have been violated.

TITLE XVI TRANSITORY PROVISIONS Art. 341. All laws, decrees, regulations, orders, and other provisions in effect when this Constitution is promulgated, shall continue to be observed in so far as they are not contrary to it, until they are legally repealed or amended. Art. 342. For the term 1957-1963, the citizens elected by this National Constituent Assembly shall be the Constitutional President of the Republic and the Designates to the Presidency. Art. 343. The Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General and Assistant Attorney General of the Republic, the Chief of the Armed Forces, the Comptroller General and Assistant Comptroller General of the Republic, elected by this Assembly, shall hold office constitutionally for the same term referred to in the preceding article, with the exception of the Comptroller General and Assistant Comptroller General who shall finish their terms in accordance with the respective constitutional provision. Art. 344. When this Constitution has been promulgated and sworn to, in public and solemn session, and the oath of office has been received from the officials to whom the two preceding articles refer, the National Constituent Assembly shall adjourn its sessions and become converted into the regular National Congress, for the constitutional term to begin on December 21 of this year.

Final Article Art. 345. The present Constitution shall take effect on December 21 of year, Given t hat of March 28, 1936 being thereby repealed.

in the Hall of Sessions of the Legislative Palace, in Tegucigalpa, Capital of the Republic of Honduras, on December 19, 1957. President: MODESTO RODAS ALVARADO h. Vice President: HECTOR ORLANDO GOMEZ

followed by the signature of the secretaries of the assembly, the Department Depu the Secretaries of State)

