

CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Honduras.-Tegucigalpa, November 1, 1880. 

THE National Constituent Assembly convoked by the Executive Power on the 2nd May of the current year decrees the following Constitution for the Republic of Honduras -

PART I.-DELARATIONS, PRINCIPLES, RIGHTS, AND FUNDAMENTAL GUARANTEES. 

Chapter 1.-Rights and Principles.
ART. 1. Honduras considers itself a section separated from the Republic of Central America. In consequence it recognizes as its principal duty and most pressing necessity its reunion with the other sections of the dissolved Republic. To the attainment of this important object the present Constitution is no hindrance, as it may be reformed or abolished by Congress in order to ratify any Agreements, Treaties, and Conventions which may tend to promote, or have for their aim, the national reconstruction of Central America. 2. The Hondurean nation is a Republic, sovereign, free, and independent. 3. All public power emanates from the people. The functionaries of State are its delegates, and have no further authority than that expressly given them by the law. By means of the law they legislate, administer and dispense justice, and, in conformity with the law, they must render account of their actions. 4. The Government of the Republic is democratic, representative, changeable, and responsible; and will be exercised by three distinct departments: the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial. 5. The limits of the Republic and its territorial division will be the subject of a (special) Law.

Chapter 2.-Public Bights of the Hondureans. 

6. The Constitution guarantees to all inhabitants of the Republic, whether Hondureans or foreigners, inviolability of human life, security of the individual, liberty, equality, and rights of property. 

Security of the Individual. 

7.- (1.) The Republic accords the guarantee of the habeas corpus. (2.) No warrant for arrest is legal which does not emanate from the competent authority. Detention for the purpose of inquiry will not exceed six days, and the "Juge d'Instruction" is obliged, within that time, to decree the liberty or committal of the accused. (8.) The delinquent taken in the act may be apprehended by any person, for the purpose of banding him over immediately to the authority having the right of arrest. (4.) Even with a Decree of Arrest, no one may be taken to prison,

nor detained in prison, if bail is forthcoming, when the crime is not
punishable by corporal punishment. (5.) No one may be condemned without previous judgment founded on law of date anterior to the commission of the deed which is the subject of the trial. (6.) No one may be judged by Special Commissions, nor withdrawn from the Judges designated by the law of date anterior to the commission of the deed which is the subject of the trial. (7.) No one can be compelled, in a criminal matter, to give evidence against himself, nor against relations to the fourth degree of consanguinity, or the second degree of affinity. (8.) The right of defence is inviolable. (9.) Torture is for ever abolished. The shackles which are not absolutely necessary for the security of the prisoners must not be employed. (10.) Isolation of arrested persons or prisoners will not be permitted, except by written order of the Judge in the cause, for a short time and for specified motives. No one may be imprisoned except in the public buildings appropriated to that purpose. (11.) The domicile is inviolable. Correspondence by letter and telegraph, private papers, and books of commerce, are inviolable. (12.) No inhabitant may be molested or persecuted on account of his opinions, of whatever nature they may be, provided that he does not disturb order, or infringe the law by any open and positive action. (13.) Laws, Orders, provisional Judgments, or retrospective sentences, of outlawry, condemnatory without trial, and defamatory, are unjust, oppressive, and null. The authorities which commit such outrages will be held responsible, with their persons and goods, for the damage inflicted. (14.) The police force will be intrusted to the civil authorities only. 

Liberty. 
8. The slave who sets foot on Hondurean soil is free. The traffic in slaves is a crime. 9. All have freedom (1.) To publish their opinions in the press without previous censorship. (2.) To dispose of their property, without any restriction, by sale, gift, testament, or any other legal title. (3.) To profess any religion. The State will not contribute to the sustenance of any form of worship. The forms of worship will be supported by the voluntary contributions of individuals. The State will exercise the right of paramount inspection over the forms

of worship, in conformity with the law and the police regulations relating to their external exercise. (4.) To practise their profession, calling, or employment. (5.) To form associations, and to meet together peacefully and without arms. The establishment of any kind of monastic association is forbidden. (6.) To exercise the right of petition. (7.) To teach. (8.) To travel about in the territory of the Republic, to remain in it, and to leave it, without a passport. (9.) To engage in navigation and commerce.

Equality.
10.-(1.) In the eyes of the law there are no charters nor personal privileges. (2.) Every Hondurean will be eligible to fill public offices of trust, without further condition being required than that of capacity. Ministers of the different religious societies will not be eligible to hold such public offices of trust. (3.) Equality is the basis of taxation. (4.) The civil law recognizes no difference between natives and foreigners.

Property.

11.-(1.) The right of property is inviolable. No one may be deprived of it, except by virtue of the law or of a sentence based on the law. Expropriation on account of public utility must be authorized by law or by a sentence based on the law, and will not take effect without previous indemnification. (2.) Congress alone imposes taxation. (3.) No personal service may be exacted, except in virtue of the law or of a sentence based on the law. (4.) Confiscation is declared to be for ever abolished. (5.) Every author or inventor enjoys the exclusive right of property in his work or discovery. (6.) No armed body may make requisitions. 12. The laws regulate the use of these guarantees of public right; but it will not be permissible to make a law which, with the object of reforming or organizing their exercise, would essentially diminish, restrict, or vitiate them. 

Chapter 3.-Public Rights conferred on Foreigners. 
13.-(1.) No foreigner is entitled to more privileges than another. All enjoy the civil rights of a Hondurean. Consequently they can buy, sell, lease, embark in business and professions; possess
every class of property, and dispose of them in the form prescribed by law; enter the country and leave it with such possessions; visit with their ships, from time to time, the ports of the Republic, and navigate its waters and rivers. They are free from extraordinary taxation; they are guaranteed entire liberty of conscience, and may construct places of worship and cemeteries in any part of the Republic. Their matrimonial contracts cannot be invalidated on account of want of conformity with the religious requirements of any form of belief, provided they are legally celebrated. 
(2.) They are not compelled to become naturalized. 
(3.) They may be candidates for public offices according to the provisions of the law, which in no event will exclude them only on account of their origin; and (4.) They obtain naturalization by residing a complete year in the country. It is obtained without this qualification by farmers ("colonos") ; by those who establish themselves in localities inhabited by the aborigines, or in uninhabited lands; by those who undertake and carry out important works of general utility; by those who introduce large fortunes into the country; and by those who commend themselves by inventions or appliances of great utility for the Republic. 
14. Foreigners, on their arrival in the territory of the Republic, are compelled to respect the authorities and to observe the laws. They are also obliged to pay observance to the arrangements and regulations of the police, and to pay the local rates, and the taxes imposed on account of commerce, trade, profession, property, or possession of goods, and those which, with the same object, may be imposed in the future, whether in augmentation or in diminution of the previous taxes. 15. The Laws and Treaties regulate the enjoyment of these guarantees without the power of diminishing or altering them. 

Chapter 4.-Guarantee of Order and Progress. 
16. Military service is compulsory. Every Hondurean from 18 to 35 years of age is soldier of the active army, and from 35 to 40 is soldier of the reserve. Naturalized Hondureans are excepted for 10 years. The organization of the army will be regulated by law. 17. Military jurisdiction is established; its extension will be determined by the Code corresponding thereto. 18. The public force is essentially obedient. No armed body is permitted to deliberate. 19. Every individual, or collection of individuals, which assumes the right of representation of the people, arrogates to itself their righto, or acts in their name, commits sedition.

20. All usurped authority is illegal; its acts are null. Any decision decreed by direct or indirect intimidation of an armed body or of a popular meeting is unlawful, and will have no legal value. 21. In the event of the Republic, or a portion of the Republic, being declared in a state of siege, the operation of the Constitution is suspended in the locality to which the declaration of the state of siege refers. 22.* Neither Hondureans nor foreigners can, in any case, reclaim from the State any indemnity for damages or losses which may be caused to their persons or goods by military engagements. 23. The President of the Republic, the Magistrates of the Supreme Court, the Secretaries of State, and the Diplomatic Agents, may be arraigned before the Congress for crimes of treason, illegal exaction, dilapidation, and violation of the Constitution and of the laws. The political or responsible judgment is limited to deposing the accused from his office, and handing him over to the ordinary Tribunals. 24. To the State pertains the original duty of promoting and protecting public instruction in its different branches. Primary instruction is obligatory, secular, and free. The secondary and higher instruction will also be secular. No minister of any religious society will be permitted to direct educational establishments supported by the State. 25. The State will encourage everything conducive to the wellbeing and advance of the country, promoting the progress of agriculture, of trade, and commerce; of immigration, of the colonization of uninhabited lands, and of the construction of roads and railways; of the introduction of new industries, and the establishment of banking establishments, of the importation of foreign capital, and the exploration and canalization of rivers and lakes, by means of laws protecting these objects, and of temporary concessions of privileges and recompenses as a stimulus. 26. The navigation of the rivers is free to all flags. 27. The present Constitution may be reformed. The necessity for its reformation will be declared by the ordinary Congress; but the reform will only be effected by a National Constituent Assembly, convoked for the purpose. The proposal for reform which is not supported by two-thirds of the Congress is ineffective. The case provided for in Article 1 is excepted from these provisions. 28. Every public official or functionary of the Republic, on

taking possession of his appointment, will make the following promise: "I promise that I will comply with, and will cause to be complied with, the Constitution and Laws, abiding by their text, whatever be the orders which may oppose them and the authority from which those orders emanate." Chapter 5.-Concerning Nationality, Citizenship, and Elections. 29. Those persons are Hondureans who are born in the territory of the Republic, and those who are naturalized in the country according to law. 80. The following are Hondureans by birth:(1.) All persons born or who may be born in the territory of the Republic. The nationality of the children of foreigners born on Hondurean territory, and that of the children of Hondureans born on foreign territory, will be determined by Treaties. Where a Treaty does not exist, the children, born in Honduras, of foreign parents domiciled in the country are Hondureans. (2.) Inhabitants of the other Republics of Central America are considered Hondureans by birth, by the fact of being actually in any part of the territory of Honduras, provided that they do not express before the proper authority their intention of retaining their nationality. 81. The following are Hondureans by naturalization:(1.) Spanish-Americans domiciled in the Republic, unless they preserve their nationality. (2.) Those foreigners who come under any of the heads set out in Article 13, paragraph 4, provided that they are inscribed in the Civil Registry in the form prescribed by the law. (3.) Those who may obtain letters of naturalization from the authority indicated by the law. 32. Citizens are(1.) All Hondureans, by birth or naturalization, who have attained the age of 21 years, who have a profession, employment, income, or property, which assures them subsistence; and (2.) Hondureans, by birth or naturalization, who have attained the age of 18 years, and who can read and write, or are married. 33. The rights of citizenship are suspended(1.) In case of the subject of a criminal prosecution, or of a Decree of Imprisonment. (2.) In case of notoriously vicious conduct, or of vagrancy legally decreed. (3.) In case of mental alienation, judicially decreed; and (4.) In case of sentence of disqualification for the exercise of political privileges. 


34. Hondureans who accept employment from another Government, without the permission of Congress or of the Executive, lose their rights of citizenship. From this rule are excepted Hondureans who accept employment from the Governments of Central America, except in case of their rendering military service or accepting military appointments without the previous licence of the Executive Power. 85. The right of voting is not transferable, and is obligatory, and appertains to citizens in exercise of their rights. Suffrage is public and direct. The elections will be carried out in the form prescribed by law. 36. Only citizens in the exercise of their rights can qualify for election conformably to the law.

PART II.-GOVERNMENTAL DEPARTMENTS.

Chapter 6.- Of the Legislative Department, 
Section 1.-Concerning its Organization. 
37. The legislative power is exercised by a Chamber (" Congress") of Deputies, which will have the right of assembling in the capital 6f the Republic, every second year, from the 1st to the 15th January, without the necessity of an Edict of Convocation. Its Sessions will last for 60 days, capable of being prorogued, with power to close them sooner with the concurrence of the Executive. Extraordinary Sessions will also be held, when the Chamber may be convoked by the Executive; in which case it will occupy itself only with the business to consider which it is convoked. 38. A number of Deputies, not less than five, has the right to take measures to summon the remainder so as to form a Session of the House. Congress can "sit" and deliberate with two-thirds of the elected Deputies for a quorum, and, as a general rule, an absolute majority of votes is sufficient to carry a Resolution. 39. Deputies will be elected for four years, and may be re-elected indefinitely. At the end of the second year of the first period half must retire for re-election; the half to be decided by lot in Congress at the close of the Session. The successive retirements will take place by order of seniority. 40. To be elected Deputy, it is necessary to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, and to have attained the age of 25 years 41. The following are ineligible as Deputies:(1.) The Secretaries of State. (2.) Soldiers on full pay; and (3.) Political Governors and Administrators of Taxes, for the

department or electoral district in which they exercise their employment. 42. The Deputy is inviolable. At no time will he be held responsible for the schemes which, either by word of mouth or by writing, he may expound in the discharge of his mandate as legislator. 43. For the elections of Deputies to Congress the Territory of the Republic will be divided into electoral districts, which will consist of 10,000 inhabitants. Each district will elect a sitting Deputy and a substitute. But, whilst this division is being made, each Department will elect three sitting Deputies and two substitutes. The Departments of the Bahia Islands and the Mosquito Coast will elect each one sitting Deputy and one substitute. 
Section 2.-Attributes of Congress. 
44. The following are the attributes of Congress: In the Department of the Interior (Home Department). 
(1) To certify the election of members, and to approve or otherwise deal with their credentials. (2.) To summon the substitutes in case of the death-or legal disqualification of the sitting members. (3.) To accept the resignations which either may send in for causes legally verified. (4.) To regulate its interior management. (5.) To decree, interpret, reform, and abrogate laws. (6.) To create and suppress public offices, fix the salaries thereto, decree honours, and concede amnesties and pardons, general or individual, when the public welfare requires, or the petitioner has in his favour eminent services performed for the nation. (7.) To elect Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, and to accept, or refuse to accept, their resignations. (8.) To dispose of everything relating to the security and defence of the Republic, and to its progress and prosperity. (9.) To regulate the interior commerce. (10.) To proclaim the election of the President of the Republic, carried out according to law; to proceed to the election of President of the Republic in the case provided in Article 62; and to accept or refuse to accept the resignation of the President. (11.) To determine on the formation of an accusation against the President of the Republic, the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Secretaries of State, and the Diplomatic Agents.
In the Department of Foreign Affairs. 
45.-(1.) To provide what is necessary abroad for the defence and safety of the country. (2.) To declare war and make peace. (3.) To approve or disapprove the Treaties concluded with foreign nations. (4.) To regulate maritime and overland commerce. 
In the Department of the Treasury. 
46.-(1.) To approve or disapprove the account of public expenses. (2.) To fix, biennially, the budget of those expenses. (3.) To impose and abolish taxes. (4.) To contract national debts, regulate the payment of existing debts, and to decree loans. (5.) To fit out the principal ports; to create and abolish customhouses. (6.) To decree the weight, alloy, and mint of the National currency. Of the War Department. 47.-(1.) To approve or disapprove the declarations of state of siege made during its recess. (2.) To fix, biennially, the number of the land and maritime forces which are to be maintained. (3.) To approve or disapprove any declaration of war which the Executive Power may have made. (4.) To authorize the expedition of the National forces without the Republic, and to authorize the transit of foreign troops through, or their existence in, the Territory, preserving in every case the laws of neutrality. (5.) To declare the Republic, or any part thereof, in state of siege, in case of foreign aggression, of internal disturbance, or of the public tranquillity being menaced. 48. Congress may delegate to the Executive authority the power to legislate on questions of Police, the Treasury, War, Marine, Public Instruction, and Patronage. Section 3.-Concerning the Formation, Sanction, and Promulgation of Laws. 49. Laws may be introduced by any Member of Congress, by the President of the Republic, and by the Supreme Court of Justice, in matters relating to its jurisdiction. Deputies will present their

Bills in form of a written proposition, the President of the Republic by a Message, and the Supreme Court of Justice by means of a formal statement. 50. No Bill, except in the case of urgency voted by Congress, will be definitively voted except after three deliberations (three readings). Every proposal having for its object the declaration of urgency for a Law must be preceded by a statement of the motives on which such application for urgency is founded. 51. Every Bill, after having been discussed and approved by Congress, will pass to the Executive, which, in case of not objecting thereto, will give its sanction, and will have it promulgated as law. 52. When the Executive objects to sanction a Bill it will return it to Congress within 10 days, expressing the reasons on which it founds its disagreement. If within the said interval it does not object, the Bill will be held to have received its sanction, and will be promulgated as law. In the event of the Bill being returned, Congress will reconsider it, and if it is ratified by two-thirds of the votes given, it will again go before the Executive, and will become law. 53. When Congress votes a Bill at the end of the Session to which the Executive finds itself unable to grant its sanction, the Executive must at once notify the fact to Congress, in order that the Session may not be closed for 10 days, counted from the day of the date of the Bill; and in the event of this notice not being given, the Bill will be held to have been sanctioned. 54. In the event of a Bill being thrown out or not being ratified, it may not be reintroduced in the same Session, or until the following Parliament. 55. In the event of the Executive returning a Bill to Congress, the votes for its ratification will be by name, and must be entered on the Minutes of the day. 56. The sanction of the Executive is not necessary to the following Acts or Resolutions:(1.) In the elections which Congress may make or publish, and the resignations which it may accept or refuse to accept. (2.) In the determination it may come to with the object of impeachment. (3.) In the rules it may make for its internal management. 57. Every Bill approved by Congress will be copied in duplicate, and will pass to the Executive with this formula: "To the Executive Power." If the Executive Power does not approve it, it will be returned to Congress with this formula: "Let it return to the National Congress." 58. The Executive having received a Bill, of which it does not disapprove, will sanction it, returning one copy to Congress and

reserving the other in order to promulgate it as law, within a period of 10 days. 59. The promulgation of the law will be made with this formula: "The President of the Republic of Honduras to the inhabitants, know: That the National Congress has ordained the following:" [Here follow the seal and signatures.] "Therefore, let it be put in execution." 
Chapter 7.-Concerning the Executive Department. 
Section 1.-Concerning its Organization. 60. The Executive Power is exercised by a citizen, who is denominated "President of the Republic." 61. The President of the Republic must be a native of Honduras, citizen in the exercise of his rights, and must have attained the age of 30 years. 62. The President of the Republic is elected popularly and his election ratified by Congress, as has been prescribed. But when, after a scrutiny of votes, no one is found to have an absolute majority, Congress is to proceed to elect one from the three candidates who have obtained the greatest number of votes. In this case the voting will be public and by name, and the election must be concluded in one single Session. 63. The Constitutional term during which the President will exercise his functions will be four years, and he may be re-elected for the following term. In order to be elected for a third term a period of four years must elapse between the second and third terms. The Presidential term of office commences on the 1st February in the year of the change. 61. The President of the Republic has, for the dispatch of affairs, one or more Secretaries of State, and appoints them to their respective Departments. 65. A Secretary of State must have attained the age of 25 years, and must be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 66. The Secretary of State countersigns the Decrees of the President of the Republic, without which requisite they are not legal; but he exercises no authority on his own sole account. He is responsible for the Decrees which he legalizes, and conjointly with his colleagues for those on which he decides in concert with them, except in the event of his protesting. 67. The Secretaries of State will present to Congress, at the commencement of its ordinary Sessions, detailed and verified Report of the acts of the Executive, in each of their respective branches of the Public Administration. These Reports will serve the Congress
as a basis on which it may form a judgment of the conduct of the Executive in every matter which it is authorized by the Constitution to approve or disapprove. 68. The Secretaries of State must present to Congress biennially the estimate of expenses of their respective Departments, and an account of the expenditure of the funds voted in the previous biennial Session. 69. The Secretaries of State may attend the Sessions of Congress and take part in the debates, but not vote. They must reply to the interpellations which any Deputy may address to them on matters which Congress is competent to discuss, excepting those relating to war or to foreign affairs, when the President of the Republic considers reserve necessary. 70. When the President of the Republic commands in person a military force, or when, on account of illness, absence from the Territory, or other grave motive, he is unable to exercise his office, he will elect as his substitute the Council of Secretaries of State, or one of the Secretaries of State, whilst the impediment exists. In the event of the death of the President, the acceptance of his resignation, or other class of absolute incapacity which could not cease before the expiration of the remainder of the four years of his' term of office, the Secretary for War will act as substitute for the President of the Republic, being compelled, within a peremptory period of 10 days, to convoke the population by means of a Decree, that they may elect a President conformably to the provisions of the Constitution. The President elected in consequence will remain in office for four years. 

Section 2.-Concerning the Attributes of the Executive Power. 
71. The President of the Republic is the Supreme Head of the .Nation, has in his charge the general administration of the country, and his attributes are the following:-
In the Department of the Interior.

72.-(1.) To carry out and provide for the execution of the laws, dispatching the Decrees and Orders conducive to that object, being careful not to alter their spirit, with the exceptions provided by law. (2.) To nominate the Judges of the Courts of Appeal, on the representation of the Supreme Court of Justice and Justices of the Peace, in the form prescribed by law. (3.) To accept, during the recess of Congress, the resignations of the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, and in that case to appoint, ad interim, the Judges who are to replace them. He will

make appointments in the same way in cases of death or the absolute incapacity of individual members of the Supreme Court of Justice. (4.) To appoint the officials of the Executive Department in accordance with the law. (5.) To watch over the prompt and complete administration of justice, and over the official conduct of the employees of this branch. (6.) To remove and dismiss employees of his independent volition. (7.) To grant, during the recess of Congress, amnesties and pardons, general or individual, when the public good requires, or the petitioner has in his favour important services rendered to the nation. (8.) To commute capital punishment when the Superior Tribunal which pronounces the sentence condemning the convict to execution recommends the commutation of the sentence, expressing this recommendation in the sentence itself, and for any of the causes indicated by the law. (9.) To grant to the employ6s leave of absence, superannuation, retirement, and the possession of Government pawn-shops, in accordance with the laws. (10.) To prorogue the ordinary Sessions of Congress, and to convoke it to Extraordinary Sessions when a matter of important national interest renders it necessary. (11.) To give an account to Congress, at the opening of its ordinary Sessions, of the general state of the Public Administration, and of the use which he may have made of the powers which had been delegated to him. 

In the Department of Foreign Affairs. 73.-(1.) To conclude and sign Treaties of Peace, of Commerce, of Navigation, of Alliance, of Neutrality, and any other negotiations required for the maintenance and cultivation of good international relations; and (2.) To nominate the Diplomatic and Consular Agents of the Republic, to receive the Ministers, and sanction the appointment of the Consuls of foreign nations. 
In the Treasury Department. 74.-(1.) To cause the income of the Republic to be collected and administered, and decree the application thereof in accordance with the law; and (2.) In cases of invasion or rebellion, if the resources of the Treasury are not sufficient, to decree an extraordinary general tax, of the application of which he shall give an account to Congress in its next Session,
 In the War Department.

75.-(1.) The President is the Commandant - General and General-in-chief of the sea and land forces of the Republic. (2.) He appoints all the military officials. He alone confers the steps up to that of full Colonel; confers those of General of Brigade or of Division with the consent of Congress ; and he may confer them without this requisite on the field of battle. (3.) He disposes of the military forces, and is charged with their organization and distribution according to the necessities of the State. (4.) He declares war during the recess of Congress, and grants letters of marque and letters of reprisal. (5.) He declares, during the recess of Congress, the Republic, or part of the Republic, in a state of siege, in cases of foreign aggression, of interior disturbance, or of the tranquillity of the country being threatened.

Chapter 8.-concerning the Judicial Department.
76. The judicial power of the Republic is exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, composed of five Judges, and by the superior and inferior Tribunals which the law may establish. 77. In order to be a Judge of the Supreme Court of Justice it is necessary to be citizen in exercise of his rights, to have attained the age of 25 years, and to be Barrister of the Republic. 78. The right to judge and execute justice appertains exclusively to the Tribunals of Justice. Neither Congress nor the President of the Republic can in any case exercise judicial functions, nor remove to a higher Court cases which are pending. No public power can revive cases which have been adjudicated upon. 79. The Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice will hold their office four years, to be prolonged by right until the appointment of their successors. 80. The law regulates the organization and attributions of the Tribunals. 81. The administration of justice will be gratuitous in the Republic.

Chapter 9 .- Concerning Municipal Government
82. Places having at least 500 inhabitants may be constituted Municipalities. 8a. The Municipality is autonomous, and will be represented by

a Municipal Council, elected directly by the people. The number, position, and attributes of the Municipal Councillors will be determined by a special Law. 84. The attributes of the Municipal Councils are limited to the local Government of their respective administrative areas. 
Temporary Provision. 
85. Until the scale of punishments is decreed, capital punishment may be inflicted in the cases prescribed by law; and Final Article. This Constitution will commence to take effect on the 1st December of this current year. Given in the city of Tegucigalpa, on the 1st November, 1880, the 60th year of the Independence of Central America. 
MANUEL GAMERO, President, Deputy for the Department of El Paraiso. 
JOSE MANUEL ZELAYA, Vice - President, Deputy for the Department of Olancho. [Here follow the signatures of 28 Deputies] Government House, Tegucigalpa, November 1, 1880. Let it be promulgated. MARCO AURELIO SOTO. [Here follow the signatures of three Secretaries of State.]

