CONSTITUTION OF 14 OCTOBER 1894
[PREAMBLE. ]

We, the representatives of the people of Honduras, having assembled to formulate the fundamental law of the nation, declare and sanction the following Political Constitution. 
TITLE I.-THE NATION.

ARTICLE 1. Honduras is a State disjoined from the Republic of Central America. In consequence, it recognizes as a most pressing necessity its reunion with the other States of the dissolved Republic. To this effect the legislative power is authorized to definitively ratify the treaties which aim to accomplish this reunion with one or more of the States of the old Federation. ART. 2. Honduras is a free, sovereign and independent nation. ART. 3. The national sovereignty resides essentially in the universality of Hondurans.

ART. 4. All public power emanates from the people. The functionaries of the State have no further authority than that expressly given to them by law. All acts executed by them outside of the law are null. ART. 5. The limits of Honduras and its territorial divisions shall be determined by law.
TITLE ART.

II.-Hondurans

6. Hondurans are either natives or naturalized. 7. The following are natives: 1. Those who are born in Honduras of Honduran parents. 2. Children born in Honduras of foreigners domiciled there and children of a Honduran father or mother born abroad who should choose Honduran nationality. The provisions of the last paragraph may be modified by treaty, provided there is reciprocity. ART. 8. Children, of the other Republics of Central America who declare before the highest political departmental authorities their desire to become Hondurans are considered as natives. ART. 9. The following are naturalized: 1. Spanish-Americans who have resided one year in the country and who declare, before the proper authority, their desire to be naturalized therein. 2. Other foreigners -who have resided two years in the country and who declare, before the aforesaid authority, their desire to be naturalized therein. 3. Those who obtain naturalization papers from the authority designated by the law.


TITLE III.-FOREIGNERS.

ART. 10. The Republic of Honduras is a sacred asylum for all who may take refuge in its territory. ART. 11. Foreigners, from the moment of their arrival in the territory of the Republic, are obliged to respect the authorities and to observe the laws. ART. 12. Foreigners enjoy in Honduras all the civil rights of Hondurans. ART. 13. They may acquire every kind of property in the country: but with regard to their property, they shall be subject to all the ordinary taxes and to those extraordinary taxes of a general character to which Hondurans are liable. ART. 14. They shall not present claims or demand any indemnity from the State except in such cases and in such form as Hondurans may do so. 

ART. 15. Foreigners shall not have recourse to diplomatic intervention except in cases of denial of justice. For this purpose a judicial decision unfavorable to the claimant is not understood to be a denial of justice. If, in contravention of this provision, they do not terminate their claims in an amicable manner and cause injury to the country, they shall forfeit the right to live therein. ART. 16. Extradition shall be granted only by virtue of a law or of treaties, for serious common crimes; never for political crimes, even if, in consequence of the latter, a common crime should ensue. ART. 17. The laws shall establish the form and the cases in which a foreigner may be denied entry into the territory of the nation, or his expulsion ordered, because of his being considered pernicious. ART. 18. Laws and treaties shall define the use of these guarantees, without the power to diminish or alter them. ART. 19. The provisions of this title do not modify the treaties now existing between Honduras and other nations.

TITLE IV.-CITIZENs. 
ART. 20. All Hondurans over 21 years of age, and those over 18 who are married or know how to read and write, are citizens. ART. 21. The following are the rights of -the citizen: To vote, to apply for public offices and to possess and carry arms, all in accordance with the law. ART. 21. The rights of citizenship are suspended: 1. By an order for imprisonment or a declaration that there are grounds for indictment. 2. By vagrancy legally established. 3. By disorder of the metal faculties judicially established. 4. By a sentence depriving the subject of political rights, during the service of such sentence. 5. By having been declared a fraudulent debtor, until judicial rehabilitation is obtained. 6. By a sentence which imposes a penalty higher than a correctional penalty. 7. By accepting employment from foreign States without permission of the proper authorities. The Republics of Central America are not considered foreign States. ART. 23. Active suffrage can not be renounced and is obligatory to all citizens. ART. 24. Suffrage shall be direct and secret. Elections shall be carried out in the form prescribed by law, and the law shall give a corresponding representation to minorities. ART. 25. Only citizens over 21 years of age, who are in the exercise of their rights, can qualify for election.

ART. 26. The Constitution guarantees to all the inhabitants of Honduras, whether nationals or foreigners, the inviolability of human life, individual security, liberty, equality and property rights.

INVIOLABILITY OF HUMAN L1FE.

ART.27. Capital punishment is absolutely abolished in Honduras.

INDIVIDUAL SECURITY.

ART. 28. The Constitution recognizes the guarantee of habeas corpus. Consequently every person illegally detained, or any other person in his name, has the right to have recourse to the court, verbally or in writing, demanding the production of the person. ART. 29. Every person has the right to ask for protection against any attempt or arbitrary proceedings of which he may be a victim, and to make effective the exercise of all the guarantees which this Constitution establishes, when he has been wrongfully restrained in the enjoyment thereof, by law or by the acts of any public authority, agent or functionary. ART. 30. A warrant of arrest which does not emanate from the competent authority, or which has been issued without the legal formalities, is illegal. ART. 31. Detention for the purpose of inquiry shall not exceed six days. ART. 32. The solitary confinement of the person detained shall not exceed 24 hours. ART. 33. No order for imprisonment may be made without full proof before the arrest that a crime has been committed which is punishable with a penalty higher than a correctional penalty and without at least reasonable presumption as to who the author is. ART. 34. Imprisonment or arrest is permitted, through sentence or judicial order, in such cases and for such periods as are provided by the law. The judicial order shall not be for a period exceeding 30 days. ART. 35. An offender in flagrante delicto may be apprehended by any person for the purpose of handing him over immediately to the authority having the right to arrest. ART. 36. No one may be imprisoned or detained except in such places as the law determines.
ART.37. Even with a warrant for imprisonment, no one can be taken to prison, or detained therein, if he furnishes sufficient bail, when a greater penalty than three years is not applicable for the offense. 

ART.38. No one may be judged by special commissions or by judges other than those designated by the law. ART. 39. Imprisonment for debts is forbidden except in cases of fraud. ART. 40. The right of defense is inviolable. ART. 41. In criminal cases no one can be obliged to give evidence against himself or against his spouse or relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity. ART. 42. No one may be molested or prosecuted on account of his opinions. Private actions which do not interfere with morality or public order, or which do not injure third parties, will always be beyond the action of the law. ART. 43. Whipping or beating with cudgels and all kinds of torture are absolutely forbidden. Unnecessary imprisonment and all undue rigor are also forbidden. ART. 44. The dwelling of every individual is a sacred asylum which shall not be forcibly entered except by the authorities in the following cases: 1. To take out of it a criminal surprised in flagrante delicto. 2. When an offense is committed inside of the dwelling; when some scandalous disturbance requiring prompt remedy has taken place therein, or when so requested from the interior of the house. 3. In case of fire, earthquake, flood, epidemic or any other analogous emergency. 4. To release a person unlawfully sequestered. 5. To remove objects sought by virtue of a process, provided there is at least partial proof of the existence of said objects, or to execute a judicial order legally issued. 6. To arrest parties whose imprisonment or detention has been ordered, provided there is at least partial proof that they are concealed in the house to be forcibly entered. In the two cases last mentioned the forcible entry shall not take place without the written order of the competent authority. ART. 45. When the dwelling place to be entered is not the domicile of the party pursued, the authority or its agents shall previously ask the permission of the tenant. ART. 46. The forcible entry of a domicile in those cases which require a written order shall not be made between the hours of seven o'clock in the evening and six o'clock in the morning. ART. 47. Private correspondence by letter or telegram, private papers and commercial books are inviolable. In no case shall the executive power or the agents thereof intercept, open or detain private letters or telegrams. Correspondence intercepted, whether at post-offices or any other place, shall not be admitted in evidence. 


ART. 48. Private correspondence, papers and books shall only be seized by order of a competent court in the cases, whether civil or criminal, which the law may determine; said correspondence must be examined in the presence of the person possessing it, or if absent, in the presence of two witnesses, and those papers which have no bearing upon the matter under investigation shall be returned. ART. 49. The enactment of laws providing for proscription, confiscation or the establishment of infamous or perpetual penalties is hereby forbidden. The duration of the penalties shall not exceed fifteen years. ART. 50. Laws shall not have retroactive effect except in criminal cases, where the new law is favorable to the delinquent. ART. 51. The police force shall only be entrusted to the civil authorities. ART. 52. No penalty higher than correctional shall be imposed except after a jury has found the delinquent guilty.
LIBERTY.

ART.53. A slave who enters on the territory of Honduras becomes Slave traffic is a crime. ART. 54. The free exercise of all religions, limited only by morality and public order, is guaranteed. ART. 55. The civil status of persons shall not be subject to any specified religious belief. ART. 56. The expression of thought, written or spoken, is free, and the law shall not restrict it. Neither shall the law prevent the circulation of national or foreign printed matter. Offenses committed through the press shall be previously qualified by the jury. ART. 57. Free education is guaranteed. Education supported by public funds shall be laical, and primary education shall be also gratuitous, obligatory and subsidized by the State. The law shall regulate education without restricting its liberty or the independence of its professors. ART. 58. The liberty of meeting unarmed and of forming associations for any legal object is guaranteed. The establishment of any kind of monastic associations is forbidden. ART. 59. All industries are free. Only spirits, gunpowder, saltpeter and tobacco can be made a monopoly for the benefit of the nation. ART. 60. Monopolies, privileges and concessions can only be established for a limited time for the purpose of stimulating the introduction or improvement of new industries, colonization or emigration, institution of credit and the opening up of means of communication. 


ART.61. Every one is at liberty to dispose of his property, in accordance with the civil law, by sale, donation, will or any other legal title. ART. 62. Entails and all institutions in favor of religious establishments are prohibited. 63. Any person or collection of persons has the right to address petitions to the legally established authorities for their decision and to be informed thereof. ART. 64. Every one is at liberty to enter, remain in, traverse and quit the territory of the nation without a passport.

EQUALITY.

ART.65. In law there are no charters or personal privileges. The ministers of the different religious societies shall not hold public offices. ART. 66. Proportionality shall be the basis of direct taxation.

PROPERTY.

ART. 67. No one shall be deprived of his property except by virtue of a law or of a sentence founded on law. Expropriation, when necessary or for public utility, must be authorized by law or by a sentence founded on law, and shall not take place without previous compensation. In case of war previous compensation is not indispensable. ART. 68. All authors or inventors enjoy the exclusive ownership of their work or inventions for such period as the law determines. ART. 69. The right of recovery of confiscated property prescribes after fifty years.

ART. 70. Congress alone shall impose national taxes.
ART. 71. No personal service can be exacted except by virtue of the law or a sentence founded on law.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.

ART. 72. The enumeration of rights and guarantees made in this Constitution does not exclude other rights and guarantees not enumerated but arising from the principle of sovereignty of the people and of the republican form of government. ART. 73. The laws which regulate the exercise of these guarantees shall become ineffective in so far as they diminish, restrict or alter them. ART. 14. In case of external war a state of siege may be declared in the whole Republic or any part thereof. The state of siege will 

last as long as the circumstances which caused it may require: but shall not exceed sixty days without a fresh declaration, and shall never alter the guarantees as set forth in Articles 27, 43 and 49. The state of siege shall also be declared in case of disturbances of the public peace in the interior, being limited to the place or to the territory where disturbances of the order exist, and may be extended if so required for the security of the Republic. ART. 75. In case of an epidemic, sanitary regulations may be issued in opposition to or in restriction of the guarantees contained in Articles 44, 47, in so far as relates to the detention of correspondence, 58, 64 and 71.

TITLE VI.-THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT.

ART. 76. The government of Honduras is republican, democratic and representative. It is exercised by three independent powers: Legislative, executive and judicial. ART. 77. None of the constituted powers shall perform any acts altering the established form of Government or impairing the integrity of the territory or the national sovereignty. 

TITLE VII.-THE LEGISLATIVE POWER
ART. 78. The legislative power is exercised by a Congress of Deputies which will assemble in the capital of the Republic on the first of January of each year without need of previous convocation. ART. 79. The sessions of Congress shall last sixty days and may be extended for forty days more, when so required by matters of actual interest. ART. 80. Congress shall also hold extraordinary sessions when convoked by the executive, in which case it will occupy itself solely with the business stated in the decree convoking it. ART. 81. After Congress has been installed in the capital, it may resolve to move to another place. ART. 82. On the twenty-first day of December of each year the deputies shall assemble in preparatory meetings, and with the concurrence of five at least they shall organize the directory, in order to issue the necessary orders for the installation of Congress. ART. 83. Two thirds of the members composing Congress shall be sufficient to constitute a quorum. ART. 84. Five deputies may convoke an extraordinary session of Congress at any place in the Republic, whenever the executive has prevented its sessions or has dissolved them. ART. 85. Deputies shall be elected for four years and may be re-elected indefinitely. Every two years they shall be renewed by halves. The first renewal shall be made by lot, and the subsequent ones by order of seniority. 
ART.86. The following shall not be elected deputies: 1. The secretaries and under-secretaries of State. 2. The employees of the executive power who exercise general or departmental jurisdiction. 3. Soldiers in service. 4. Contractors for public works or services paid for with funds of the State, and those who by reason of said contracts may have claims in their own interest. 5. Debtors in arrears of the public treasury, and those who have pending accounts for the administration of its funds. 6. The relatives of the President of the Republic within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity. ART. 87. Deputies from the day of their election shall enjoy the following prerogatives: 1. Personal immunity from being accused or sentenced without previous declaration of Congress to the effect that they may be prosecuted. 2. No civil action shall be brought against them from thirty days before, or until fifteen days after, the ordinary or extraordinary sessions of Congress, except in case of counter-claim. 3. Not to be subject to military service without their consent from the time of election until the end of their term of office. 4. Not to be banished from the Republic or held in confinement during the period for which they have been elected. 5. Not to be responsible for their opinions or their parliamentary initiative. ART. 88. Deputies are not obliged to accept employment from the executive. Should they voluntarily accept any of the offices enumerated in Article 86, they shall ipso facto cease to be deputies and their successor shall be elected. ART. 89. The election of deputies to Congress shall take place on the basis of one sitting deputy and one substitute for every ten thousand inhabitants. In the event of there being fractions, their representation shall be determined by law.

ART. TITLE VIII.-THE ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER.

90. The following attributions belong to Congress: 1. To open and close its sessions, certify the elections of its members upon the presentation of their credentials and receive their promise according to law. 2. To summon the respective substitutes in case of the absolute non-attendance or legal disqualification of the sitting member and order the filling of the vacancies which may occur. 3. To accept the resignation of its members for legal reasons duly approved. 
4. To regulate its internal management. 5. To decree, interpret, reform and abrogate laws. 6. To create and suppress public offices, provide pensions and decree honors. 7. To grant pardons and amnesties and commute sentences. 8. To provide for everything relative to the security and defense of the Republic. 9. To scrutinize the votes for the President and the Vice-President of the Republic and the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and declare the election of those citizens who have obtained an absolute majority. 10. In case of there being no absolute majority, to elect the President, Vice-President and magistrates from among the three citizens who have obtained for each office the greatest number of popular votes. 11; When several elections concur in a single individual, preference shall be determined in the following order: 1. President; 2. Vice-President; 3. deputy; 4. magistrate. The election as a sitting member has preference over that of substitute. 12. To receive the constitutional promise from the public officials it may elect or declare elected and to accept or refuse their resignations. 13. To designate every year three citizens to exercise the executive power in the order of their election in cases of vacancy of the Presidency or Vice-Presidency of the Republic, provided for in the Constitution. 14. To declare that there are grounds for impeachment of the President, the Vice-President, deputies, magistrates of the Supreme Court, secretaries of State and diplomatic agents during the term of their offices. 15. To change the residence of the supreme powers for grave reasons. 16. To decree rewards and grant temporary privileges to authors and inventors and to such as introduce or improve new industries of general utility. 17. To decree subsidies to promote new industries or improve existing ones. 18. To grant subventions for purposes of public utility. 19. To grant or refuse permission to Hondurans to accept employment from other nations. 20. To approve or disapprove the conduct of the executive. 21. To approve, modify or disapprove the contracts entered into by the executive in the cases provided for in Article 60, or when their effect has to be extended to the following presidential term.

22. To approve, modify or disapprove the treaties concluded with other nations. 23. To regulate land and maritime commerce. 24. To approve or disapprove the accounts of public expenditures. 25. To fix annually the budget of expenditures, taking the probable revenues as a basis thereof. 26. To levy taxes. 27. To regulate the payment of the national debt. 28. To decree the alienation of national property or its application to public uses. 29. To contract loans. 30. To open ports and to create and suppress custom-houses. 31. To decree the weight, fineness and type of national currency. 32. To declare war and conclude peace. 33. To fix in each ordinary session the number of the forces of the permanent army. 34. To allow or forbid the passage of troops belonging to another country through the territory of the Republic. 3. To declare the Republic or any part thereof in a state of siege in accordance with the law. 36. To confer the rank of general of brigade or division on the recommendation of the executive. 37. To grant naturalization papers to foreigners, 38. To appoint the members of the Court of Accounts and the Fiscal General of the Treasury. ART. 91. The legislative power shall not settle or declare the civil status of persons or grant academic or literary degrees. ART. 92. The faculties of the legislative power, with the exception of those which refer to the installation of high public officials in office, can not be delegated.

TITLE IX-THE FORMATION, SANCTION AND PROMULGATION OF THE LAW.

ART. 93. Only the deputies, the President of the Republic through the secretaries of State and the Supreme Court of Justice in matters of its competence can introduce laws. ART. 94. No bill shall be definitively voted until it has been considered three times on separate days except in cases of urgency supported by two thirds of the votes. Every proposal having for its object to declare the urgency of a law must be preceded by a statement of the motives on which it is founded.

ART. 95. Every bill, as soon as it is approved by Congress, shall be dispatched to the executive, at the latest, within three days after it has been passed, so that the executive may sanction it and may cause it to be promulgated as law. ART. 96. The promulgation of a law shall be effected with the following formula: "Therefore, let it be carried out." ART. 97. Should the executive power find reasons for not sanctioning the bill, it shall be returned to Congress within ten days with the formula, "Return to Congress," setting forth the reasons upon which it bases its disapproval. If, within the said period it does not object, the bill shall be held to be sanctioned and shall be promulgated as law. Should the executive return the bill, Congress shall subject it to a reconsideration; and if it is ratified by two thirds of the votes, it shall be dispatched again to the executive with this formula: "Ratified constitutionally ": and the executive shall publish it without delay. ART. 98. If Congress votes a bill at the end of its sessions which the executive considers advisable not to sanction, the latter is obliged immediately to inform Congress, so that it may remain assembled for ten days beginning from the day the executive received the bill; and should this not be done, the law will be considered as sanctioned. ART. 99. The sanction of the executive is not necessary for the following acts or resolutions: 1. For elections made or declared by Congress, or for resignations accepted or refused by it. 2. For declarations that there are grounds for indictment. 3. For the budget law. 4. For decrees relating to the conduct of the executive. 5. For the rules it may form for its internal management. 6. For resolutions to temporarily change its residence to some other place and to suspend or extend its sessions. 7. For treaties or contracts which Congress disapproves. ART. 100. Whenever a bill not introduced by the Supreme Court of Justice has for its object the reformation or abrogation of any of the provisions contained in the Codes of the Republic, it shall not be discussed without hearing first the opinion of that tribunal. The court shall publish its report within such period as Congress may designate. This provision does not extend to laws of political, economic or administrative character.

TITLE X-THE EXECUTIVE POWER

ART. 101. The executive power is exercised by a citizen who is called President of the Republic; in default thereof, by a Vice-President, and in default of the latter, by one of the Designates in the order of their appointment. ART. 102. The President, the Vice-President and the Designate must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, over 21 years of age and natives of Honduras. ART. 103. The President and Vice-President shall be elected by popular and direct vote, and their election shall be declared by Congress, as is prescribed. ART. 104. The presidential term shall be for four years and shall commence on 1 February. A citizen who has proprietorially exercised the Presidency shall not be re-elected nor be elected Vice-President for the following term. Neither shall his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity be elected President or Vice-President. ART. 105. No citizen who has occupied the constitutional Presidency during the last six months of the presidential term, nor his relatives within the degrees stated in the foregoing article, shall be elected President. ART. 106. In case of absolute default of the President of the Republic, the executive power shall be in charge of the Vice-President; and in default of the latter, the corresponding Designates in the order of their election. The Designate shall finish out the presidential term, should such vacancy occur within the last year; but should it occur before the first three years have elapsed, a new presidential election must be proceeded with one month after the vacancy has occurred. In case of temporary disability, the functions of the President shall be exercised by the Vice-President and the Designates in the order of their election. ART. 107. Until the person designated by law has taken charge of the Presidency, the executive power shall be exercised by the Council of Ministers, and the latter shall immediately call the new official to give him charge of office, if Congress has not assembled. 

TILE XI.-THE DUTIES AND ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER

ART. 108. The President of the Republic has the general administration of the country. His attributions are: 1. To exercise command as chief of the land and naval forces. 2. To defend the independence and the honor of the nation, and the integrity of its territory. 3. To carry out and provide for the fulfillment of the laws, issuing for this purpose the necessary decrees and orders without altering their spirit.
4. To appoint the secretaries and under-secretaries of State and the other officials of the executive department, in accordance with the law. 5. To preserve the internal peace and security of the Republic, and to repel all external attack or aggression. 6. To give to the officials of the judicial power the force and assistance which they may require to make their decisions effective. 7. To remove officials of his own free appointment. 8. To see that all officials of the Republic fulfill the duties which are imposed upon them by law, without interfering in the exercise of their functions. 9. To grant amnesties, whenever public convenience demands it. during the recess of Congress. 10. To commute sentences in accordance with the law during the recess of Congress. 11. To convoke Congress to extraordinary sessions or to propose the prorogation of the ordinary ones. 12. To declare war and make peace and to permit or forbid the passage of troops of another country through the territory of the Republic, when circumstances do not permit the assembling of Congress to decide the matter. 13. To submit through the respective secretaries of State, within the first eight days after the assembling of Congress, a detailed report or memorial of all the branches of the administration. 14. To conclude treaties and any other diplomatic negotiations, submitting them to the ratification of Congress at the next session. 15. To direct foreign relations, to appoint diplomatic and consular agents of the Republic, and to receive ministers and admit consuls of foreign nations. 16. To cause the revenue of the State to be collected and to regulate the disposal thereof in accordance with the law. 17. In case of invasion or rebellion, if the resources of the' State should be insufficient, to decree a general and proportional loan, voluntary or forced, of the disposal of which he shall give an account to Congress at the next session. 18. To confer military grades from sub-lieutenant to colonel and those of general of brigade and division on the field of battle to military officers who distinguish themselves by their conduct; submitting the appointments of generals to the approval of Congress at its next session. 19. To dispose of the military forces and to organize and distribute them in accordance with the law as the necessities of the Republic may require. 20. To grant letters of marque and reprisal. 

21. To declare the Republic or a part thereof in a state of siege in accordance with the law during the recess of Congress, with the obligation of rendering an account to Congress, at its first meeting, of the use that he may have made of this power. 22. To grant naturalization papers in accordance with the law. 23. To grant or deny permission to Hondurans, during the recess of Congress, to accept employment from another nation. 24. To direct and promote public instruction, and to provide for the education of the people. 25. To sanction the laws and exercise the right of veto when necessary, and to promulgate without delay those legislative enactments which do not require the sanction of the executive. 26. To order, during the recess of Congress, the filling of vacancies among the deputies and the magistrates of the Supreme Court in accordance with the law, at the latest one month after the vacancies have occurred. 27. To appoint ad interim, during the recess of Congress. the members of the Court of Accounts and the Fiscal General of the Treasury. 28. To publish monthly the report of receipts and expenditures of the public revenues. 29. To keep watch on the legal exactness of the currency, and to look after the uniformity of weights and measures. 30. To exercise the supreme command of the police force. ART. 109. The orders of the executive power which do not emanate from the corresponding ministry shall not be obeyed. The President and the ministers shall be jointly responsible for the orders they may issue in contravention of the Constitution and the laws. ART. 110. Whenever the President of the Republic may consider it advisable to place himself at the head of the army, he shall entrust the executive power to the citizen who must replace him under the Constitution; and he shall become invested only with the character of General-in-Chief and with the attributions of Commanding General.

TITLE XII.—THE SECRETARIES OF STATE.

ART. 111. There shall be from three to six secretaries of State, and the executive shall apportion between them the transaction of business. ART. 112. The secretaries of State must be native or naturalized Hondurans and over 21 years of age. ART. 113. The following shall not be secretaries of State: Contractors of public works or services who are to be paid by the nation; those who by reason of said contracts may hold claims for their own

interests; debtors of the public treasury, and those who have accounts pending in favor of the latter, for administration of funds. ART. 114. The secretaries of State may assist at the deliberation, of Congress without the right to vote, and they must attend whenever they are called, and answer the interpellations which any deputy may make to them in regard to administrative matters, excepting those of the Departments of War and of Foreign Relations, when they consider it necessary to maintain reserve, until Congress orders them to answer. ART. 115. The under-secretaries of State must have the same qualifications as the secretaries, and they shall substitute the latter by ministration of the law. 

TITLE XIII.-THE JUDICIAL POWER.

ART. 116. The judicial power of the Republic shall be exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice composed of five magistrates, who shall reside at the capital, and by the inferior courts and judges which the law establishes. ART. 117. To be a magistrate it is required to-be a lawyer and over 25 years of age. ART. 118. Magistrates of the Supreme Court shall be elected by the people, and may be re-elected. ART. 119. Three substitute magistrates shall likewise be elected, who shall substitute for the sitting magistrates, and must have the same qualifications as the latter. In case the vacancy is absolute, the executive power shall issue a call for elections to fill the place of the sitting magistrate, and the election shall be declared by the Supreme Court. ART. 120. The Supreme Court of Justice shall appoint the Magistrates of the Courts of Appeals, the departmental and sectional inferior judges and the officials of the public ministry in accordance with the law. The justices of the peace shall be elected by popular vote in the respective municipal districts. ART. 121. Persons who are related within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity shall not be magistrates or judges in the same tribunal. If two or more persons related within said degrees are elected, the one obtaining the highest number of votes shall be given preference, and in case of equal number of votes, the one who is the senior lawyer shall be preferred. The election of the others shall be replaced. ART. 122. The term of office of magistrates, departmental or sectional judges and officials of the public ministry shall be four years and they shall take possession of their posts on 1 February. 
ART. 123. The Supreme Court shall accept or refuse the resignations of the officials of its appointment, and shall grant leave of absence both to the latter and to its own members. Departmental and sectional judges shall accept or refuse the resignations and grant leave of absence to the justices of the peace. ART. 124. The law shall regulate the organization and attributions of the tribunals of justice. ART. 125. The power to judge and to carry judgments into effect is vested in the courts and other tribunals of justice. It is their business to apply the laws in concrete cases legally brought before them, and to refuse to carry them out when they are contrary to the Constitution. ART. 126. A jury is established in those places where there are departmental or sectional judges who shall sit in all criminal cases which must be heard before a court of record. The law shall regulate this institution. ART. 127. The Supreme Court of Justice, in addition to the attributions conferred upon it by law, shall exercise the following attributions: 1. To formulate its internal regulations. 2. To take cognizance of official and common offenses, committed by high public officials, when Congress has declared that there are grounds for their indictment. 3. To authorize the lawyers and notaries, licensed within or outside of the Republic, to exercise their profession, with the exceptions established in the treaties, and to suspend them in accordance with the law. 4. To declare that there are grounds for impeachment of the members of the Court of Accounts, of the Fiscal General of the Treasury and of the principal national and departmental officials which the law may determine, for offenses committed by them in the discharge of their duties. 5. To take cognizance of prize cases, extradition cases and other cases which should be judged in accordance with international law. ART. 128. Direct proceedings may also be established before the Supreme Court of Justice, against the constitutionality of a law in regard to matters not within the jurisdiction of the courts, by any person whose legal rights may be injured by reason of the application of that law in a concrete case. The law shall regulate the use of this recourse. ART. 129. The administration of justice in the Republic is gratuitous. ART. 130. The members of the courts of justice shall not, during their term of office, hold any other office carrying jurisdictional powers.

ART. 131. Courts of justice may demand the assistance of the armed forces for the enforcement of their decrees, and should this be denied them, or in case it is not available, they may require such assistance from the citizens. The public official who should unduly refuse to give assistance shall incur liability. ART. 132. No person having the free administration of his property may be deprived of the right to put an end to his civil cases through a compromise or arbitration. ART. 133. The same judge shall not act in his official capacity in different stages of the same case. ART. 134. No power or authority shall order pending suits to be moved to its jurisdiction nor reopen cases which have terminated.

TITLE XIV.-THE BUDGET.

ART. 135. The budget shall be voted by Congress according to the bill presented by the executive power. ART. 136. The bill for the budget shall be presented by the respective minister, within a fortnight after Congress is convened. ART. 137. All expenditures made outside of the law are illegal, and, in case of failure to comply with their respective duties, the President, the respective minister, the members of the Court of Accounts, and the employees who intervened in the matter shall be jointly responsible for the amount expended. ART. 138. The budget of the ordinary expenditures of the public administration shall not exceed the probable receipts estimated by the national Congress.

TITLE XV.-THE PUBLIC TREASURY.

ART.139. The following form the public treasury of the nation. 1. All its real and movable property. 2. Any sums to its credit. 3. The product of the duties, taxes and imposts. ART. 140. The executive power shall not enter into contracts of importance which may compromise the national treasury without the previous publication of the proposal in the official journal and the reception of public bids. Contracts which are made for the purpose of providing for the needs of war, and those which, from their nature, can only be entered with certain persons, are excepted. ART. 141. In order to fiscalize the administration of the national treasury, there will be a Higher Auditorship or Superior Court of Accounts whose attributions shall be to examine, approve or disapprove the accounts of those who administer public funds, and to return to the executive the orders which are not in accordance with the law for the purposes which may be determined by the law.


ART. 142. The members of this Court must be over 21 years of age, and must not be creditors or debtors of the public treasury, nor have accounts pending therewith. Their number, organization and attributions shall be determined by law. ART. 143. There will be a Fiscal General who shall represent the interests of the public treasury. His attributions shall be determined by law. 

TITLE XVI-THE ARMY
ART. 144. The public force is established to insure the rights of the nation, the compliance with the law and the preservation of public order. ART. 145. No armed body shall deliberate. Military obedience shall be regulated by law and military ordinances. ART. 146. Military service is compulsory. Every Honduran from 21 to 30 years of age is a soldier in the active army, and from 30 to 40 years of age, in the reserve. The law shall provide for the organization of the militia, and shall establish the causes for exemption from service. Commissioned military officers, after reaching the age of 40 years, have the right to resign their commissions and become separated from the service. ART. 147. Military offenses shall be subject to military jurisdiction. 

TITLE XVII. -THE DEPARTMENTAL GOVERNMENT..

ART. 148. For the public administration the territory of the nation is divided into departments, the number and limits of which shall be determined by law. In each one of the said departments there shall be the officials which the law may determine. ART. 149. In the departmental government no one shall be permitted to exercise at the same time, unless ad interim and for a period not to exceed three months, political, military and treasury functions.
TITLE XVIII.-THE MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT.

ART. 150. The municipal government is autonomous, and shall be vested in municipal corporations directly elected by the people. The law shall regulate the organization and attributions of municipal corporations. The number of their members shall be proportional to their population. The attributions of municipal corporations shall be purely economical and administrative. ART. 151. Municipal corporations shall levy, according to law, the local taxes, and shall manage the property and funds of the community for the benefit of the same, rendering an account of their 

administration to the Court established by law. They shall submit
annually a detailed report of receipts and expenditures. ART. 152. Municipal corporations shall freely appoint their own employees, and those police agents whose salaries are to be paid out of the municipal funds. ART. 153. In the exercise of their own functions municipal corporations shall be wholly independent of the other powers, but in no case shall they violate the general laws of the country. They shall be responsible before the courts of justice for any acts which they may commit collectively or individually. ART. 154. Municipal corporations have the power to commute, according to law, sentences imposed for misdemeanors. Municipal corporations have also the right to take action on matters of police, sanitation and public instruction, provided said action is not in opposition to the Constitution and general laws. ART. 155. No member of the municipal corporations shall be compelled to accept another position or be called to the military service.
TITLE XIX.-THE

RESPONSIBIITY OF PUBLIC

EMPLOYEES
ART. 156. Every employee or public functionary, when entering on the discharge of his duties, shall make the following promise: I promise to be faithful to the Republic, and to comply and make others comply with the Constitution and the laws.

157. Every public functionary is responsible for his own acts. 158. The President of the Republic, deputies, justices of the Supreme Court, secretaries of State and diplomatic ministers shall be answerable before Congress for the offenses committed by them in the exercise of their functions. Congress, after following the course of procedure for such cases, determined by its rules, shall declare whether or not there are grounds for their indictment, in order to place the offender at the disposal of the competent court. The same declaration shall be required before instituting proceedings for common offenses, against the President of the Republic, the secretaries of State and justices of the Supreme Court. ART. 159. Notwithstanding the approval which Congress may give to the conduct of the executive, the President and secretaries of State may be accused for official offenses. If these public officials have remained in the country, the right to bring such proceedings against them shall become prescribed five years after they have ceased in their office. ART. 160. Public employees who violate any of the rights and guarantees set forth in this Constitution shall be civilly and criminally responsible. They may be accused without need of filing a bond for libel. They shall not be pardoned nor their sentences commuted

within the constitutional period, nor during the following one. The offenses and the penalties which they may be liable for shall not prescribe until after the said two periods. ART. 161. Whenever a public functionary. against whom a declaration should have been made to the effect that there are grounds for his indictment, should be acquitted, he shall be reinstated in the exercise of his functions.

TILE XX.-CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS. ART. 162. The following are constitutional laws: Press laws, laws regarding a state of siege, laws granting the right of asylum (amparo) and electoral laws. TITLE

XXI.-REFORMS OF THE CONSTITUTION AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS

Art.163. The reforms of this Constitution shall only be effected by two thirds of the votes of the representatives in Congress in ordinary session setting forth the article or articles which need reform, and stating whether or not the reform is to be absolute. As soon as the reform is decreed, Congress shall convoke a Constituent Assembly in order that the latter may proceed to reform it; the decree containing the proposed reforms to be contained in the decree of convocation. ART. 164. The Constituent Assembly shall be elected in the same manner as Congress, and shall have the same number of representatives, with the same immunities. ART. 165. In no case shall a reform of the articles of the Constitution forbidding the re-election of the President or of his substitute, and establishing the duration of the presidential term be decreed so as to be effective during the current term, or during the following term. ART. 166. The constitutional laws may be reformed in the same manner as the Constitution, or by two ordinary Congresses with two thirds of the votes. ART. 167. The National Constituent Assembly entrusts this Constitution, and the rights consecrated therein, to the patriotism of all Hondurans.
ART. FINAL ARTICLE.

The present Constitution shall commence to take

effect on 1 January 1895; the Constitution of 1 November 1880 being annulled from that date. 

