CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS 1982
(Decree No. 131 of January 11, 1982)

General Secretariat Organization of American States Washington, D.C. 1982

DECREE N° 131 PREAMBLE We, the representatives elected by the sovereign will of the Honduran people, meeting in the National Constituent Assembly, invoking the protection of God and the example of our founding fathers, placing our faith in the restoration of the Central American union and faithfully interpreting the aspirations of the people who conferred upon us their mandate, hereby decree and sanction this Constitution so as to strengthen and perpetuate a rule of law which ensures a politically, economically and socially just society which affirms our nationality and establishes the conditions for the full realization of man as a human being, within a context of justice, liberty, security, stability, pluralism, peace, representative democracy and the common good. CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC TITLE I THE STATE CHAPTER I The Organization of the State Article 1. Honduras is a State of law, sovereign, constituted as a free, democratic and independent republic to ensure its inhabitants the enjoyment of justice, liberty, culture, and social and economic well-being. Art icle 2. Sovereignty originates in the people, from whom stem all the powers of the State, which are exercised through representation. The supplanting of popular sovereignty and the usurping of their constituted powers shall be considered crimes of treason against the fatherland. Responsibility in these cases shall be imprescriptible and an action may be initiated by the competent organ on its own motion or by petition of any citizen. Article 3. No one owes allegiance to a usurping government nor to those who assume office or public service by force of arms or by using means or procedures which violate or ignore the provisions established by this

2

Constitution and other laws. The acts adopted by such authorities are null. The people have the right to resort to insurrection in defense of the constitutional order. Article 4. The government is republican, democractic and representative. It is composed of three branches: legislative, executive and judicial, which are complementary, independent, and not subordinate to each other. Alternation in the exercise of the Presidency of the Republic is obligatory. Violation of this provision constitutes treason against the fatherland. a crime of

Article 5. The government must be founded on the principle of democratic participation from which stems national integration. This implies participation by all political sectors in public administration, in order to ensure and strengthen the progress of Honduras, based upon political stability and national conciliation. Article 6. The official language of Honduras is Spanish. The State shall protect its purity and increase its learning. Article 7. The national symbols are: coat of arms and the national anthem. The law shall establish shall regulate their use. their the flag, the

characteristics

and

Article 8. The cities of Tegucigalpa and Comayaguela, jointly, constitute the capital of the Republic. CHAPTER II The Territory Article 9. The territory of Honduras is situated between the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans and the republics of Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua. Its boundaries with these republics are: 1. With the Republic of Guatemala, those established by the arbitral award issued in Washington, D.C., United States of America, on January 23, 1933.

3

2. With the Republic of Nicaragua, those established by the Mixed Honduran-Nicaraguan Boundary Commission, in 1900 and 1901, according to the description of the first section of the dividing line, contained in the second act of June 12, 1900, and in later acts, to Portillo de Teotecacinte, and from that place to the Atlantic Ocean, in accordance with the arbitral award handed down by His Majesty the King of Spain, Alfonso XIII, on December 23, 1906, and declared valid by the International Court of Justice on November 18, 1960. 3. With the Republic of El Salvador, those established in Articles 16 and 17 of the General Peace Treaty signed in Lima, Peru, on October 30, 1980, whose instruments of ratification were exchanged in Tegucigalpa, Central district, Honduras, on December 10, 1980. In the sections pending delimitation the provisions of the pertinent articles of the above-mentioned Treaty shall be applied. Article 10. The territories located on the mainland within its territorial limits, its inland waters and its islands, islets, and the cays in the Gulf of Fonseca which historically, geographically and legally belong to it, are part of Honduras. So are the Bay Islands, the Swan Islands, also known as Santanilla or Santillana, Viciosas, Misteriosas; and the cays Zapotillos, Cochinos, Vivorillos, Seal or Foca (or Becerro), Caratasca, Cajones or Hobbies, Mayores de Cabo Falso, Cocorocuma, Palo de Campeche, Los Bajos Pichones, Media Luna, Gorda and Los Bancos Salmedina, Providencia, De Coral, Cabo Falso, Rosalinda and Serranilla, and all others located in the Atlantic that historically, geographically and legally belong to it. The Gulf of Fonseca may be put under a special regime. Article 11. The following also belong to the State of Honduras. 1. The territorial sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles, measured from the baseline of the lowest tide along the entire coast; 2. The zone contiguous to its territorial sea, which extends up to twenty-four nautical miles, measured from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured;

4

3. The exclusive economic zone, which extends up to a distance of two hundred nautical miles, measured from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured; 4. The continental shelf, which includes the bed and the subsoil of the submarine platform, which extends beyond its territorial sea and along the entire length of the natural extension of its territory to the outer limits of its continental border, or instead to a distance of two hundred nautical miles from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured in those cases in which the outer limits of the continental border does not reach that distance; and 5. Concerning the Pacific Ocean, the previous measures shall be taken from the line of the closure of the mouth of the Gulf of Fonseca, out to the high seas. Article 12. The State exercises sovereignty and jurisdiction over the air space, and the subsoil of its continental and insular territory, its territorial sea, its contiguous zone, its exclusive economic zone, and its continental shelf. This declaration of sovereignty does not ignore similar legitimate rights of other states on a basis of reciprocity, and it neither affects the rights of free navigation of all nations, in accordance with international law, nor compliance with those treaties or conventions ratified by the Republic. Article 13. In those cases referred to in the preceding articles, the domain of the nation is inalienable and imprescriptible. Article 14. Foreign States may only acquire, in the territory of the Republic, on a basis of reciprocity, such real estate as may be necessary for the seat of their diplomatic mission, without prejudice to the provisions of international treaties. CHAPTER III Treaties Article 15. Honduras supports the principles and practices of international law, that promote the solidarity

5

and self-determination of peoples, nonintervention and the strengthening of universal peace and democracy. Honduras proclaims as inevitable the validity and obligatory execution of arbitral and judicial awards of an international character. Article 16. All international treaties must be approved by the National Congress before their ratification by the Executive Power. International treaties entered into by Honduras with other States form part of the domestic law as soon as they enter into force. Article 17. When an international treaty affects a constitutional provision, it must be approved through the same procedure that governs Constitutional reform before being ratified by the Executive Power. Article 18. In case of conflict between the treaty or convention, and the law, the former shall prevail. Article 19. No authority may enter into or ratify treaties or grant concessions that damage the territorial integrity, the sovereignty or the independence of the Republic . Anyone who does so shall be tried for the crime of treason to the country. Responsibility in such a case is imprescriptible. Art icle 20. Any treaty or convention entered into by the Executive Power, relating to the national territory, shall require approval by the National Congress by a vote of not less than three fourths of its members. Article 21. The Executive Power may, in matters of its exclusive competence, enter into, ratify or adhere to international conventions with foreign states or international organizations without the previous requirement of approval by congress, whom it must inform immediately.

6

TITLE II NATIONALITY AND CITIZENSHIP CHAPTER I HONDURANS Article 22. Honduran nationality is acquired by birth or by naturalization. Article 23. The following are Hondurans by birth: 1. Persons born within the national territory with the exception of the children of diplomatic agents; 2. Children born abroad of a Honduran father or mother by birth; 3. Persons born on board Honduran vessels or aircraft of war, and persons born on board merchant vessels while they are in Honduran territorial waters; and 4. Infants territory. Article 24. zation: of unknown parents found in Honduran

The following are Hondurans by naturali-

1. Central Americans by birth who have resided in the country for one year; 2. Spaniards and Ibero-Americans by birth resided in the country two consecutive years; who have

3. All other foreigners who have resided in the country more than three consecutive years; 4. Foreigners who have obtained naturalization papers decreed by the National Congress for extraordinary services rendered to Honduras; 5. Immigrants forming part of selected groups brought in by the government for scientific, agricultural or industrial purposes, who after one year of residence in the country fulfill the requirements of law; and 6. Foreigners married to Hondurans by birth.

7

In the cases referred to in numbers 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6, the applicant must previously renounce his nationality and indicate his desire to obtain Honduran citizenship before the competent authority. Where there exists a treaty on dual nationality, the Honduran seeking to obtain foreign nationality shall not lose his Honduran nationality. Likewise, the foreigner renounce his nationality. shall not be required to

Article 25. While he resides in Honduras, no Honduran by birth may nationality.

the territory of invoke any other

Article 26. No naturalized Honduran may hold official positions in representation of Honduras in his country of origin. Article 27. Neither marriage nor its dissolution shall affect the nationality of the spouses or their children. Art icle 28. Honduran nationality is lost: 1. By naturalization in a foreign country; and

2. By cancellation of the naturalization papers in accordance with law. Article 29. Honduran nationality by birth is recovered when the person who had lost it becomes domiciled in the territory of the Republic and declares his intention to recover it. CHAPTER II Foreigners Article 30. Foreigners are bound to respect the authorities and obey the laws from the time they enter the territory of the republic. Article 31. In Honduras foreigners enjoy all of the civil rights of Hondurans with the restrictions as may be established by law for reasons of public policy, security, or national interest.

8

Foreigners are also subject to the same regular and special taxes of a general nature to which Hondurans are subject, in accordance with law. Article 32. Foreigners may not engage in political activities of a national or international character in the country, under penalty prescribed by law. Article 33. Foreigners may not file claims nor demand indemnity of any kind from the State, except in the manner and in the same cases in which Hondurans may do so. They may not resort to diplomatic channels except in cases of denial of justice. For such purposes a decision that is unfavorable to the claimant is not to be taken as a denial of justice. Persons who contravene this provision shall lose their right to reside in the country. Article 34. Within the limits established by law, foreigners may only hold positions in teaching the sciences and the arts or render technical or advisory services to the State, when there are no Hondurans who can fill these positions or render such services. Article 35. Immigration shall be conditioned by the social, political, economic, and demographic interests of the country. The law shall establish the requirements, quotas and conditions for the entrance of immigrants into the country, as well as the prohibitions, limitations and penalties to which foreigners shall be subject. CHAPTER III CITIZENS Article 36. All Hondurans over eighteen years of age are citizens. Article 37. The following are rights of citizens: 1. 2. To vote and be elected; To be a candidate for public office;

3. To form political parties; to join or renounce membership from them; and

9

4. laws.

Those recognized by

this Constitution and other

Citizens on active duty in the Armed Forces and Security Forces may not vote, but may be elected to office in cases not prohibited by law. Article 38. Every Honduran is bound to defend his country, to respect the authorities and to contribute to the moral and material support of the nation. Article 39. Every Honduran must be registered in the National Registry of Persons. Article 40. The following are duties of citizens: 1. To obey, defend, and observe compliance with the Constitution and the laws; 2. 3. To obtain an identity card; To exercise the right to vote;

4. To discharge the duties of popularly elected office, except when excused or upon resignation for just cause; 5. To render military service; and

6. All other duties required by this Constitution and the laws. Article 41. Citizenship is suspended for the following reasons: 1. 2. 3. By commitment to jail decreed for a felony; By final conviction imposed for a crime; and By incompetency judicially decreed.

Article 42. Citizenship is lost: 1. For rendering service in time of war to enemies of Honduras or their allies; 2. For aiding, against the State of Honduras, a foreigner or foreign government in any diplomatic claim or before an international tribunal;

10

3. For holding employment of a military or political character for a foreign nation, without permission of the national Congress; 4. For restricting the right to vote, falsifying electoral documents, or using fraudulent means to defeat the popular will; 5. For inciting, promoting, or abetting the continuation in office or the reelection of the President of the Republic; and 6. In the case of naturalized Hondurans, for residing outside the country for more than two consecutive years without prior authorization by the Executive Power. In the cases referred to by numbers (1) and (2), the declaration of the loss of citizenship shall be made by the national Congress on the detailed record prepared for such a case. For numbers (3) and (6), the declaration shall be made by the Executive Power through a governmental resolution, and for cases (4) and (5) the declaration shall also be made by a governmental resolution, based on a prior conviction by a competent court. Article 43. 1. 2. 3. 4. Citizenship is restored:

By confirmed dismissal of the charges; By final judgment of acquittal; By amnesty or by pardon; and By serving the sentence. CHAPTER IV Suffrage and Political Parties

Article 44. Suffrage is a right and a public duty. Voting shall be universal, obligatory, egalitarian, direct, free and secret. Article 45. Every act whereby participation by a citizen in the political life of the nation is prohibited or limited is declared punishable.

11

Article 46. The system of proportional or majority representation in those cases determined by law shall be adopted to declare elected for service those candidates chosen by popular election. Art icle 47. Legally registered political parties are institutions under public law, whose existence and free functioning are guaranteed by this Constitution and the law, in order to achieve the effective political participation of the citizens. Art icle 48. Attempts against the republican, democratic and representative system of government by political parties is prohibited. Article 49. The State shall contribute to financing the outlays of the political parties, in accordance with the law. Article 50. Political parties may not receive contributions or subsidies from foreign governments, organizations, or institutions. CHAPTER V Electoral Function Article 51. There shall be a National Elections Tribunal to handle all matters relating to electoral acts and procedures. The Tribunal is an autonomous and independent body, with jurisdiction and competence throughout the Republic, whose organization and function shall be established by this Constitution and the law, which will also determine the matters relating to the other electoral institutions. Article 52. The composition of the National Elections Tribunal shall be determined by appointment by the Executive Power through the Secretary of the Interior and Justice, in the following manner: 1. One principal member and one alternate proposed by the Supreme Court of Justice. 2. One principal member and one alternate proposed by each of the duly registered political parties. If due to a change of the number of parties with the right to propose a member for the National Elections

12

Tribunal, the full body is constituted by an even number, the Executive Power upon the prior designation by the Supreme Court of Justice, shall immediately appoint an additional member, in such a way that the total of the members shall always remain uneven. Article 53. The Presidency of the National Elections Tribunal shall be held for one year, in a rotating manner by each of its principal members. Article 54. The National Registry of Persons as an organ of the State is hereby created. Its seat is located in the capital of the Republic and it has jurisdiction over all the national territory. The Registry is a dependency of the National Elections Tribunal, who shall appoint its director and assistant director. Article 55. In addition to the duties prescribed by the Special Law, the National Registry of Persons shall be the state body in charge of the Civil Registry, of issuing the exclusive identity cards to all Hondurans and of preparing on its own initiative and exclusively the National Electoral Census. Article 56. The National Electoral Census is public, permanent, and unalterable. The registration of citizens, as well as modifications due to death, change of address, suspension, loss or restoration of citizenship, shall be made within the time and by the methods established by law. Article 57. Criminal action for electoral offenses established by law is a public right and prescribes in four years. Article 58. Electoral offenses and misdemeanors shall be tried in the regular courts, in accordance with ordinary law, without privileged status. TITLE III DECLARATIONS, RIGHTS, AND GUARANTEES CHAPTER I Declarations A r t i c l e 5 9 . The human b e i n g i s the supreme end of s o c i e t y and of t h e S t a t e . Everyone has t h e o b l i g a t i o n t o r e s p e c t and p r o t e c t t h e p e r s o n .

13

The dignity of the human being is inviolable. Article 60. All men are born free and equal before the law. There are no privileged classes in Honduras. All Honduras are equal before the law. All forms of discrimination on account of sex, race, class, or any other reason prejudicial to human dignity shall be punishable. The law shall establish the crimes and penalties for violators of this provision. Article 61. The Constitution guarantees to all Hondurans and to foreigners residing in the country the right to the inviolability of life, and to individual safety, freedom, equality before the law, and property. Article 62. The rights of every man are limited by the rights of all others, by collective security, and by the just demands of the general welfare and democratic development. Article 63. The declarations, rights and guarantees enumerated in this Constitution shall not be construed as a denial of other declarations, rights and guarantees not specified that spring from the national sovereignty, from the democratic and representative form of government, and from the dignity of man. Article 64. Laws and governmental provisions or any other provisions that regulate the exercise of declarations, rights and guarantees recognized by this Constitution shall not be enforced if they diminish, restrict, or evade such rights and guarantees. CHAPTER II Individual Rights Article 65. The right to life is inviolable.

Article 66. The death penalty is abolished. Article 67. The unborn shall be considered as born for all rights accorded within the limits established by law. Article 68. Every person has the right to have his physical, mental, and moral integrity respected.

14

No one shall be subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment or treatment. Every person deprived of his liberty shall be treated with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person. Article 69. Personal freedom is inviolable and may be restricted or temporarily suspended only according to law. Article 70. All Hondurans have the right to do that which is not harmful to others; likewise, no one shall be obliged to do that which is not legally prescribed nor shall be prevented from doing that which the law does not prohibited. No one may take justice into his own hands, nor exercise violence to claim his rights. No personal service may be exacted, nor must it be rendered gratuitously, except by virtue of the law or by a sentence based on the law. Article 71. No one may be detained nor held incommunicado for longer than twenty-four hours, without being placed at the disposal of the competent authorities for trial. Judicial detention for investigation may not exceed six days from the moment of such detention. Article 72. Expression of thought shall be free, and may be expressed through any means of dissemination, without prior censorship. Those who abuse this right, and those who by direct or indirect methods restrict or limit the communication and circulation of ideas and opinions shall be liable before the law. Article 73. Printing shops, radio broadcasting, television stations, and any other means of broadcast and dissemination of information, as well as their machinery and equipment, may not be seized or confiscated nor may their work be closed down or interrupted by reason of an offense or misdemeanor relating to the dissemination of thoughts and ideas, without prejudice to the liabilities incurred by these reasons in accordance with the law.

15

No enterprise for the dissemination of thought may receive subsidies from foreign government or political parties. the law shall establish the penalty for violations of this provision. The control of newspapers, of radio, and television newscasts, and the intellectual, political and administrative interpretation thereof shall be exercised exclusively by Hondurans by birth. Article 74. The right to freedom of thought and expression may not be restricted by indirect means, such as the abuse of government or private controls over newsprint, radio broadcasting frequencies, or equipment used in the dissemination of information. Article 75. The law which thought, may establish prior ethical and cultural values of rights of persons, especially cence and youth. regulates the expression of censorship to protect the the society, as well as the those of childhood, adoles-

The commercial advertising of alchoholic beverages and tobacco consumption shall be regulated by law. Article 76. The right to honor, to personal privacy, to a family, and to one's dignity is guaranteed. Article 77. The free exercise of all religions and cults is guaranteed without predominance, provided they do not violate the law and public policy. Ministers of the various religions may not hold public office or engage in any form of political propaganda, invoking religious motives or, as a means to such end, thus taking advantage of the religious beliefs of the people. Article 78. Freedom of association and assembly is guaranteed provided its exercise is not contrary to the public policy or to public morals. Article 79. Everyone has the right of peaceful assembly, without arms, in a public demonstration or temporary assembly, in connection with their common interests of whatever nature, without the need of notice or special permission.

16

Outdoor meetings and those of a political nature may be subject to a system of special permission, with the sole purpose of ensuring public order. Article 80. Every person or asociation of persons has the right to present petitions to the authorities, for reasons of either private or general interest, and to obtain a prompt reply within the time allowed by law. Article 81. Every person has the right to move freely within the national territory, as well as leave, enter and remain in it. No one may be compelled to change his domicile or residence, except in special cases and in accordance with law. Article 82. The right of defense is inviolable. The inhabitants of the Republic have free access to the courts to bring actions in accordance with law. Article 83. The State shall appoint counsel to defend indigents and to protect the persons and interests of minors and other incompetents. They shall give legal assistance to them and represent them judicially in defense of their personal liberty and other rights. Article 84. No one may be arrested or detained except by virtue of a warrant from a competent authority, issued in accordance with the legal formalities and for reasons previously established by law. Notwithstanding, a person in flagrante delicto may be apprehended by anyone, for the sole purpose of being handed over to the authority. The detainee must be informed upon arrest and with total clarity of his rights and the charges against him; furthermore, the authorities must permit him to report his detention to a relative or to a person of his choice. Article 85. No one may be detained or imprisoned in places other than those established by law. Article 86~ Accused persons subject to criminal prosecution shall, whtlje in detention, have the right to be segregated from convicted persons.

17

Article 87. Prisons are establishments for the security and protection of society. They shall be used in an effort to bring about the social rehabilitation of prisoners, and their training for work. Article 88. Duress or coercion of any type to obtain confessions, are absolutely forbidden. No one may be compelled, in criminal, correctional or police matters, to testify against himself, his spouse or household companion, nor against his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity. Testimony given only in the presence of competent judge shall be valid evidence. Testimony obtained in violation of any of these principles shall be null, and those responsible shall incur the penalties established by law. Article 89. Every person shall be presumed innocent so long as his guilt has not been proven according to law. Article 90. No person may be tried except by a compepetent judge or tribunal, in accordance with the law and the formalities, rights and guarantees established thereby. Military jurisdiction is recognized for offenses and wrongdoings of a military nature. Military courts may in no case extend their jurisdiction to persons who are not on active duty with the armed forces. Article 91. If an offense or wrongdoing of a military nature involves a civilian or a discharged soldier, the case shall be tried by the competent authority of the regular justice. Article 92. No formal charges shall be brought except when sustained upon convincing evidence that a crime or mere offense punishable by deprivation of liberty has been committed, and without reasonable indication of who the perpetrator is. Arraignments shall be made in the same manner. Article 93. No one may be committed to jail, even by a bill of indictment, nor detained therein, if he furnished sufficient bail in accordance with law.

18

Article 94. No one may be punished without having been heard and convicted in a trial, and without final sentence imposed by a judge or competent authority. In cases of contempt of court, and other measures of a similar nature in civil or labor matters, as in cases involving fines or police arrest, the defendant shall always be heard. Article 95. No one shall be punished with penalty not previously established by law, nor be tried a second time for the same punishable acts for which a previous trial was held. Article 96. No law has retroactive effect, except in criminal matters when the new law favors the defendant. Article 97. Perpetual, infamous, confiscatory punishment is forbidden. proscriptive and

Sentences to imprisonment may not exceed twenty years and those accumulated for several crimes may not exceed thirty years. Article 98. No person may be detained, arrested or imprisoned for debts or obligations which do not arise from crimes or offenses. Article 99. The home is inviolable. No entrance or search may be made without the consent of the occupant or without order from a competent authority. Nevertheless, it may be searched, in case of urgency, to prevent the commission or impunity crimes, or to avoid grave injury to persons or damage to property. Except in cases of urgency, search of the home may not take place between seven o'clock in the evening and six o'clock in the morning, without incurring responsibility. The law shall determine the requirements and formalities regarding the manner in which the entrance, inspection or search may be carried out, as well as the responsibilities that may be incurred by the authority carrying it out. Article 100. Every person has the right to the inviolability and privacy of correspondence, specifically mail, telegrams and telephone conversations, except by judicial order.

19

Books and documents of merchants and their private papers shall be subject only to inspection and supervision by the competent authorities, in accordance with law. The correspondence, books and documents referred to in this article that are violated or seized shall not serve as evidence in a trial. In any case, the secrecy of private matters which have no bearing on the matter of the action taken shall be maintained. Article 101. Honduras recognizes the right of asylum in the form and conditions established by law. When asylum is revoked or denied in accordance with the law, in no case shall the political refugee or asylee be returned to the territory of the State that may claim him. The State shall not authorize the extradition of persons accused of committing political crimes or related common offenses. Article 102. No Honduran may be expatriated nor handed over to the authorities of a foreign state. Article 103. The State recognizes, guarantees, and promotes the existence of private property in its broadest concept as a social function and without further limitations than those established by law for reasons of necessity or public interest. Article 104. The right to ownership shall not prejudice the right of eminent domain of the State. Article 105. Confiscation of property is prohibited. Property may not be limited in any way for reasons of political crimes. The right to imprescriptible. recover confiscated property is

Article 106. No one may be deprived of his property except by reason of public need or interest defined by law or a decision based on law, and shall not take place without assessed prior compensation.

20

In the event of war or internal disorder, it is not necessary that the compensation be paid in advance; however, the corresponding payment shall be made not later than two years after the termination of the state of emergency. Article 107. State lands and municipal lands (ejidales), community property, or private property located in zones adjacent to boundaries with neighboring states, land located along the shores of the two oceans, to a width of forty kilometers toward the interior of the country, and land situated on islands, cays, reefs, cliffs, rocks, shoals and sand banks may be acquired, possessed or occupied under any title only by native-born Hondurans, by companies composed entirely of Honduran members, and by State institutions, under penalty of nullification of the pertinent act or contract. The acquisition of urban property within the limits established in the previous paragraph shall be dealt with by a special law. Registrars of property are prohibited from recording documents that violate this provision. Article 108. Every author, inventor, producer or merchant shall enjoy the exclusive ownership of his work, invention, trademark, or tradename, according to law. Article 109. Taxes shall not be confiscatory. No one shall be obliged to pay taxes and other imposts which -are not duly enacted by, the national Congress in regular sessions. No authority shall impose measures in violation of this provision without incurring the liability established by law. Article 110. No individual who freely administers his property may be deprived of the right to discharge his civil affairs by compromise or arbitration. CHAPTER III Social Rights A r t i c l e 111. The f a m i l y , m a r r i a g e , motherhood childhood a r e under t h e p r o t e c t i o n of t h e S t a t e . and

21

Article 112. The right of a man and a woman to contract marriage is recognized, as well as the legal equality of spouses. Only a civil marriage performed by competent officials and under the conditions established by law is valid. De facto union between persons having the legal capacity to marry is recognized. The law shall indicate the conditions under which it shall have the effect of a civil marriage. Article 113. Divorce as a means matrimonial bond is recognized. of dissolving the

The law shall regulate the grounds for divorce and its effects. Article 114. All children have the same rights and duties. Qualifications concerning the nature of filiation are not recognized. No statement of any kind as to differentiations in births or the marital status of the parents shall be contained in any birth registrations or in any document relating to filiation. Article 115. Investigation of paternity is authorized. The procedure shall be determined by law. Article 116. The right of adoption is recognized. law shall regulate this institution. The

Article 117. The aged merit the special protection of the state. Article 118. The homestead shall be the subject of special legislation designed to protect and further it. CHAPTER IV Rights of the Child Article 119. The children. State has the duty to protect

Children shall enjoy the protection afforded to them in international treaties which look after their rights.

22

Child protection laws are matters of public policy, and the government agencies serving this purpose shall have the status of social welfare centers. Article 120. Physically or mentally handicapped minors, those with abnormal behavior, orphans, and abandoned children shall be subject to special legislation for their rehabilitation, supervision, and protection as the case may be. Article 121. Parents are under obligation to feed, assist, and educate their children during their minority, and beyond in those cases established by law. The state shall provide special protection for minors whose parents or guardians are economically unable to do so, to provide for their care and education. Under circumstances of equal qualifications, these needy parents and guardians shall be given preference in filling public positions. Article 12 2. The law shall establish the jurisdiction and the special courts which shall hear family and juvenile matters. No one under eighteen years of age shall be permitted to be confined in a jail or prison. Article 12 3. All children shall enjoy the benefits of social security and education. Every child shall have the right to grow and develop in good health, for whom special care shall be given during the prenatal period, as much for the child as for the mother, both being entitled to food, housing, education, recreation, exercise and adequate medical services. Article 124. Every child must be protected against every form of abandonment, cruelty and exploitation. No child shall be the object of any type of bondage. No child shall work before reaching an adequate minimum age, nor shall he be permitted to dedicate himself to any occupation or employment that may be prejudicial to his health, education, or serve as an impediment to his physical, mental, or moral development.

The use of minors by their parents or other persons for the purpose of begging is prohibited. The law shall establish the applicable penalties for those who violate this provision. Article 12 5. The communications media shall cooperate in the training and education of children. Article 12 6. Every child, regardless of circumstances, shall be among the first to receive aid, protection, and assistance. CHAPTER V Labor Article 12 7. Every person has the right to work under equitable and satisfactory working conditions, to choose his occupation freely and to give it up, and to protection against unemployment. Article 12 8. Laws governing the relations between employers and workers are matters of public policy. All acts, stipulations or agreements that involve the waiver, diminution or restriction or evasion of the following guarantees shall be void: 1. Regular day work shall not exceed eight hours a day, nor forty-hour hours a week. Regular nightwork shall not exceed six hours a day or thirty-six hours a week. Regular combined work shall not exceed seven hours a day or forty-two hours a week. All work shall be paid for at a rate equivalent to forty-eight hours a week. Overtime work shall be paid for in the manner specified by law. These provisions shall not apply in those well-defined exceptional cases indicated by law. 2. No worker shall be required to perform work which covers more than twelve hours in any period of twenty-four consecutive hours, except in those cases specified by law.

24

3. Equal work shall receive equal pay without discrimination, provided that the position, the working hours, the conditions of efficiency and the time of service are also equal. Wages must be paid in legal tender. 4. The amount of wages, indemnity compensation, and social benefits shall constitute a preferred credit in accordance with law. 5. Every worker is entitled to minimun wages fixed periodically by participation of the State, employers and workers, sufficient to meet the normal material, moral and cultural needs of his household, in accordance with the standards of each kind of work, the conditions peculiar to each region and type of work, the cost of living, the relative skill of workers, and the pay systems of the enterprises. A minimum occupational wage shall also be fixed for those activities not wage regulated by a collective contract or agreement. The minimum wage shall be exempt from attachment, compensation or discount except as prescribed by law governing family and trade union obligations. 6. In the facilities of his establishments, the employer must observe and enforce the legal provisions concerning hygiene and health and adopt adequate safety measures in work, which help to prevent occupational hazards and ensure the physical and mental integrity of workers. Employers in agricultural enterprises are also subject to the same security system. Special protection shall be given to women and minors. 7. Minors under sixteen years of age and those above that age who are subject to mandatory education by virtue of national legislation may not be employed in any kind of work. The labor authorities may authorize their employment when they deem it indispensable for their own support or for the support of their parents or brothers and sisters provided that their working does not hinder their compliance with the requirements of mandatory education.

25

For minors under seventeen years of age the work period, which must be daytime, may not exceed six hours a day or thirty hours a week, for any kind of work. 8. A worker shall be entitled to annual paid vacations. The duration and time of which shall be regulated by law. In any event, a worker shall be entitled to a cash payment for vacations already earned and for proportional vacations corresponding to the period worked. Vacations may not be compensated by a cash payment, nor accumulated, and the employer shall be obliged to give them to the worker and the worker must take them. The law shall regulate this obligation and shall determine the exceptional cases which permit the accumulation and compensation of vacations. 9. Workers shall be entitled to leave with pay for holidays specified by law. The law shall also specify what kind of work shall not be governed by this provision, but in such cases workers shall be entitled to overtime. 10. The right of workers to receive payment for a seventh day is hereby recognized; permanent workers shall receive, in addition, payment for a thirteenth month as a Christmas bonus. The law shall regulate the terms and manner of application of this provision. 11. A woman is entitled to leave before and after childbirth, without loss of employment or wages. During the nursing period she shall be entitled to a rest period each day for nursing her child. The employer may not terminate the employment contract of a pregnant woman, even after childbirth, except for justifiable cause shown before a competent judge, in the cases and conditions indicated by law. 12. Employers shall be required to indemnify their workers for work injuries and occupational diseases, according to law. 13. The right to strike or to lockout is recognized. The law shall regulate its exercise and may subject it to special restrictions in specified public services.

26

14. Workers and employers shall be entitled to associate freely for purposes exclusively related to their economic and social activities, by forming trade unions or professional associations, according to law. 15. The State shall protect individual and collective contracts between employers and workers. Article 12 9. The law garantees stability for workers in their jobs, in accordance with the characteristics of industries and professions, and just causes of severance. Whenever an injustifiable discharge occurs upon final judgment, the worker shall be entitled at his option to compensation for unpaid wages damages, and to the legal indemnity as well as the indemnity agreed to, or else to be reinstated with recognition of unpaid wages, as actual and consequential damages. Article 130. Homeworkers shall have a legal status analogous to that of other workers, with due consideration for the peculiarities of their work. Article 131. Domestics shall be protected by social legislation. Persons rendering domestic services in industrial, commercial, and social enterprises and in others of a similar nature shall be considered manual workers and have the rights granted to them. Article 132. The law shall regulate the hiring of: agricultural, livestock, and forestry workers; land, air, sea, inland waterborne and railway transportation workers; mining and petroleum workers; business employees, and all other employees hired under special conditions. Article 133. Independent intellectual workers and the product of their work must be covered by protecting legislation. Article 134. All disputes arising from relations between employers and workers shall be subject to the labor jurisdiction. The law shall establish the corresponding rules governing this jurisdiction and the institutions entrusted with their application. Article 135. Labor laws shall be based on harmony between capital and labor, as the factors of production. The State must protect the rights of workers while also protecting capital and employers.

27

Article 136. Workers may share the profits of employers, but may never assume his risks or losses. Article 137. Under equal conditions Honduran workers shall be given preference over foreign workers. It is prohibited for employers to hire less than 90 percent of Honduran workers and to pay them less than 85 percent of the total amount of the salaries paid in the respective enterprises. Those percentages may be modified in exceptional cases specified by law. Article 138. In order to enforce these guarantees and labor laws, the State shall supervise and inspect enterprises, and, when necessary, impose the penalties established by law. Article 139. The State has an obligation to promote, organize and regulate conciliation and arbitration procedures for the peaceful settlement of labor disputes. Article 140. The State shall promote the vocational and technical training of workers. Article 141. The law shall determine which employers, according to their capital and the total number of workers, shall be required to provide them and their families with educational, health, housing and other services. CHAPTER VI SOCIAL SECURITY Article 142. Every person is entitled to the security of his economic means of support in the event of work disability or inability to obtain remunerated employment. Social Security services shall be furnished and administered by the Honduran Social Security Institute and shall cover cases of sickness, raatternity, family allowance, old-age, orphanhood, lockout, work injury, involuntary unemployment; occupational disease, and other contingencies affecting the capacity to produce. The State shall establish social welfare institutions which shall function as a unit in a single state system with the contribution of all interested parties and the state.

28

Article 143. The State, employers and workers are required to contribute to the financing, improvement and expansion of social security. The social security system shall be established in a gradual and progressive way, both as to the type of contingencies covered as well as the geographic zones and the categories of protected workers. Article 144. It shall be considered in the public interest to expand the social security system to urban and rural workers. CHAPTER VII HEALTH Article 145. The right to health is hereby recognized. the protection of one's

It is everyone's duty to participate in the promotion and preservation of individual and community health. The State shall maintain a satisfactory for the protection of everyone's health. environment

Article 146. It is the duty of the State to regulate, supervise and control all food, chemical, pharmaceutical and biological products through its duly constituted agencies and institutions. Article 147. The law shall regulate the production, traffic, possession, donation, use and marketing of psychotropic drugs which may be destined only for health services and scientific experimentation under the supervision of a competent authority. Article 148. The Honduran Institute for the Prevention of Alcoholism, Drug Addiction, and Drug Dependency is hereby created. It shall be governed by a special law. Article 149. The Executive Power, through the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare, shall coordinate all public activities of the centralized and decentralized institutions of that field, by means of a national health plan, which shall assign priority to the neediest groups. It is the responsibility of the State to supervise private health activities according to law.

29

Article 150. The Executive Power shall promote integrated programs for the improvement of the nutritional level of all Hondurans. CHAPTER VIII EDUCATION AND CULTURE Article 151. Education is an essential function of the State for the preservation, development, and dissemination of culture, which must extend its benefits to society without discrimination of any kind. Public education shall be secular and shall be based on fundamental principles of democracy. It shall instill and promote in all students a deep feeling of Honduran patriotism and shall be directly connected with the economic and social development process of the country. Article 152. Parents have choose the type of education children. a preferential right to they wish to give their

Article 153. The State has the obligation to promote the basic education of the people, creating for that purpose the necessary administrative and technical institutions which shall be directly dependent on the Secretariat of State in the Office of Public Education. Article 154. The elimination of illiteracy is a primary task of the State. It is the duty of all Hondurans to cooperate in order to achieve this objective. Article 155. The State recognizes and protects freedom of investigation, of education and of teaching. Article 156. The levels of formal education shall be determined by law, except for higher education which is the exclusive competence of the National Autonomous University of Honduras. Article 157. Education at all levels of the formal educational system, except at the higher levels, shall be authorized, organized, directed and supervised exclusively by the Executive Power through the Secretariat of Public Education, which shall administer all the establishments of the system that are entirely financed by public funds.

30

Article 158. No educational establishment may provide education of a quality below the level established by law. Article 159. The Secretariat of Public Education and the National Autonomous University of Honduras, without impairing their respective competence, shall adopt the necessary measures so that the general curricula of public education are integrated in a coherent system, in order that all students satisfactorily meet the requirements of higher education. Article 160. The National Autonomous University of Honduras is an autonomous institution of the State, with juridical personality. It has the exclusive privilege of organizing, directing, and developing higher and professional education. It shall contribute to scientific, humanistic and technological research, to the general dissemination of culture, and to the study of national problems. It shall program its participation in the transformation of Honduran society. The law and the bylaws of the University shall determine its organization, functioning, and attributes. For the creation and functioning of private universities, a special law shall be enacted in accordance with the principles established by this Constitution. The only academic degrees having official validity shall be those granted by the National Autonomous University of Honduras, as well as those granted by private and foreign universities which are recognized by the National Autonomous University of Honduras. The National Autonomous University of Honduras is the only institution authorized to determine the incorporation of professionals who are graduates of foreign universities. Only persons who hold a valid degree may engage in professional activities. Non-university degrees granted by the Executive Power shall have legal validity. Article 161. The State shall contribute to the maintenance, development and enlargement of the National Autonomous University of Honduras, with a required annual

31

appropriation of not less than six percent of the budget of net revenues of the Republic, the amounts of loans and donations excluded. The National Autonomous University is exempt from any form of taxes or contributions. Article 162. Due to its informational and educational nature, teaching has a social and human function which determines for the educator scientific and moral responsibilities toward his students, the institution in which he works, and toward society. Article 163. The training of teachers is an exclusive function and responsibility of the State. A teacher is anyone who administers, organizes, directs, imparts or supervises educational work and whose profession is that of teaching. Article 164. Elementary schoolteachers shall be exempt from all taxes on their salaries and on the amounts they receive as pensions. Article 165. The law guarantees to teachers work stability, a standard of living in accordance with their high mission, and an adequate pension. A Honduran Teachers Statute shall be enacted. Article 166. All natural and juridical persons have the right to establish educational centers with due compliance with this Constitution and other laws. Working relations between teachers and owners of such private institutions shall be governed by the educational laws, without prejudice to the benefits that may originate in the labor legislation. Article 167. Owners of farms, factories and other production centers located in the rural areas are obliged to establish and maintain schools of basic education for the benefit of the children of their permanent workers, as long as the number of children of school age exceeds thirty, and in border areas when it exceeds twenty. Article 168. The teaching of the Constitution of the Republic and the history and geography of Honduras, is compulsory and shall be entrusted to Honduras teachers.

32

Article 169. The State shall support and promote the education of handicapped persons. Article 170. The State shall promote the development of extracurricular education by means of libraries, cultural centers and all forms of dissemination. Article 171. Public education shall be free, and basic education shall also be compulsory and completely at the expense of the State. The State shall set up the necessary compulsory mechanisms accordingly to make these provisions effective. Article 172. All the anthropological, archeological, historical and artistic wealth of Honduras forms part of the cultural heritage of the nation; The law shall establish the norms that will serve as the basis for its preservation, restoration, maintenance and restitution, as the case may be. It is the duty of all Hondurans to safeguard their heritage and prevent its unlawful removal. All sites of natural beauty, monuments and reserved zones shall be under the protection of the State. Article 173. The State shall preserve and promote all native cultures as well as authentic expressions of national folklore, popular art and handicrafts. Article 174. The State shall promote an enthusiasm for and the practice of physical culture and sports. Article 175. The State shall dissemination of works of national contribute to national development mate, philosophical, scientific or promote and support the and foreign authors that because they are legitiliterary creations.

Article 176. The mass media of the state shall be at the service of education and culture. Private media must collaborate in the achievement of that purpose. Article 177. Compulsory membership in professional associations is established. Its organization and functioning shall be regulated by law.

33

CHAPTER IX HOUSING Article 178. All Hondurans have the right to decent housing. The state shall design and implement housing programs of social interest. The law shall regulate the leasing of housing and premises, the use of urban soil and construction, in accordance with the public interest. Article 179. The state shall promote, support and regulate the creation of systems and mechanisms for the utilization of internal and external resources to be used for solving the housing problem. Article 180. All internal or external credits and loans obtained by the state for housing shall be regulated by law for the benefit of the ultimate user of the credit. Article 181. The Social Fund for Housing is hereby created. Its purpose shall be to develop housing in urban and rural areas. A special law shall regulate its organization and functioning. TITLE IV CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES CHAPTER I Habeas Corpus and Amparo Article 182. The State recognizes the writ of habeas corpus or personal appearance. Consequently, every aggrieved person, or any other in his behalf, has the right to file the petition: 1. When he is imprisoned or detained illegally or restrained in any way in the enjoyment of his personal freedom; and 2. When during his lawful imprisonment or detention, the imprisoned or detained person is subjected to torment, torture, harrasment, illegal demands, or any other coercion, restriction, or molestation that is unnecessary for his safety or for the order of the prison.

34

A writ of habeas corpus may be filed without any special power or any formality, either orally or in writing, using any means of communication, at any time during working or nonworking days and free of charge. Judges or other authorities may not dismiss a petition for a writ of habeas corpus and have the inescapable duty of proceeding immediately to put an end to the violation of one's personal liberty or safety. The courts that fail to admit these petitions shall incur the corresponding penal and administrative liability. Any authority who orders, or agents who undertake, the concealment of the detained person, or who in any other way violate this guarantee, shall be guilty of the offense of false arrest. Article 183. The state recognizes the writ of amparo. Consequently, every aggrieved person, or any other in his behalf, has the right to file a petition for a writ of amparo; 1. To have the enjoyment of his rights and guarantees under the Constitution maintained or restored; and 2. For a declaratory judgment in particular cases that a law or resolution or act of authority does not bind the petitioner, and is not applicable because it contravenes, limits or restricts any of the rights guaranteed by this Constitution. The petition for a writ of amparo shall be filed in accordance with the law. CHAPTER II UNCONSTITUTIONALITY AND REVIEW Article 184. Laws may be declared because of their form or content. unconstitutional

The Supreme Court of Justice has original and exclusive jurisdiction over hearing and deciding such matters and must render its decisions in accordance with the requirements governing final judgments.

35

Article 185. A declaration of unconstitutionality of a law and its nonapplicability may be petitioned by anyone who considers himself injured in his direct, personal, and legitimate interest: 1. By way of an action, to be filed before the Supreme Court of Justice; 2. By way of a defense which may be asserted in any judicial proceeding; and 3. A judge or court during any judicial proceeding may directly request a declaration as to the unconstitutionality of a law and its nonapplicability before rendering a decision. In this case and as provided in the preceding item, the proceedings shall be stayed and the case transmitted to the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 186. No power or authority may enjoin causes of action pending in other courts or reopen cases already adjudged, except that criminal and civil cases already decided may be reviewed at any time in behalf of the persons convicted, on their own request or the request of any other person, or of the Public Ministry, or on the court's own motion. The petition shall be filed with the Supreme Court of Justice. The law shall regulate the cases and the manner of review. CHAPTER III RESTRICTION OR SUSPENSION OF GUARANTEES Article 187. The exercise of the rights established in articles 69, 71, 72, 78, 81, 84, 93, 99 and 103 may be suspended in the event of invasion of the national territory, serious disturbance of the peace, an epidemic, or other general disaster, or by the president of the republic in agreement with the Council of Ministers, by means of a decree that shall contain: 1. 2. The reasons justifying the suspension; The guarantee or guarantees that are restricted;

36

3. and

The territory to be affected by the restriction;

4. The duration of the restriction. In addition, Congress shall be convened by the same decree in order that, within a period of thirty days, it may take cognizance of the decree and ratify, modify, or reject it. In the event that Congress is in session, it shall take immediate cognizance of the decree. The restriction of guarantees shall not exceed a period of forty-five days for each time it is decreed. If before the expiration of the period set for the restriction the causes underlying the decree have disappeared, it shall cease to be effective and, in this case, every citizen shall have the right to urge its revision. Upon expiration of the period of forty-five days, the guarantees shall be restored automatically unless a new restriction has been decreed. Restriction of guarantees decreed shall in no way affect the functioning of the state agencies, whose members shall always enjoy the immunities and privileges granted by law. Article 188. The territory in which the guarantees mentioned in the preceding article are suspended shall be governed during the suspension, by the state of siege law, but neither that law nor any other may provide for the suspension of any guarantees other than those already mentioned. Likewise, during the suspension no new offenses may be established or penalties imposed other than those established by laws in force at the time the suspension was decreed. TITLE V BRANCHES OF THE GOVERNMENT CHAPTER I Legislative Branch Article 189. The legislative branch consists of a Congress of deputies, who shall be elected by direct vote.

37

It shall convene in the capital of the republic in regular sessions on the twenty-fifth of January of each year without the necessity of convocation and shall adjourn on the thirty-first of October of the same year. The sessions may be extended for such time as may be necessary, by a resolution of Congress upon the initiative of one of more of its members or at the request of the executive branch. Recess of Congress shall be determined by its internal regulations. Article 190. The national special sessions: 1. 2. 3. Congress shall also hold

At the request of the executive branch; When convoked by its Permanent Committee; and Whenever half plus one of its members so agree.

In such cases it shall deal only with matters stated in the respective decree of convocation. Article 191. Five or more deputies may convoke the national Congress into special session anywhere in the republic whenever the Executive, another authority, force majeure or an act of God prevent the installation of Congress or the holding of its meetings. Article 192. For the installation of the national Congress and the holding of its meetings a quorum of half plus one of its members shall be sufficient. Article 193. Neither the national Congress itself nor any other authority of the State or private parties may prevent the installation of Congress, the holding of its meetings or order its dissolution. Violation of this provision constitutes a crime against the branches of the government. Article 194. On January 21st of each year the deputies shall meet in preliminary sessions, and with the attendance of at least five members, the provisional directorate shall be organized.

38

Article 195. On January 23 the deputies shall hold their final preliminary session to elect the permanent directorate. The president of the national Congress shall remain in office for two years and shall preside over the Permanent Committee. The rest of the directorate shall remain in office for two years. Article 196. Deputies shall be elected for a term of four years, from the date on which the national Congress is formally installed. In the event of the permanent absence of a deputy, the alternate called by the national Congress shall complete his term. Article 197. Deputies are under obligation to meet in assembly on the dates indicated in this Constitution and to attend all sessions of Congress except in case of duly proven incapacity. Deputies whose inattendance or unjustified abandonment of the sessions cause a lack or a break of quorum shall be expelled from Congress and shall loose the right to run for public office for ten years. Article 198. To be elected deputy, the following is required: 1. 2. 3. 4. To be Honduran by birthj To be at least twenty-one years of age; To be in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship; To be a layman, and

5. To have been born in the department for which he is running for office or to have resided therein for at least the last five years prior to the date of convocation of the elections. Article 199. The following may not be elected deputies: 1. The president of the republic designates of the republic; and presidential

39

2. 3.

Justices of the Supreme Court; Members of the Cabinet and deputy secretaries; of the military service with national

4. Members jurisdiction;

5. Holders of high office in the direction of management or administration of the decentralized institutions of the State; 6. Members of the military service, on active duty, members of security forces and any other armed force; 7. All other public officials or employees of the executive branch and the judicial branch as established by law, except those who hold a teaching or health-care position; 8. Members of the National Elections Tribunal;

9. The attorney general and deputy attorney general of the republic, comptroller general of the republic and the director and deputy director of administrative probity; 10. The spouse and relatives of those named in paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 8, and 9 above, and of the secretaries and deputy secretaries of state of defense and public security, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity; 11. The spouse and relatives of the chiefs of military zones, commanders of military units, departmental or sectional military representatives, and representatives of security forces or of any other armed force, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity, when these individuals are candidates for office in the department where they exercise jurisdiction; 12. Holders of government concessions for the exploitation of national resources or contractors for public services and works paid for with state funds and who have accounts pending with the state; 13. Delinquent debtors of the National Treasury.

These incompatibilities and disabilities shall affect those holding one of the above-mentioned positions six months prior to the election.

40

Article 200. Beginning on the day they are declared elected, deputies shall be entitled to the following prerogatives: 1. Personal immunity against the search of their person or their home, being arrested, accused, or tried, even during a state of siege, unless the national Congress first declares that there is probable cause for a trial; 2. Not to be conscripted for military service without their consent; 3. Immunity from liability for bills introduced or opinions expressed during their term of office; 4. Exemption from civil suit during the period covered by fifteen days before and fifteen days after a regular or special session of Congress, except as to counterclaims; and, 5. Exemption from testifying concerning information that a third party has entrusted to them by virtue of their office. Likewise, candidates for deputy shall enjoy the prerogatives set forth in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, from the day on which they are nominated by their respective political parties. Those who violate these provisions shall incur penal liability. Article 2 01. Buildings and facilities of the national Congress are inviolable. It is the duty of the president of the Directorate or of the Permanent Committee to authorize the entrance of members of the public security forces when circumstances so require. Article 202. The election of deputies to the national Congress shall be on the basis of one principal and one alternate for each thirty-five thousand inhabitants or fraction over fifteen thousand. In those departments that have a population of less than thirty-five thousand inhabitants, one principal and one alternate shall be elected. Taking into account changes in the population, the national Congress may alter the basis for the election of deputies.

41

Article 203. Deputies in office may not obtain remunerated public positions during the term for which they have been elected, except teaching and cultural positions and professional services related to social welfare. They may, however, be members of the Cabinet or deputy secretaries, presidents or managers of decentralized institutions, chiefs of diplomatic or consular missions, or serve in ad hoc diplomatic missions. In such cases they will be reinstated in the national Congress upon the termination of these functions. Alternate deputies may hold public positions or employment without loosing their status as alternates. Article 204. No deputy may hold state property as a lessee directly or indirectly, or obtain contracts or concessions of any kind from the state. Violation of this provision shall absolutely null by operation of law. Article 205. The following powers: 1. 2. national Congress render the act

shall

have

the

To make, enact, interpret, amend, and repeal laws; To convoke, suspend and close its sessions;

3. To adopt its internal regulations and impose the penalties established therein for those who violate them; 4. To convoke this Constitution; special sessions in accordance with

5. To incorporate its members in accordance with their credentials and to receive the constitutional oath from them; 6. To call the alternate deputies, in case of permanent or temporary absence or legitimate impediment of the principals, or when the latter refuse to attend; 7. To count the votes and declare the election of the president, presidential designates, and deputies to the national Congress, whenever the National Elections Tribunal has not done so. If the same person has been elected to different offices, he shall be declared elected for only one of them, in accordance with the following order:

42

a. President of the republic; b. Presidential designate of the republic; c. Deputy to the national Congress, and d. Member of the municipal corporation. 8. To accept or refuse to accept the resignation of deputies for justifiable cause; 9. To elect for the constitutional term, nine principal justices and seven alternates of the Supreme Court of Justice and to elect its President; 10. To elect the chief of the armed forces;

11. To elect the comptroller general, the assistant comptroller general, the attorney general, the assistant attorney general of the republic, and the director and deputy director of administrative probity; 12. To receive the constitutional oath of the president of the republic and presidential designates declared elected, and of any other officials it elects; to grant them leave of absence, and accept or refuse to accept their resignations; and to fill vacancies in case of the permanent absence of any of them; 13. To grant or deny permission to the president of the republic and presidential designates to leave the country for more than fifteen days; 14. To move the seat of the state powers for serious reasons. 15. To declare whether or not there are grounds for impeachment of the president and presidential designates, deputies to the national Congress, justices of the Supreme Court, members of the National Elections Tribunal, chief of the armed forces, members of the cabinet and deputy secretaries, chiefs of diplomatic missions, the comptroller general, the assistant comptroller general, the attorney general, the assistant attorney general of the republic, and director and deputy director of administrative probity; 16. To grant amnesty for political offenses or related common offenses, except in such cases the national Congress may not make decisions on pardons; 17. To grant or refuse permission to Hondurans to accept employment or decorations from another State;

43

18. To award prizes and grant temporary privileges to authors and investors and to persons who hace introduced new industries of public benefit or who have improved those already existing; 19. To approve or disapprove contracts that involve fiscal exemptions, incentives, and concessions, or any other contract that is to take effect or continue to be valid in the following presidental term; 20. To approve or disapprove duct of the executive branch, the National Elections Tribunal, the the republic, the attorney general decentralized institutions; the administrative conjudicial branch and the comptroller general of of the republic and the

21. To appoint special committee's to investigate matters of national interest. The summons of such committees shall be compulsory under penalty of contempt similar to the one used in the judicial process; 22. To interpellate secretaries of state and other officials of the central government, decentralized institutions, state enterprises and any other entities in which the state has an interest, concerning matters related to the public administration; 2 3. To declare a restriction or suspension of guarantees in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, and to rafity, modify, or disapprove the restriction or suspension enacted by the executive branch according to law; 24. To confer all ranks from major to major general, at the proposal of the chief of the armed forces and at the initiative of the president of the republic; 25. To fix the permanent number of members of the armed forces; 2 6. To authorize or refuse the passage of foreign troops through the national territory; 2 7. To authorize the executive branch to order troops of the armed forces to go to another country to serve in foreign territory, in accordance with international treaties and conventions; 28. To declare war and to make peace;

44

29. To authorize the admission of foreign military missions of technical assistance or cooperation in Honduras; 30. To approve or disapprove international treaties signed by the executive branch; 31. To create and abolish posts and to award honors and pensions for significant services to the nation; 32. To adopt annually the general budget of revenues and expenditures, on the basis of the proposal submitted by the executive branch, duly itemized and to decide on modifications; 33. To approve annually the duly itemized budget of revenues and expenditures of decentralized institutions; 34. To determine the weight, fineness, and rate of the national currency and the standard of weights and measures; 35. charges; To levy taxes, assessments, and other public

36. To approve or disapprove loans and similar agreements related to the public credit, entered into by the executive branch. In order to contract foreign loans, or loans that although contracted in Honduras must be financed with foreign capital, the approval of the national Congress shall be required; 37. To establish by law, those cases in which subsidies and aid may be granted for purposes of public benefit or as an instrument of economic and social development; 38. To approve or disapprove the final accounts of public expenditures, on the basis of reports submitted by the office of the comptroller general of the republic and reservations thereto made by the executive branch; 39. To regulate the payment of the national debt, at the initiative of the executive branch; 40. To exercise control over the public revenues;

45

41. To authorize the executive branch the alienation of national property or its application to public uses; 42. To open ports of entry, and establish and abolish customhouses and free trade zones, at the initiative of the executive branch; 43. 44. To regulate maritime, land and air trade; To establish the national symbols, and

45. To exercise any other powers conferred upon it by this Constitution and other laws. Article 206. The functions of the legislative branch are indelegable except that related to the taking of the constitutional oath of office of high government officials, in accordance with this Constitution. Article 2 07. Before closing its sessions, the directorate of the national Congress shall appoint nine deputies and their respective alternates to form the Permanent Committee during the adjournment of Congress. Article 208. The powers are the following: 1. 2. of the Permanent Committee

To adopt its internal regulations; To render opinions and complete action on pending business, to be considered at the next legislative session; To prepare, for submission to Congress for consideration, proposed changes in the laws that in its opinion the needs of the country may demand; To receive from the executive branch the enactments of the last ten days of sessions of the national Congress, duly signed; To receive complaints Constitution; of violations of this

3.

4.

5.

6.

To keep in its custody and under its responsibility the files of the national Congress;

46

7.

To publish an edition of all decrees and resolutions enacted by the national Congress at its previous sessions, within three months following its adjournment; To convoke the national Congress for a special session, at the request of the executive branch or whenever the exigent circumstances so require; To receive from the executive branch the documentation and information relative to economic agreements, credit operations, or loans that that branch plans to enter into, authorize, or contract, in order to give detailed information to the national Congress at its next session; To submit to Congress a detailed report of its work during its period of its performance; To elect ad interim, in case of absolute default, the replacements for officials who must be appointed by the national Congress; To call in other deputies as members, to fill vacancies in the membership of the Committee; To grant or deny permission to the president of the republic and the presidential designates to leave the national territory for more than fifteen days; To appoint members of the national Congress to the special committees that it deems necessary, and To perform any other duties conferred on it by the Constitution.

8.

9.

10. 11.

12. 13.

14. 15.

Art icle 209. The Special Disbursement Office of the legislative branch is hereby created to attend to the payment of all expenditures of the branch. Article 210. The Special Disbursement Office of the legislative branch shall be immediately subordinate to the directorate of the national Congress or to the Permanent Committee, as may be appropriate. The directorate of the national Congress is responsible for appointing the paymaster, who must furnish bond in accordance with the law.

47

Article 211. The executive branch shall include in the general budget of expenditures and revenue the funds budgeted by the legislative branch for its functioning. Art icle 212. The General Treasury of the Republic shall make advance quarterly authorization of the funds necessary to meet the expenditures of the national Congress. CHAPTER II ENACTMENT, SANCTION AND PROMULGATION OF LAWS Art icle 213. Deputies to the national Congress, the president of the republic, through the secretaries of State, as well as the Supreme Court of Justice and the National Electoral Tribunal, in matters within their jurisdiction, have the exclusive right to introduce bills. Article 214. No bill shall be finally voted upon until after it has been debated on three different days, except in case of urgency determined by a simple majority of the deputies present. Article 215. Every bill that has been passed by Congress shall, within three days after being voted upon, be sent to the executive branch so that it may sanction it and order it promulgated as law. A law shall be sanctioned with the following phrase: "Let it therefore be executed". Article 216. Should the executive branch find impediments to the sanction of the bill, it shall return it to the national Congress within ten days with the phrase: "Return to Congress", and shall explain the grounds on which disapproval is based. If it does not veto it within the period indicated, the bill shall be considered sanctioned and shall be promulgated as law. Whenever the executive returns a bill, it shall again be debated in the national Congress, and if it is ratified by a two-thirds vote, it shall again be sent to the executive branch, with this phrase: "Constitutionally ratified" and the executive branch shall publish it forthwith.

48

If the grounds for the veto are that the bill is unconstitutional, it may not be submitted to a new debate until the opinion of the Supreme Court of Justice has been obtained; the Court shall issue its opinion within such period as the national Congress shall specify. Article 217. When the national Congress passes a bill at the conclusion of its session and the executive deems it inadvisable to sanction it, the executive is required to give immediate notice to Congress so that it may remain in session for another ten days, calculated from the date on which Congress received the bill, and if the executive does not do so, it shall return the bill within the first eight days of the next session of the Congress. Article 218. Sanction shall not be necessary for, nor shall the executive branch be entitled to veto, the following acts and resolutions: 1. Elections that the national Congress orders announces or resignations that it accepts disapproves; 2. or or

Declarations that there are or are not grounds for impeachment; Decrees that relate to the conduct of the executive branch; Regulations procedure; that it issues for its internal

3. 4.

5.

Decrees it approves to temporarily transfer its seat to another place in the territory of Honduras or to suspend its sessions or to convene special sessions; The budget law; Treaties or contracts Congress, and rejected by the national

6. 7. 8.

Amendments to the constitution of the republic.

In these cases, the executive shall promulgate the law with this phrase: "Now therefore let it be published".

49

Article 219. Whenever a bill that was not introduced by the Supreme Court of Justice is intended to amend or repeal any provision contained in the codes of the republic, it may not be debated without hearing the opinion of that Court. The Court shall issue its report within the period specified by the national Congress. This provision does not apply to laws of a political, economic or administrative nature. Article 220. No bill rejected wholly or partially may be debated again in the same session of the Congress. Article 221. A law is compulsory by virtue of its promulgation and after twenty days have elapsed following completion of its publication in the official journal La Gaceta. Nevertheless, the period mentioned in this article may be reduced or extended in the law itself and, in special cases, another method of promulgation may be ordered. CHAPTER III THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE REPUBLIC Article 222. The office of the comptroller general of the republic is an auxiliary agency of the legislative branch and is functionally and administratively independent, exclusively responsible for the post-auditing of the public treasury, and has among others the following powers and duties: 1. To monitor the administration of public funds and properties and to audit the accounts of the officials and employees that handle them; To audit the financial operations of the agencies of the public administration, decentralized institutions, including the municipalities, government institutions, and entities that are financed with funds from the public treasury or receive a subsidy or subvention from it; To examine the books kept by the state and the accounts rendered by the executive branch to the

2.

3.

50

national Congress on the operations of the public treasury and to report to the Congress on the results of this examination; and 4. To perform any other functions that the organic law assigns to it.

Article 223. The office of the comptroller general shall be in the charge of a comptroller and a deputy comptroller elected by the national Congress, both of whom shall have the same qualifications and shall enjoy the same prerogatives as the justices of the Supreme Court of Justice. No person shall be the comptroller or deputy comptroller unless: 1. 2. 3. He is a Honduran national by birth; He is over 25 years of age; He is a citizen rights; in the full enjoyment of his

4. 5.

He is of recognized honesty and competence, and He holds a university degree in law, economics, public administration, auditing or public accounting or is a qualified accountant or public accountant.

The comptroller and deputy comptroller shall be elected for a term of five years and may not be reelected for the subsequent term. Article 224. The comptroller and the deputy comptroller shall be answerable to the national Congress for acts done in performance of their duties and may be removed by the Congress only when there is proof of the commission of serious irregularities or offenses. Article 22 5. The post-auditing of the Central Bank of Honduras, as it relates to the management of state funds shall be carried out by the office of the comptroller general of the republic, which shall submit reports on such audit to the national Congress.

51

The post-auditing of other credit institutions that receive state funds, as it relates to the use of such funds in strictly banking operations or business, shall be carried out by the office of the superintendent of banks and, in other cases, by the office of the comptroller general of the republic. Art icle 226. The office of the comptroller general must submit to the national Congress, within the first forty days after the close of the fiscal year, a report on the work done during that year, together with a statement of opinions and suggestions deemed necessary to achieve greater efficiency in the management and control of public funds and properties. This report, a copy of which shall be simultaneously sent to the president of the republic, shall be published by the office of the comptroller general in full or in summary form, with the exception of matters relating to classified military information and others that may affect national security. The foregoing does not preclude the office of the comptroller general from presenting special reports to the national Congress and, in specified cases, also simultaneously, to the president of the republic. Article 227. All aspects relating to the organization and operation of the office of the comptroller general of the republic shall be determined by law. CHAPTER IV OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE REPUBLIC Article 228. The office of the attorney general of the republic shall be the legal representative of the state. Its organization and operation shall be determined by law. Art icle 229. The attorney general and the deputy attorney general of the republic shall be elected by the national Congress for a term of four years and they may not be reelected for a subsequent period; they must have the same qualifications and shall have the same prerogatives and qualifications as prescribed by this Constitution for justices of the Supreme Court of Justice.

52

Article 230. Civil and criminal actions resulting from the audits of the office of the comptroller general of the republic shall be instituted by the attorney general, with the exception of those relating to municipalities, which shall continue to be the responsibility of officials indicated in the respective laws. Art icle 2 31. The state shall appropriate such funds as may be necessary for the proper organization and operation of the office of the attorney general of the republic. All public administration organs shall cooperate with the attorney general of the republic in performing his functions in the manner determined by law. CHAPTER V DIRECTORATE OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROBITY Article 2 32. The Directorate of Administrative Probity shall be an auxiliary control agency of the legislative branch and shall be functionally and administratively independent . Its organization, powers and duties shall be regulated by law. Article 233. Unlawful enrichment is presumed whenever the increase in the capital of a public official or employee, from the date on which he took office until the date on which he left it, is notably higher than that which he could have normally obtained from salaries and emoluments legally received and from increases of his capital or his income from any other lawful source. Unlawful enrichment shall also be presumed when a public servant does not authorize an investigation of his bank deposits or business in the country or abroad. To determine the increase referred to in the first paragraph of this article, the capital and income of the official or employee, his spouse and his children shall be considered jointly. The declaration of property of public officials and employees shall be made according to law. When a public servant has been shall be entitled to resume his post. found innocent, he

53

Article 234. The director and deputy director general of administrative probity shall be elected by the National Congress for a term of five years and must have the same qualifications as specified for the posts of comptroller and deputy comptroller of the republic. CHAPTER VI THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH Article 235. The president of the republic shall exercise the executive power on behalf and for the benefit of the people. Art icle 236. The president of the republic and three presidential designates shall be elected jointly and directly by the people by a simple majority of votes. The election shall be announced by the National Electoral Tribunal and, in default thereof, by the national Congress or by the Supreme Court of Justice as applicable. Art icle 2 37. The presidential term shall be four years and shall begin on the 2 7th day of January following the date on which the election was held. Article 238. No person shall be president republic or presidential designate unless: 1. 2. 3. He is a Honduran by birth; He is over 30 years of age; He is in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, and He is a layman. of the

4.

Article 2 39. A citizen who has held the office of president under any title may not be president or a presidential designate. Any person who violates this provision or advocates its amendment as well as those that directly or indirectly support him shall immediately cease to hold their respective offices and shall be disqualified for ten years from holding any public office. ' Article 240. The following may not be elected prfsi dent of the republic:

54

1.

The presidential designates of the republic, secretaries and deputy secretaries of the cabinet, members of the National Electoral Tribunal, justices and judges of the judicial branch, presidents, vice presidents, managers, deputy managers, directors, deputy directors, executive secretaries of decentralized institutions, the comptroller general and deputy comptroller general of the republic, the attorney general and deputy attorney general of the republic, the director and deputy director of administrative probity, who have performed their functions during the six months prior to the date of election of the president of the republic . Commanders and general officers of the armed forces; Senior officers of the armed forces and the police or state security forces; Servicemen on active duty and members of any other armed body that have performed their functions during the previous twelve months prior to the date of the election; The spouse and the relatives of military commanders serving as members of the high council of the armed forces, within the fourth degree of relationship by blood or the second degree of relationship by marriage; Relatives of the president and presidential nates that have held the post of president year preceding the election, within the degree of relationship by blood or the degree of relationship by marriage; desigin the fourth second

2. 3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Representatives or agents of enterprises that are concession holders of the state, the concession holders of the state for the exploitation of natural resources or contractors for services or public works that are financed with national funds and who for those reasons have outstanding account with the state.

Article 241. The president of the republic, or whoever is performing his functions, may not leave the national territory for more than fifteen days without permission of the national Congress or its Permanent Committee.

55

Article 242. If the absence of the president is permanent, the designate elected for that purpose by the national Congress shall exercise the executive power for the time that remains for completion of the constitutional term. But if the three designates are also permanently absent, the executive power shall be exercised by the president of the national Congress or, in default thereof, by the president of the Supreme Court of Justice for the time that remains for completion of the constitutional period. During his temporary absences, the president may call upon one of the designates to replace him. If the election of the president and designates should not be announced one day before the 2 7th of January, the executive power shall be exercised exceptionally by the council of Ministers, which must convoke elections of the supreme authorities within fifteen days subsequent to that date. These elections shall take place within a period of not less than four or more than six months from the date of the convocation. Once the elections have been held, the National Electoral Tribunal or, in default thereof, the national Congress or the Supreme Court of Justice, as the case may be, shall make the corresponding announcement within the twenty days subsequent to the date of the election, and the persons elected shall immediately take office until the corresponding constitutional period is completed. While the newly elected supreme authorities take office, the deputies to the national Congress and the justices of the Supreme Court of Justice shall continue temporarily to perform their functions. Article 243. If, at the beginning of the constitutional period for which he has been elected the president does not take office, until he does so the presidential designate elected by the national congress shall exercise the executive power. Art icle 244. The oath required by law of the president of the republic or his legal replacement shall be administered before the president of the national Congress, if it is in session, or, in default thereof, before the president of the Supreme Court of Justice.

56

Should it not be possible to administer the oath before the above-mentioned officials, it may be administered before any judge (juez de letras) or justice of the peace of the republic, Art icle 245. The president of the republic shall be responsible for the general administration of the state; his powers and duties are as follows: 1. To comply with and enforce the Constitution, treaties and conventions, laws and other legal provisions ; To direct the policies of the state and to represent it; To safeguard the independence and honor of the republic and the integrity and inviolability of the national territory; To maintain the peace and internal security of the republic and to repel every attack or external aggression; To freely appoint and dismiss secretaries and deputy secretaries of the cabinet and other officials and employees whose appointment is not assigned to other authorities; To convene the national Congress in special sessions through the Permanent Committee or to propose the continuance of regular sessions; To restrict or suspend the exercise of rights, in agreement with the Council of Ministers, subject to the provisions of this Constitution; To send messages to the national Congress at any time and compulsorily by personal appearance and in writing when each regular legislative session is installed; To participate in the enactment of the laws by introducing bills in the national Congress through the secretaries of the cabinet;

2. 3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

57

To give the legislative and judicial branches and the National Electoral Tribunal such assistance and forces as they may need to implement their decisions; To issue directives and decrees and to issue regulations and resolutions according to the law; To direct foreign policy and relations; To conclude treaties and agreements and to ratify, following approval by the national Congress, international treaties of a political and military nature, those relating to the national territory, sovereignty and concessions, those entailing financial obligations for the public treasury, those requiring amendment or repeal of any constitutional or legal provision, and those needing legislative measures for their implementation; To appoint, in accordance with the foreign service law to be issued, the heads of diplomatic and consular missions who shall be Honduran nationals by birth except in the case of honorary posts or joint representations of Honduras with other states; To receive the heads of foreign diplomatic missions and representatives of international organizations; to issue the exequatur to and withdraw it from consuls of other states; To exercise command over the armed forces as the commander-in-chief and to adopt the necessary measures for the defense of the republic; To declare war and make peace during a recess of the national Congress, which must be convened forthwith; Generally to watch over the official behavior of public officials and employees for the security and prestige of the government and of the state; To administer the public treasury; To adopt special economic and financial measures when the national interest so requires and to give an account thereof to the national Congress;

To negotiate loans and conclude contracts therefor following approval by the national Congress when appropriate; To draw up the national development plan, discuss it in the Council of Ministers, submit it to the national Congress for approval, direct it and execute it; To regulate customs tariffs according to law; To pardon and commute sentences according to law; To confer declarations according to law; To see to it that the revenues of the state are collected and to regulate their investment according to law; To publish each quarter a statement of income and expenditure of public revenue; To organize, direct, orient and promote public education, eradicate illiteracy, and disseminate and improve technical education; To adopt measures for the promotion, recovery and rehabilitation of the health of the population and the prevention of disease; To direct the economic and financial policy of the state; To exercise supervision and control of banking institutions, insurance companies, and investment houses through the National Banking and Insurance Commission, whose membership and operation shall be governed by a special law, and to appoint the president and vice presidents of the state banks according to law; To prescribe such measures and provisions as may be feasible to promote the rapid execution of the agrarian reform and the development of production and productivity in rural areas; To sanction, veto, promulgate and publish laws approved by the national Congress; any

59

To direct and support the policy of economic and social integration, both national and international, aimed at improving the living conditions of the Honduran people; To create, maintain, and supress public services and take such measures as may be necessary for the efficient operation thereof; To confer military ranks from second lieutenant to captain, inclusive; To ensure that the army is apolitical, essentially professional, and obedient; To issue and cancel naturalization papers authorized by the executive branch according to law; To award pensions, according to law; bonuses, and allowances

To confer legal status on civil according to law;

organizations

To ensure harmony between capital and labor; To revise and fix the minimum wage according to law; To permit or deny, following authorization by the national Congress, the transit through Honduran territory of troops of another country; To permit, following authorization by the national Congress, the departure of Honduran troops to render services in foreign territory, in accordance with international treaties and conventions for operations for the maintenance of peace, and Such other powers and duties as are conferrred on him by the Constitution and the laws.

60

CHAPTER VII OFFICES OF THE SECRETARIES OF THE CABINET Article 246. For the general administration of the country there shall be at least twelve departments of the cabinet, among which shall be distributed the areas of interior and justice, office of the president, foreign affairs, economic affairs and trade, finance and public credit, national defense and public security, lab-or and social welfare, public health, public education, communications, public works and transportation, culture and tourism, natural resources and such others as may be created according to law. Article 247. The secretaries of the cabinet shall cooperate with the president of the republic in orienting, coordinating, directing and supervising the organs and agencies of the national public administration in their areas of jurisdiction. Article 248. The decrees, regulations, directives, orders and executive acts of the president of the republic must be authorized by the secretaries of the cabinet in their respective areas of jurisdiction or by the deputy secretaries, as the case may be. If this requirement is not met, they shall not have legal force. The secretaries of the cabinet and the deputy secretaries shall be jointly responsible with the president of the republic for any acts they authorize. The ministers present shall be responsible for decisions taken in the Council of Ministers unless they have given grounds for their dissenting votes. Article 249. No person may be secretary or deputy secretary unless he meets the same requirements as to be president of the republic. The deputy secretaries shall replace the secretaries by operation of law. Article 2 50. The following may not be secretaries or deputy secretaries of the cabinet:

61

1.

The presidential designates of the republic, relatives of the president and of the designates within the fourth degree of relationship by blood and the second degree of relationship by marriage; Persons who have administered or collected public securities until the solvency of their account has been settled; Delinquent debtors to the public treasury; Concession holders of the state, their agents or representatives for the exploitation of natural resources or contractors of any services and public works that are financed with state funds and who for those reasons have accounts pending with it .

2.

3. 4.

Art icle 251. The national Congress may summon the secretaries of the cabinet and these must answer any questions put to them concerning matters relating to public administration. Article 2 52. The and presides over the of the Council shall the event of a tie, vote. president of the republic convokes Council of Ministers. All decisions be taken by simple majority and, in the president shall have a casting

The Council shall meet at the initiative of the president to take decisions on any matters he may deem to be of national importance and to consider such cases as are specified by law. The secretary of the cabinet in the office of the president shall act.as secretary of the Council. Art icle 253. The holding of another public post is incompatible with the office of secretary of the cabinet except when the laws assign him other functions. The rules, prohibitions and penalties established in articles 203 and 204 are applicable to the secretaries of the cabinet where appropriate. Art icle 254. The secretaries of the cabinet must submit annually to the National Congress within the first fifteen days of its installation a report on the work done in their respective departments.

62

Article 255. The administrative acts of any organ of the State that are to have general legal effects shall be published in the official journal La Gaceta and their validity shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution for the coming into force of legislative enactment. CHAPTER VIII THE CIVIL SERVICE Article 256. The civil service system regulates the employment and public service relations established between the State and its servants, based on the principles of competence, efficiency and honesty. Personnel administration shall be subject to scientific methods based on the merit system. The State shall protect administrative career. its servants within the

Article 257. The law shall regulate the civil service and in particular conditions for entering the public administration; promotions and advancement based on merit and qualifications; job security, transfers, suspensions and guarantees; the duties of public servants and reviewability against decisions that affect them. Article 2 58. Both in the central government and in any of the decentralized agencies of the State, no person may hold at the same time two or more remunerated public offices except those rendering medical care or educational services. No official, employee or public worker that receives a regular salary shall receive a per diem allowance for the provision of a service in performance of his duties. Article 259. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to officials and employees of decentralized and municipal institutions. CHAPTER IX DECENTRALIZED INSTITUTIONS Article 2 60. Decentralized institutions may be established only by special law, provided the following are guaranteed:

63

1.

Greater efficiency in the administration of the national interests; The satisfaction of mass public service needs on a nonprofit basis; Greater effectiveness in achieving the purposes of the public administration; Economic and administrative justification of the cost of their operation, of the expected yield or benefit or, where appropriate, of the expected savings; Exclusiveness of the field, so that their establishment does not entail duplication with other already existing organs of the public administration; The development and exploitation of properties or resources belonging to the state; the participation of the state in those areas of economic activities that it considers necessary and advisable for achieving its purposes of social progress and general welfare, and The general legal regime of the decentralized institutions will be established by the means of the general law of public administration to be issued.

2.

3. 4.

5.

6.

7.

Art icle 261. To establish or suppress a decentralized agency the national Congress shall decide by the vote of two thirds of its members. Prior to the issuance of laws relating to decentralized institutions, the national Congress must seek the opinion of the executive branch. Article 2 62. The decentralized institutions enjoy functional and administrative independence and for that purpose may issue such regulations as are necessary according to law. The decentralized institutions shall operate under the direction and supervision of the State and their chairmen, directors or managers shall be accountable for their activities. The law shall stipulate the necessary mechanisms for the control of decentralized institutions.

64

Art icle 2 63. The following may not be chairmen, general managers, or directors general of decentralized institutions: 1. Relatives of the president of the republic within the fourth degree of relationship by blood or the second degree of relationship by marriage, and The presidential designates of the republic their relatives within the fourth degree relationship by blood or the second degree relationship by marriage. or of of

2.

Article 264. The chairmen, directors general and managers of decentralized agencies of the state shall have a term of office of four years and their mode of appointment and removal shall be in accordance with the respective laws establishing them. Article 2 65. Officials who in any capacity exercise directive functions of decentralized agencies shall be officials of trust of the executive branch but the employment relations of the other employees of these institutions shall be regulated by the legal regime applicable to workers in general. The methods, content and scope of these regimes shall be governed by the pertinent laws, regulations and collective agreements. Article 266. The decentralized institutions shall submit to the central government the plan of operations for the fiscal year concerned, accompanied by a narrative and analytical report of each of the basic specific activities to be carried out, together with a comprehensive budget for the executivon of the plan concerned. The secretaries of the cabinet in the departments of finance and public credit and the Superior Council for Economic Planning shall separately prepare opinions for the purpose of determining the consistency of such documents with the development plans approved. Once they are approved by the president of the republic, the opinions shall be sent to the decentralized institutions concerned. The governing bodies of the decentralized institutions shall not approve the plan or the annual budget until the changes proposed in the opinion concerned have been incorporated into them.

65

Article 267. The decentralized agencies of the State shall send to the legislative branch within the first thirty days of its installation the respective annual itemized preliminary draft budgets for approval. Article 268. The decentralized institutions must submit to the central government a detailed report on the net results of the financial activities of their prior fiscal year. Likewise, they must submit a report on the physical and financial progress of all the programs and projects being executed. The secretary of the cabinet in the department of finance and public credit and the Superior Council for Economic Planning shall evaluate the results of the work of each decentralized agency and shall make such observations and recommendations as they deem pertinent. Article 269. The executive branch may, through the corresponding channel, dispose of the net profits of the decentralized institutions that carry on economic activities, when they do not affect the development of those institutions or the execution of their priority programs or projects. Article 270. The law shall specify the contracts that must be submitted to public bidding by decentralized institutions. Article 2 71. Any substantial change in the plan of operations and the budget of a decentralized institution shall previously require a favorable opinion from the Superior Council for Economic Planning and from the secretary of the cabinet in the department of finance and public credit. CHAPTER X THE ARMED FORCES Art icle 2 72. The armed forces of Honduras are a permanent essentially professional, apolitical, obedient and nondeliberative national institution. They are established to defend the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the republic, to maintain peace,

66

public order and the rule of the Constitution, the principles of free suffrage and alternation in the exercise of the office of the president of the republic. Article 273. The armed forces shall comprise the high command, army, air force, navy, public security force, the agencies and units determined by the laws establishing them. Article 2 74. The armed forces shall be subject to the provisions of the laws establishing them and of the other laws and regulations governing their operation. They shall cooperate with the executive branch in the tasks of literacy training, education, agriculture, conservation of national resources, highways, communications, health, agrarian reform and in emergency situations. Article 275. A special law shall regulate the operation of the military courts. Article 276. Military service is compulsory for all citizens between the ages of 18 and 30. A special law shall regulate its operation. In the event of an international war, all Honduran nationals capable of rendering service, without discrimination, shall be soldiers. Article 277. The armed forces shall be under the direct command of the chief of the armed forces; through him, the president of the republic shall perform his constitutional function relating to them, in accordance with the law establishing the armed forces. Article 2 78. Orders given by the president of the republic to the armed forces, through their chief, must be obeyed and executed. Article 2 79. The chief of the armed forces must be a general or superior officer with the rank of colonel of the army or its equivalent, on active service, a Honduran national by birth, and shall be elected by the national Congress from a list of three proposed by the Superior Council of the Armed Forces. His term of office shall be five years and he may be removed from his office by the national Congress only when

67

ground for impeachment has been declared by a two-thirds vote of its members; and in the other cases provided for in the law establishing the armed forces. No relative of the president of the republic or of his legal substitutes within the fourth degree of relationship by blood or the second degree of relationship by marriage may be elected chief of the armed forces. Art icle 280. On taking office the chief of the armed forces shall take before the national Congress the legal oath for every public official. Article 281. In the event of temporary absence of the chief of the armed forces, the chief of the general staff of the armed forces shall perform his functions. In the event of permanent absence, the Superior Council of the Armed Forces shall propose, within the following fifteen days, a list of three candidates so that the national Congress may elect the one to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the period for which he had been elected. Until the election takes place, the chief of the general staff of the armed forces shall fill the vacant post. Art icle 282. The chief of the armed forces shall appoint the personnel of the armed forces through the office of the secretary of national defense and public security. Art icle 283. The general staff of the armed forces is an organ of the office of the chief thereof and shall have such functions as the law specifies. Article 284. The territory of the republic shall be divided into military regions for reasons of national security and each shall be in the charge of a chief of military region. Each region shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the respective law and may be divided into districts and sections in accordance with the orders of the chief of the armed forces. Article 285. The Superior Council of the Armed Forces is the consultative organ in all matters relating to that institution.

68

It shall act as the decision-making organ in matters within its jurisdiction and as the Superior Court of the Armed Forces in matters submitted to its cognizance. Article 286. The chief of the armed forces shall be the chairman of the Superior Council of the Armed Forces, which shall be composed as specified in the law establishing the armed forces. Article 2 87. The National Council on Defense and Security is hereby created; a special law shall regulate its organization and operation. Article 288. Candidates for commissions in the armed forces shall be educated in military training centers. Training centers shall be organized for the arms and services in accordance with the needs of the institution. Article 289. The National Defense College is established as the highest seat of learning of the armed forces, responsible for the training of select military and civilian personnel so that they may participate jointly in the national strategic planning in the political, economic, social and military fields. Art icle 2 90. Military ranks are acquired only strict promotion in accordance with the respective law. by

Military personnel may not be deprived of their ranks, honors or pensions except as provided for by law. Promotions from second lieutenant to captain, inclusive, shall be conferred by the president of the republic on the proposal of the chief of the Armed Forces; promotions from major to major general, inclusive, shall be conferred by the national Congress on the joint proposal of the president of the republic and the chief of the armed forces. The general staff of the armed forces shall make a report on each promotion requested. Article 2 91. For security of all the Institute of Military with the corresponding the protection, welfare and social members of the armed forces, the Welfare shall operate in accordance law.

Article 292. The manufacture, import, distribution and sale of arms, ammunition and similar articles is reserved as an exclusive right of the armed forces.

69

Article 293. The administration of the funds appropriated for the Department of Defense shall be the responsibility of the general disbursement office of the armed forces (Pagaduria General), which shall receive from the secretariat of finance and public credit quarterly advances of the funds appropriated in the general income and expenditure budget of the republic. CHAPTER XI THE DEPARTMENTAL AND MUNICIPAL SYSTEM Art icle 294. The national territory shall be divided into departments. Their establishment and boundaries shall be determined by the national Congress. The departments shall be divided into autonomous municipalities administered by corporations elected by the people, according to law. Article 2 95. The central district consists of a single municipality made up of the former municipalities of Tegucigalpa and Comayaguela. Article 296. The law shall establish the organization and operation of the municipalities and the requirements for being a municipal official or employee. Art icle 297. The municipalities shall freely appoint the employees under their authority including the police officers paid with their own funds. Article 298. In the performance of their exclusive functions and provided they are not contrary to the law, the municipal corporations shall be independent of the state powers and shall be accountable to the courts of justice for abuses committed individually or collectively, without prejudice to administrative liability. Article 299. The economic and social development of the municipalities must form part of the national development programs. Article 300. Every municipality shall have sufficient communal land (tierras ejidales) to ensure its existence and normal development.

70

Article 301. Taxes and contributions levied on income derived from investments made in the respective municipality, as well as the participation incumbent upon it for the exploitation or processing of the natural resources located in its municipal jurisdiction, shall be paid into the municipal treasury, except where reasons of national expediency require them to be used for other purposes. Article 302. For the exclusive purposes of ensuring the improvement and development of the communities, citizens shall be entitled to freely associate themselves in civic associations, to establish federations or confederations. The law shall regulate this entitlement. CHAPTER XII THE JUDICIAL BRANCH Article 303. The power to dispense justice emanates from the people and is administered free of charge on behalf of the state by independent justices and judges. The judicial branch consists of a Supreme Court of Justice, the courts of appeals, and the courts specified by law. The Supreme Court of Justice shall have its seat in the capital of the republic, shall be composed of nine principal justices and seven alternates, elected by the national Congress, and shall be divided into divisions, in accordance with the provisions of the internal rules of that Court. Article 304. The president of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be elected by the national Congress for a term of four years. Article 305. The term of office of the justices of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be four years and they may be reelected. The vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term. Article 306. The judicial branch shall receive an annual appropriation of not less than 3 percent of the budget of the net income of the republic, excluding loans and grant s.

71

Article 307. No person shall be a justice of the Supreme Court of Justice unless: he is a citizen in the enjoyment of his rights, a Honduran national by birth, a lawyer before the courts of the republic, a member of the bar association, more than thirty five years of age, a layman and has held the post of trial judge (juez de letras) or judge of the court of appeals for at least five years. Article 308. The following persons may not be elected justices of the Supreme Court of Justice: 1. 2. Those who have any of the disqualifications to be a secretary of the Cabinet, and Relatives within the fourth degree of relationship by blood or the second degree of relationship by marriage.

The provisions of item 1 above apply to the appointment of judges of the courts of appeals, and the disqualifications mentioned in item 2 above apply to the appointment of judges of the same courts of appeals. Article 309. Judges and justices may not be removed, suspended, transferred or retired, except for the causes and with the guarantees provided in the law. The law shall regulate the judicial career and matters relating to ensuring the competence, stability or independence of the judges, in addition to establishing rules relating to jurisdiction, organization and operation of the courts, when not otherwise provided for in this Constitution. Article 310. No case shall have more than two instances; the judge or justice who has exercised jurisdiction in one of them may not try the other or examine a writ of cassation on the same matter without incurring liability. Nor may relatives within the fourth degree of relationship by blood or the second degree of relationship by marriage participate as judges in the same case. Article 311. The position of serving as judge or justice is incompatible with the free practice of the legal

72

profession and with the performance as an official or employee of other branches of government except that of teacher or diplomat at large. Judges or justices in service may not take part for any reason in politics of any kind except that of casting their personal vote, nor may they join a union or go on strike. Article 312.. The justices, judges, employees of the office of the solicitor general (ministerio publico) and court officials may not be required to undergo military service, or to attend military exercises or drills. Article 313. The courts of justice shall request the assitance of the police force in the enforcement of their decisions: if it is denied to them or is not available, they shall require it from the public at large. He who without reason refuses to give assistance shall be held liable therefore. Article 314. It is the exclusive right of the courts of justice to judge and enforce judgments. They are responsible for the application of the laws in specific cases. Article 315. In the event of a conflict between a constitutional rule and a rule of ordinary law, a judge shall apply the former. Likewise, he shall give precedence to the rule of law over all other subordinate rules. Article 316. The law shall regulate the organization and operation of the courts and the office of the solicitor general. Article 317. Without detriment to the independence of judges and justices, the law shall prescribe what is necessary to ensure the proper and normal operation of the courts of justice and shall provide effective means of meeting their functional and administrative needs, as well as the organization of the auxiliary services. Article 318. The contentious-administrative jurisdiction is hereby created. The law shall determine the jurisdiction of such courts as well as their organization and operation.

73

Article 319. The Supreme Court of Justice shall have the following powers and duties: 1. 2. To enact its internal rules; To try official and common offenses of high officials of the republic, when the National Congress has declared that there are grounds for impeachment; To hear in second instance all cases that the court of appeals has heard in first instance; To confer the title of lawyer and authorize those who have obtained it to practice the profession of notary; To declare whether or not there are grounds for trial of such officials and employees as are specified by law; To try cases of extradition and such others as are to be judged in accordance with international law; To take cognizance in cassation according to law; To hear cases of protection against (amparo) and review, according to law; authority

3. 4.

5.

6.

7. 8.

9.

To appoint justices, judges, public prosecutors and other officials and employees, according to law; To publish the Gaceta Judicial; To accept or refuse to accept the resignation of officials appointed by it and to grant leave to such officials and to its own members; To declare laws to be unconstitutional in the manner and in the cases provided for in this Constitution; To prepare the proposed budget of the judicial branch and to submit it to the executive branch for inclusion in the general budget of revenues and expenditures; and Such other powers and duties as are conferrred upon it by this Constitution and the laws.

10. 11.

12.

13.

14.

74

Article 320. The special disbursements office (Pagaduria Especial) of the judicil branch shall pay the salaries of officials and employees of the administration of justice and its expenses. The general treasury of the republic shall pay quarterly in advance the necessary funds for making these payments. The special disbursement office of the judicial branch shall be under the immediate authority of the Supreme Court of Justice. The Supreme Court of Justice is responsible for the appointment of the disbursements officer. He shall post a bond according to law. CHAPTER XIII THE LIABILITY OF THE STATE AND OF ITS SERVANTS Article 321. The servants of the state shall have no powers other than those expressly conferred on them by law. Any act they execute outside the law is null and void and entails liability. Article 322. On taking up his post a public official shall take the following legal oath: "I promise to be faithful to the republic, to comply with and enforce the Constitution and laws." Article 323. The officials are the repositories of authority, legally responsible for their official conduct, subject to the law and never above it. No official or employee, civil or military, is required to fulfill unlawful orders or orders that entail the commission of an offense. Article 324. If in the performance of his duties a public servant infringes the law to the detriment of private individuals, he shall be civilly and jointly liable together with the State and the state institution in whose service he is working, without prejudice to the recovery action that these may institute against the servant responsible, in cases of negligence or fraud.

75

Civil liability does not exclude the institution of administrative and penal liability proceedings against the offender. Article 325. Civil liability proceedings against servants of the State prescribe in a period of ten years; penal liability proceedings, in twice the time indicated by the penal law. In both cases, the period of prescription shall run from the date on which the public servant has ceased to perform the duties of the post in which he became liable. There is no period of limitation in cases in which the death of one or more persons was caused by wilful act or omission and for political reasons. Article 326. The action to prosecute violators of the rights or guarantees established in this Constitution may be instituted by any person without bond or any formality and by simple denunciation. Article 327. The law shall regulate the civil liability of the State, as well as the joint civil, penal and administrative liability of servants of the State. TITLE VI THE ECONOMIC REGIME CHAPTER I THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM Article 328. The economic system of Honduras is based on the principles of efficiency in production and social justice in the distribution of wealth and national income, as well as on the harmonious coexistence of the factors of production that make it possible to dignify labor as the principal source of wealth and as a means of fulfillment of the human being. Article 329. The state promotes economic and social development, which will be subject to appropriate planning. The law shall regulate the system and process of planning with the participation of the State powers, and political, economic and social organizations shall be duly represented.

76

Article 330. The national economy is based on the democratic and harmonious coexistence of various forms of ownership and enterprise. Article 331. The State recognizes, guarantees and promotes freedom of consumption, savings, investment, employment, initiative, commerce, industry, contract, business and any others that flow from the principles that underlie this Constitution. However, the exercise of these freedoms may not be contrary to the social interest nor harmful to morals, health, or public security. Article 332. The practice of economic activities primarily belongs to individuals. However, the State, for reasons of public policy or social interest, may reserve to itself the operation of specified basic industries, ventures, and services affected by a public interest and issue economic, fiscal and public security measures and laws to channel, stimulate, supervise, orient and supplement private initiative on the basis of a rational and planned economic policy. Article 333. The basis of the intervention of the State in the economy shall be the public and social interest, and its limits shall be rights and liberties recognized by this Constitution. Article 334. Commercial companies shall be subject to the control and supervision of an office of the superintendent of companies, whose organization and operation shall be determined by law. Cooperatives shall be answerable to the agency and in the form and to the extent established by the pertinent laws. Article 335. The State shall order its external economic relations on the basis of fair international cooperation, Central American economic integration, and respect for the treaties and agreements it signs, insofar as they are not opposed to the national interest. Article 336. Foreign investment shall be authorized, registered and supervised by the State. It shall supplement and never substitute for national investment. Foreign enterprises shall be subject to the laws of the republic.

77

Article 337. Small-scale industry and commerce is the patrimony of Honduran nationals and its protection shall be the subject matter of a law. Article 338. The law shall regulate and promote the organization of cooperatives of all kinds, without the basic economic and social principles of this Constitution being altered or eluded. Article 339. Monopolies, monopsonies, oligopolies, ^hoarding and similar practices in industrial and commercial activity are prohibited. The temporary privileges granted to inventors, discoverers or authors as scientific, literary, artistic or commercial property, patents of invention or trademarks are not considered private monopolies. Article 340. The technical and rational exploitation of the natural resources of the nation is declared to be of public interest and need. The state shall regulate their development in accordance with the social interest and shall establish the conditions for their grant to individuals. The reforestation of the country and the conservation of forests are declared to be of national importance and collective interest. Article 341. The law may establish restrictions, terms or prohibitions for the purchase, transfer, use and enjoyment of state and municipal property, for reasons of public policy, social interest or national expediency. CHAPTER II CURRENCY AND BANKING Article 342. The issue of currency is the exclusive power of the State, which shall exercise it through the Central Bank of Honduras. The banking, regulated by law. currency and credit regime shall be

The State, through the Central Bank of Honduras, shall be responsible for the formulation and development of the

78

monetary, credit and exchange policy of the country, duly coordinated with the planned economic policy. Article 343. The Central Bank of Honduras shall regulate and approve the granting of loans, discounts, guarantees and other credit operations; commissions, allowances or bonuses of any kind that banking, financing, or insurance institutions grant to shareholders that hold a majority interest, directors, and officers. In addition, it shall regulate and approve the granting of loans, discount, guarantees and other credit operations to companies in which the shareholders hold a majority interest. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with such regulations as the Central Bank may issue, without prejudice to any civil or penal liability proceedings resulting therefrom. CHAPTER III AGRARIAN REFORM Art icle 344. Agrarian reform is a comprehensive process and an instrument for the transformation of the agrarian structrure of the country, aimed at replacing latifundia and minifundia by a system of ownership, tenure, and use of the land that guarantees social justice in rural areas and increases the production and productivity of the agricultural sector. The implementation of agrarian reform is declared to be of public need and interest. Art icle 345. Agrarian reform is an essential part of the overall development strategy of the nation and therefore any other economic and social policies that the government may approve shall be formulated and executed in harmony with it, especially those related, inter alia, to education, housing, employment, infrastructure, marketing and technical and credit assistance. Agrarian reform shall be implemented in such a way as to ensure the effective participation of agricultural workers on an equal footing with other sectors of production, in the process of economic, social and political development of the nation.

79

Article 346. It is the duty of the state to adopt measures to protect the rights and interests of the indigenous communities in the country, especially of the lands and forests in which they are settled. Article 347. Agricultural production must be preferably aimed at satisfying the food requirements of the Honduran population, within the framework of a policy of adequate supply and fair prices for the producer and the consumer. Article 348. The agrarian reform plans of the National Agrarian Institute and the other decisions of the State in agrarian matters shall be formulated and implemented with the effective participation of legally recognized organizations of agricultural workers, farmers, and stoockraisers. Article 349. The expropriation of property for the purpose of agrarian reform or for developing and improving communities, or for any other purposes of national interest determined by the law, shall be carried out on the basis of just compensation by cash payments and, where appropriate, agrarian debt bonds. These bonds shall be compulsorily acceptable, shall enjoy sufficient guarantees by the State, and shall have such nominal values, redemption periods, interest rates and other requirements as the agrarian reform law may determine. Art icle 350. The properties that may be expropriated for the purposes of agrarian reform or the development and improvement of communities are exclusively rural holdings and the useful and necessary improvements attached to them whose severance may be detrimental to the economic production unit. CHAPTER IV FINANCIAL REGIME Article 351. The tax system shall be governed by the principles of legality, proportionality, generality and equity, in accordance with the economic capacity of the taxpayer.

80

CHAPTER V PUBLIC WEALTH Article 352. 1. 2. 3. The public wealth comprises:

All movable and immovable properties of the State; All its active credits, and Its net available funds. The financial obligations of the State

Article 35 3. are: 1.

Debts legally incurred for current expenditure or investment outlays originating in the execution of the general revenues and expenditures budget, and Other debts legally recognized by the State.

2.

Article 354. Fiscal or public properties may be awarded or transferred only to the persons and in the manner and under the conditions determined by law. The State reserves itself the power to establish or modify the demarcation of areas for the control and protection of natural resources in the national territory. Article 355. The administration of public the responsibility of the executive branch. funds is

For the collection, custody and expenditure of these funds, there shall be a general treasury service. However, the executive branch may delegate the functions of collector and depository to the Central Bank. In addition, the law may establish special disbursement services. Article 356. The State guarantees the payment of the public debt incurred only by constitutional governments, in accordance with this Constitution and laws. Any rule or act that violates the provisions of this article shall entail the civil, penal and administrative liability of the offenders, for which there shall be no period of limitation.

81

Article 357. The authorizations of external or internal indebtedness of the central government, decentralized agencies and municipal governments, which include State guarantees or indorsements, shall be regulated by law. Article 358. Local governments may undertake domestic credit operations under their exclusive responsibility, but they shall require the authorizations specified by special laws. Article 359. Public taxation, expenditure and indebtedness shall be proportionate to the gross domestic product, according to law. Article 360. The contracts which the State enters into for the construction of public works, procurement of supplies and services, purchase or rental of goods, must be executed following a public bidding, competition or auction, according to law. The foregoing provision shall not apply to contracts whose purpose is to meet the needs arising from a state of emergency and those which by their nature can be entered into only with a specified person. CHAPTER VI BUDGET Article 361. The financial resources of the State are: 1. Revenues received from taxes, fees, contributions, royalties, grants or under any other heading; Revenues derived from state enterprises, mixedcapital enterprises, or those in which the state has an equity participation, and Special revenue derived from public credit or any other sources.

2.

3.

Art icle 362. All fiscal revenues and expenditures shall appear in the general budget of the republic, which shall be voted annually in accordance with planned economic policy and with the annual plans of operations approved by the government. Article 363. All regular fiscal revenues shall constitute a single fund.

82

No earmarked revenue may be created. Nevertheless, the law may earmark revenue for the service of the public debt and order that the proceeds of specified taxes and general contributions be divided between the national treasury and the treasury of the municipalities in predetermined proportions or amounts. In addition, the law may, in accordance with the planned policy, authorize specified state enterprises or mixed economy enterprises to collect, administer, or invest financial resources derived from the performance of the economic activities incumbent upon them. Article 364. No commitment may be made and no payment may be effected that exceeds the appropriations voted in the budget or violates the budgetary rules. The offenders shall be civilly, penally and administratively liable. Article 365. The executive branch, under its responsibility and provided the national Congress is not in session, may incur loans, change the purpose of an authorized item, or open additional credits for satisfying urgent or unforeseen needs in the event of war, internal disturbance or public disaster, or for meeting international commitments, all of which are to be accounted for in detail to the national Congress at the subsequent legislative session. The same procedure shall be followed in the case of obligations of the State arising from final judgments for the payment of employment benefits when no budgetary item exists or when such item has been exhausted. Article 366. The budget shall be voted by the legislative branch on the basis of the proposal submitted by the executive branch. Article 367. The proposed budget shall be submitted by the executive branch to the national Congress within the first fifteen days of the month of September of each year. Article 368. The organic budget law shall stipulate all matters relating to the preparation, calculation, execution and liquidation of the budget. When the budget

83

for a new fiscal year has not been voted at the end of the fiscal year, the one corresponding to the previous period shall continue in effect. Article 369. The law shall determine the organization and operation of the general supply office of the republic. Article 370. For the control and supervision of movable and immovable State property, there shall be an office for the administration of national property. The law shall determine its organization and operation. Article 371. The preventive inspection of the execution of the general revenues and expenditures budget of the republic shall be the responsibility of the executive branch, which must in particular: 1. Check the collection and supervise the custody, commitment and outlay of public funds, and Approve all outlays of public funds, in accordance with the budget.

2.

The law shall establish the procedures and scope of this inspection. Article 372. The preventive inspection of decentralized institutions and municipalities shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the respective laws. TITLE VII
AMENDMENT AND INVIOLABILITY OF THE CONSTITUTION CUAPTER I

AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION Article 373. The amendment of this Constitution may be decreed by the national Congress, in regular session, with two thirds of the votes of all its members. The decree shall specify for that purpose the article or articles that are to be amended, which must be ratified by the subsequent regular annual session, by the same number of votes, in order to take effect.

84

Article 374. The foregoing article, this article, the articles of the Constitution relating to the form of government, national territory, the presidential term, the prohibition from reelection to the presidency of the republic, the citizen who has served as president under any title, and to persons who may not be president of the republic for the subsequent period may not be amended. CHAPTER II THE INVIOLABILITY OF THE CONSTITUTION Article 375. This Constitution does not cease to be in effect nor does it cease to be in force by act of force or when it is allegedly repealed or amended by any means or procedure other than that which it itself provides. In these cases, every citizen, whether or not invested with authority, has the duty to cooperate in maintaining or reestablishing its effectivenees. Persons responsible for the events specified in the first part of the foregoing paragraph, as well as the principal officials of governments that may subsequently be organized, shall be tried in accordance with this Constitution and the laws issued in conformity therewith, if they have not assisted in immediately reestablishing the rule of this Constitution and the authorities constituted in accordance therewith. The Congress may, by a vote of an absolute majority of its members, decree the forfeiture of all or part of the property of those persons and of others who have enriched themselves by supplanting the sovereignty of the people or by usurping the public powers, to compensate the republic for any losses incurred on account of them. TITLE VIII TRANSITORY PROVISIONS AND THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE CONSTITUTION CHAPTER I TRANSITORY PROVISIONS Article 376. All laws, decree-laws, decrees, regulations, orders and other provisions that were in effect at the time this Constitution was promulgated shall continue to be observed insofar as they are not in conflict with it or until they have been legally repealed or amended.

85

Article 377. The three budget, excluding loans and to the judicial branch shall annual budgetary period until

percent of the net income grants, that is appropriated be granted gradually in each that percentage is reached.

Article 378. The Constitution issued by the Constituent National Assembly on the third day of June, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-five, is repealed by this Constitution. CHAPTER II
THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE CONSTITUTION A r t i c l e 3 7 9 . T h i s C o n s t i t u t i o n s h a l l be sworn i n a p u b l i c and s o l e m n s e s s i o n and s h a l l e n t e r i n t o f o r c e on t h e t w e n t i e t h d a y o f J a n u a r y n i n e t e e n h u n d r e d and e i g h t y - t w o . Done i n t h e h a l l of s e s s i o n s o f t h e N a t i o n a l C o n s t i tuent Assembly, in the city of Tegucigalpa, Central D i s t r i c t , on t h e e l e v e n t h day of J a n u a r y , one t h o u s a n d n i n e h u n d r e d and e i g h t y - t w o .

